Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeFebruary 8-9, 1983A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, February 8, 1983, at 2:30 p.m. andcontinuing on Wednesday, February 9, 1983, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker,Mr. Solomon,Mr. BallesMr. BlackMr. FordMr. GramleyMrs. HornMr. MartinMr. ParteeMr. RiceMrs. TeetersMr. WallichChairmanVice ChairmanMessrs. Guffey, Keehn, Morris 1/, and Roberts, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Corrigan, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff DirectorMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Oltman, Deputy General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMessrs. Ettin, J. Davis, Keran, Koch, Parthemos,Prell, Siegman, Truman, and Zeisel, AssociateEconomists1/ Entered the meeting following the action to approve minutes for theDecember 20-21, 1982, meeting.2/8-9/83Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Kohn, Senior Deputy Associate Director, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Lindsey, Assistant Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Dooley, Assistant Director, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMs. Scanlon 1/, Senior Economist, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMr. Fousek, Executive Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of New YorkMessrs. Balbach, Burns, T. Davis, Eisenmenger 2/,Mullineaux, Scheld, and Stern, Senior VicePresidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis,Dallas, Kansas City, Boston, Philadelphia, Chicago,and Minneapolis, respectivelyMessrs. Meek and Soss, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Bankof New York1/ Left the meeting following discussion of the Committee's longer-runobjectives for monetary and credit aggregates.2/ Entered the meeting following the action to approve minutes for theDecember 20-21, 1982, meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any information that indicates contention or disagreement. It is simply a list of individuals present at a meeting.


Passage number 2.
Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofFebruary 8-9, 1983February 8, 1983--Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is now time to come to order. We mightas well approve the minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 3.
MR. PARTEE. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Partee, simply states "So moved," without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 4.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there a second.SPEAKER(.). Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker is simply asking if there is a second person who agrees with or supports their statement.


Passage number 5.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we'll approve theminutes. I will welcome Mr. Roberts; I think it may be symbolic orsomething that he is sitting on the left side of the table. Where isMr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply making a comment about Mr. Roberts and his seating position, without any objection or argument from anyone else. The question about Mr. Balles's whereabouts does not indicate disagreement either, it is simply a query.


Passage number 6.
MR. PARTEE. I don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "MR. PARTEE. I don't know" is a simple declaration of not knowing something. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 7.
MR. BALLES. There's no policy significance, Mr. Chairman, inmy occupying the St. Louis seat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is simply stating that occupying the St. Louis seat has no policy significance. There is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 8.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We do welcome you, Mr. Roberts, if youdon't say too much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not exhibit contention or disagreement. It is a polite statement indicating that the person is welcome as long as they do not speak excessively.


Passage number 9.
MR. ROBERTS. I'm glad to be here but I make no promises.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not display any contention or disagreement. Mr. Roberts simply expresses his sentiment of being glad to be present but states that he makes no promises.


Passage number 10.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For the first hour, anyway. We might aswell go right to work on the business outlook and the longer-termranges. We may not get through that this afternoon, but I think wecan get a long way. So, Mr. Kichline and company.MESSRS. KICHLINE, ZEISEL, TRUMAN, and PRELL. [Statements--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply discussing the plans for the meeting and expressing optimism about making progress on the business outlook and longer-term ranges. The mention of the attendees at the end does not indicate any disagreement either.


Passage number 11.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 12.
 I thought you had another page hereshowing the directive for the long-term targets over--MR. KICHLINE. We're holding that in reserve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 13.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that was a very full report. Let usconcentrate on what the outlook is. Why don't we divide it into thereal economy and prices at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting that they focus on the outlook and divide it into two main areas - the real economy and prices.


Passage number 14.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. On the real economy, if you rememberyour chart, although you have a rise in productivity in '83 you have adrop in productivity in '84, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the fact that there was a rise in productivity in '83 and a drop in productivity in '84, without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 15.
MR. ZEISEL. No, not a drop but a slightly smaller rise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that there is no drop but a slightly smaller rise, without opposing or contradicting any previous statement.


Passage number 16.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That seems like a very low growth inproductivity for a period of expansion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is expressing an opinion about a certain observation or expectation, rather than presenting a point of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 17.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. "That's right" is a statement that expresses agreement or affirmation. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 18.
MR. BOEHNE. I'd just like to comment on that for a moment.2/8-9/83 -2-I've been impressed by the efforts across the board of big businessesand small businesses to cut costs. And it seems to me that the break-even point of most of these businesses now is significantly lower thanit was a couple of years ago. What I keep hearing is that if we everget a recovery, we will see substantial increases in profits, and Ithink that means bigger increases in productivity than we mightexpect. It also may mean that the unemployment rate could be stickierthan usual in coming down because there's going to be a greatreluctance to offset some of the progress that has been made inlowering the break-even point. So, based on just casual talking to anumber of people, it does seem to me that we're in for a period, if wedo get a recovery, where we probably could expect a bigger increase inproductivity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply sharing their observations and thoughts on the efforts of businesses to cut costs and their potential impact on productivity and the unemployment rate.


Passage number 19.
MR. ZEISEL. Well, we are faced with a situation in which ourforecast is substantially under the average performance of a recoveryperiod--explicitly, about half the rate of growth in the first yearcompared to that in the average recovery in postwar expansions.Second, we have been through a period in which the trend rate inproductivity, at least as best we can measure it, has been very weak.Our feeling is that trend productivity may be in the 1 percent rangeat this point. Earlier in the postwar period productivity ratesnormally ran about 2-1/2 percent. So, in a sense, we're operatingaround a different slope. I think those two factors play ratherimportant roles. President Solomon, we are forecasting a productivityincrease of 2-1/2 percent in 1983 and of 1-1/2 percent in 1984. So,the rate of increase shown on the chart does come down a bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing information and analysis about the forecasted growth and productivity rates, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 20.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The reason it strikes me as low issimply based on conversations with many industrialists who have saidbasically the opposite: They expect relatively strong productivitygains both in '83 and in '84 because they're assuming that therecovery in '83 will not be that rapid and that the expansion willcontinue well into '84. And they expect to see continued productivitygains in '84 as well as in '83 at about the same rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply sharing their observations and conversations with industrialists who hold a different view about productivity gains in '83 and '84.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 21.
MR. WALLICH. Aren't the swings in productivity inmanufacturing larger than they are for the whole spectrum includingservices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of the word "aren't" indicates a contradiction or differing viewpoint.


Passage number 22.
MR. KICHLINE. That's right. I think there are a couple ofother points. That is one of them. I would suspect that the thingswe hear relate mainly to manufacturing. That's where the cost cuttingis taking place and that's where we get the big productivity benefit.But this is for the nonfarm economy in total and I would suspect thatthere's not as much going on in the services sector, for example, asin manufacturing. The second point is that our view essentially isthat, yes, the trend rate in productivity growth is improving. Weexpect it to improve further. We have a cautious approach. I wouldalso say that some interesting things happened in 1982. One is thatproductivity started rising very early--well, throughout the wholeyear but very early in the recession. So, we had some adjustment forthe faster trend rate of [productivity] growth that had been takingplace with the massive [cost] cutting last year. The bottom line isthat there are factors that cut in different ways. I think this is aconservative estimate. If it's wrong, it's probably too low. Wemight see much better performance than we have here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their view and observations.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 23.
2/8-9/83MR. PARTEE. In support of more productivity I would alsoargue that we've got to get a considerable rise in productivity infinance. That earnings squeeze that you expect for the banks, whichis only the tip of the iceberg now that we have money market depositaccounts and so forth, is going to force economization there. But ithasn't occurred importantly up to now. When you talk to bankers, byand large they're distressed by the rise in their operating expenseslast year but they haven't done much about it; they say they're goingto. I think that they will be forced to by events, so that mighthelp. In addition to the industrial area, we might have someproductivity improvement as a result of layoffs in finance also.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker argues that there needs to be a considerable rise in productivity in finance, while acknowledging that it hasn't occurred importantly up to now. The speaker believes that banks will be forced to address their rising operating expenses, but also suggests that productivity improvement in finance might also come from layoffs.


Passage number 24.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How do you measure value added in finance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is simply asking a question about how to measure value added in finance. It does not present any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 25.
MR. FORD. Value added.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Value added" does not indicate contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement or a term that may be used in a discussion about business or economics.


Passage number 26.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm taking for granted there isn't any tostart with.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage suggests that there is no contention or disagreement. The speaker assumes that there is no initial disagreement, indicating a lack of contention.


Passage number 27.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions Mr. Partee without providing any context or information that would indicate a disagreement or contention.


Passage number 28.
 You can have after--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do profit margins get squeezed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply poses a question about profit margins getting squeezed.


Passage number 29.
MR. FORD. Net interest margins.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a term or concept, "net interest margins," without indicating any controversy or conflicting views.


Passage number 30.
MR. ZEISEL. It's probably negative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not include any conflicting or contradictory statements. It simply states that Mr. Zeisel's statement is probably negative without indicating any opposing viewpoints or disagreements.


Passage number 31.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that may be going down. We've hadcomments that productivity is too low. What else is there on thebusiness side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing information about comments on low productivity and expressing curiosity about other aspects of the business.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 32.
MR. PARTEE. I wondered if I might just ask a question aboutthe chart showing comparisons of postwar cycles on real GNP. As youcommented, Jerry, this is a distinctly less rapid recovery, by asubstantial factor, than the typical postwar recovery. You haven'tgone back to look at the staff projections of previous recoveries, butI wonder whether there isn't a tendency to understate the recoverythat actually occurs because of the obvious fact that there aredynamics in the situation that aren't foreseen at the time we startout on it. Do you have any idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is suggesting that the staff projections of previous recoveries tend to understate the actual recovery that occurs due to unforeseen dynamics. This contradicts the assumption made by Jerry, who commented that the current recovery is less rapid compared to typical postwar recoveries.


Passage number 33.
MR. ZEISEL. I think you're right. I don't have the numbersat my fingertips but I think in general there is a tendency tounderstate the vigor of the recovery. One just doesn't see thesources of additional strength. We're still hampered by thatparticular problem; when one looks at the various components and addsthem up, one gets a rather restrained recovery.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker agrees with the other person's point, stating that there is a tendency to understate the vigor of the recovery and that one doesn't see the sources of additional strength. They also mention that when looking at the various components and adding them up, it results in a restrained recovery. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 34.
MS. TEETERS. Isn't your outlook really heavily dependent onthe timing of the inventory cycle. If the inventory [liquidation]ceased as of the end of last year, we could get a very large firstquarter which could also push the whole year up to a higher level. Iwonder if you have information from the first quarter that indicatesanything on inventories yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is a question and statement regarding the potential impact of the inventory cycle on the company's outlook.


Passage number 35.
MR. ZEISEL. That is certainly true. And it does appear thatthe rate of inventory liquidation in the fourth quarter is larger thanthe Commerce Department estimated, or that we estimated as well, from2/8-9/83the data available at that point. And that would suggest that astronger first quarter--that is, a rebound in activity--would not beunlikely. The question is: What are the fundamental forcessustaining that growth. Essentially, the information that has becomeavailable just doesn't suggest to us that there is very muchadditional [strength]; it is possible that a slightly stronger outlookis in prospect but nothing has changed our view of the forces that aregenerating income and building activity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their own views and observations, without contradicting any other opinions or information.


Passage number 36.
MS. TEETERS. My point is that when the inventory liquidationquits, at that point we could get a quarter that looks very big but isnothing more than the inventory liquidation ceasing. And it couldgive us a rather nice growth rate even for a year, if we have a coupleof fairly jagged up and down quarters as we go through the year ratherthan a constant growth rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. MS. TEETERS is expressing her point and explaining the potential outcome of the inventory liquidation ceasing. There is no contention or disagreement presented in this passage.


Passage number 37.
MR. ZEISEL. That's correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only states a statement made by Mr. Zeisel without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 38.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me make an observation. With a singleexception, everybody in this room has a significantly higher forecastthan what the staff has just presented. To the extent that that isonly due to what Nancy was just suggesting, that you assumed biggerinventory liquidation in the fourth quarter and presumably a lower GNPin the fourth quarter of last year, I don't think it means anything.But maybe you didn't assume that. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 39.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, we come out on the high end of mostof these forecasts. We're assuming a rate of growth in real GNPfourth quarter-to-fourth quarter of about 5-1/2 percent, and webelieve it will be front-end loaded--more growth in the first coupleof quarters than in the last two. We're a little more hopeful on theunemployment side; we have that pegged at about 10 percent. But weare less optimistic on the GNP deflator; we are projecting about 5-1/2percent on that versus 4 percent in the staff forecast. Andunderlying this is an assumption of a rate of growth of about 6percent in Ml. We are influenced primarily, I think, by two factors:One is that sharp recessions in the past have tended to be followed bya little faster recovery; [the second] is the sharp acceleration ingrowth of the money supply in the last half of 1982. We are wellaware of the inferences that are being drawn from the reportedabnormal behavior of income velocity of money and the inferences thatare being drawn about the demand for money. But we did someexperiments on this; we lagged money by one quarter and by twoquarters in computing the rates of change in velocity. If you dothat, it really illustrates some rather interesting things--that thedrops are not that abnormal by past standards, reflecting the tendencyof the money supply's effect to be lagged some time a couple ofquarters later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there does not appear to be contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black is simply presenting his views and assumptions about the rate of growth in GNP, unemployment, and the GNP deflator, as well as the factors influencing his projections. There is no indication of any opposing viewpoints or conflicting perspectives.


Passage number 40.
 So--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we're getting ahead of ourselves.Mr. Axilrod could promptly comment on that at this point in ourconversation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that Mr. Axilrod could comment on something at a particular point in their conversation.


Passage number 41.
MR. BLACK. Well, okay. This does get to that. But it doesaffect the velocity forecasted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 42.
MR. PARTEE. What have you lagged it--two quarters did yousay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is simply asking a question about the timeframe being referred to.


Passage number 43.
2/8-9/83MR. BLACK. We lagged it one and two quarters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about lagging a certain number of quarters.


Passage number 44.
 And in eithercase there were several postwar periods--MR. PARTEE. Shouldn't you have had a recovery at midyearlast year then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement presenting different possibilities or scenarios.


Passage number 45.
MR. AXILROD. It's hard to [comment] without looking intoyour projections, President Black. We did the same thing; we laggedMl and M2 one and two quarters and compared the velocity behavior ofthe past 5 or 6 quarters with the history of these things measuredthat way. With, say, M1 lagged 2 quarters--to develop M1 against GNP2 quarters later--in the 6 quarters ending in the fourth quarter of1982 we get an average decline in velocity of 1.1 percent even on thatbasis. And if you go back before 1982, you can't find any negativenumbers; you can find an increase of 0.5 percent, but you can't findany negative numbers. If you do it for 5 quarters, it's the samething. We did this for the same reason that you're bringing it up;the question was raised to us by others. We did the same thing for M2and it shows a bigger increase in demand, even on this lagged basis.So, it's perfectly true that with lags you don't get these negativerelations between money and velocity--that a rise in money thisquarter generally gives you a rise in velocity 2 quarters later. Butallowing for that over time we have the same kind of change in patternon a lagged basis that we do on a concurrent basis so far as thesedata show us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Axilrod is simply presenting data and explaining the results of their analysis.


Passage number 46.
MR. WALLICH. Aren't these past data very much influenced byinterest rate patterns. In the past we've had sharply rising interestrates early in recoveries.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a straightforward question about the influence of interest rate patterns on past data.


Passage number 47.
 We don't assume that this time, so weought to get rather different--MR. AXILROD. I was not projecting 1983. I was just lookingat the past.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating that they were not making assumptions about a particular time and were only examining the past.


Passage number 48.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we ought to go on to somethingelse at this point, but you might be interested in these charts onlagged velocity, and maybe we can distribute them. You might tell us,Mr. Black, if you have that big an increase in GNP, where it mightarise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests moving on to a different topic and asks for Mr. Black's thoughts on where a big increase in GNP might arise.


Passage number 49.
MR. BLACK. Well, I hadn't worried too much about thecomponents of it, Mr. Chairman. I would think that it would be mostlyin consumer expenditures, government expenditures, a pickup ininventories, and not much improvement in capital and equipment. Butwe really expect that velocity is going to come back. I'd like tolook at those figures of Steve's, because what we did was probably notas sophisticated as what he did. We had a decline in the fourthquarter, if we lagged it 2 quarters, of 1.6 percent in income velocityfor Ml; and for the third quarter the decline was 2.7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Black about his expectations regarding various components of the economy.


Passage number 50.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can return to that subject when we'rediscussing [policy].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply suggests that the subject in question can be discussed later when discussing policy.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 51.
MR. BLACK. Okay. Anyway. we projected about a 5 percentpickup in velocity and that led us to a greater increase in nominalGNP than the staff has been projecting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "that led us to a greater increase in nominal GNP than the staff has been projecting" implies that there is a difference in the projections between Mr. Black and the staff.


Passage number 52.
2/8-9/83MR. PARTEE. I think anyone with a stronger forecast, Paul,probably would have more consumption. It looks as if the personalsaving rate was a limiting factor there, but we have to remember withdynamic properties that if you have more output, you have more incomeand then you can have more consumption and maybe not change the savingrate very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion about the relationship between forecast, consumption, and saving rate.


Passage number 53.
 And that's how you get a bigger--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The saving rate is going to go down unlesswe get more investment someplace.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the saving rate is going to go down unless more investment is obtained.


Passage number 54.
MR. PARTEE. A little, but nothing like a one-for-onecomparison if we got the growth in consumption with output toaccommodate it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is acknowledging a slight difference between consumption and output but indicating that it is not a significant issue.


Passage number 55.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to decide on a course of action, Governor Gramley faced opposition from both political parties.


Passage number 56.
MR. GRAMLEY. I like the staff forecast for 1983 at least.And maybe that's because my numbers, which I put down in advance,turned out to match the staff's almost exactly. I look at the highernumbers that many people are now forecasting--5 percent or more forthe four quarters of 1983--and I ask myself "Why." I wonder ifperhaps we are being overly influenced by signs that we got off to apretty good January, judging by the improvement in nonfarm employment.I think it's quite possible that if we get off to a flying start, amomentum could develop. But I think it's just as possible that quitethe opposite could happen: That after an initial burst, real GNPgrowth suddenly comes to a halt or at least slows down verysubstantially; industrial output goes nowhere; unemployment begins torise again; and a new wave of pessimism begins to set in. I think weneed to concern ourselves with that a good deal. However, in making aprojection and thinking about the course of 1983 as a whole, I reallythink the same basic factors that led all of us to worry a month ortwo months ago about whether recovery was going to happen at all, andif so when, are still there. We're still dealing with a businesscommunity that is shell-shocked, that is going to play its cards verycautiously on the inventory front, that is going to wait untilcapacity utilization has gone up, and that is still very worried aboutthe durability of the recovery. We're still dealing with very, veryhigh real interest rates and very little hope that something will bedone at this juncture about the deficit further out to bring realinterest rates down. We're dealing with consumers who, althoughthey've improved their financial positions, are not going to lead usout of this into a strong recovery; I think the state of the savingrate is one factor that argues against that. And I think the exportmarkets are just very, very weak. All this adds up to a very modestpace of economic expansion. I think the staff has it about right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 57.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 58.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, I don't remember what [forecast] I sentin, so I don't have to worry about the consistency with what I say.It does seem to me that Chuck has a point that forecasters tend tounderestimate the recovery, but they underestimate the recessions too.I think there are three things that are different about this. One iswhat Lyle just mentioned about the shell-shocked business community.[Second,] interest rates are still very high and this recovery stillneeds some nourishing on the interest rate side to make it succeed.That's for later in our discussion but however you look at real2/8-9/83interest rates they are very, very high and that puts a damper onenthusiasm. The other thing--and it may be more noticeable in my partof the country than in some of the rest of the country--is that somebasic structural shifts are going on in the economy that can have amajor impact on the cyclical recovery. For example, even if we get agood recovery, the steel industry just isn't going to be what it oncewas because of the foreign sector. The automobile sector isn't goingto be what it was. We're just not going to get the same kinds ofrecoveries. It's hard to measure these structural, secular kinds ofthings that are influenced on the cyclical side. But they do seem tome to tend to put a damper on [the recovery]. Again, I may just bemore sensitive about that because of my particular District. But Ithink there's enough of it in the northeast part of the country thatit's bound to have some impact on the national figure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by one individual (Mr. Boehne) sharing his perspective on the factors affecting the recovery and potential impact on the national figure. There is no disagreement or conflicting viewpoint presented in the passage.


Passage number 59.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I misspoke before. I don't know why Ionly saw one person whose forecast was down with the staff; there arequite a few who are down with the staff, including you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply clarifying their previous statement and acknowledging that there are multiple people who share the same forecast.


Passage number 60.
MR. BOEHNE. So, I guess I'm consistent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any evidence of contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Boehne is consistent.


Passage number 61.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. I have all those with me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is providing confirmation that the speaker has all those mentioned with them. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 62.
MR. GRAMLEY. There are some that are actually below.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only provides a statement without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 63.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions the name "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" without providing any additional information or context.


Passage number 64.
 Well, there's one that's below--MR. GRAMLEY. There have to be at least three: one nonvotingpresident, one voting president, and one Board member.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply providing information about the required positions, without any conflicting opinions or debate present.


Passage number 65.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There are three.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that there are three of something without any contradictory or conflicting information.


Passage number 66.
MR. PARTEE. You're looking at the range there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact or observation.


Passage number 67.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody else want to comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this statement. It simply asks if there are any other individuals who would like to add a comment.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 68.
MR. CORRIGAN. In terms of the real sector, the number that Ihave is 4-1/2 percent, as opposed to the staff's 3-1/2 percent, andit's hard for me to get too excited about those kinds of differences.But I'm inclined to the view that the inventory [liquidation] hasprobably run its course to a greater extent than the staff has [in itsforecast]. I also think there's at least a fair potential that thehousing sector will be stronger than the staff has projected as well.The area that I find a little more provocative in looking at the rangeof the forecasts is not so much the real numbers but the pricenumbers. I have a deflator number that's a little over 4 percent andI struggled a bit to get to that number. But I do agree with thesentiments that were expressed by several people earlier to the effectthat productivity will be stronger than the staff forecast. In my owncase, I ended up using a unit labor cost number of 2 percent on afourth quarter-to-fourth quarter basis. Now, what's interesting abouta 2 percent unit labor cost number is that if you attack the GNP fromthe income side, and you assume unit labor costs are going up 2percent and you assume that unit interest and proprietors' income andall the rest do the same thing, a 5 percent rate of inflation permitssomething like a 40 percent increase in profit margin measures interms of the GNP accounts. That, together with the oil pricesituation and the food price situation, in the context of a 2 percent2/8-9/83rise in unit labor costs, leads me rather solidly to the view that wecan, in fact, do better than 4 percent on inflation. I think it'simportant to do it because if we found ourselves with the kind ofrecovery that's being talked about here and with prices rising at arate of 5-1/2 or 6 percent by the end of 1983, we'd have one heck of amess in 1984 irrespective of all the problems financing the deficit isgoing to cause in 1984. So, I am more optimistic on the price side.I think that's solid. But more importantly, if we don't get that kindof price performance in 1983, it bodes very poorly in my judgment for1984 and beyond.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Corrigan disagrees with the staff's forecast for the real sector and the housing sector, believing that the inventory liquidation has already run its course and that the housing sector will be stronger than projected. Additionally, he disagrees with the staff's forecast for inflation, believing that it will be higher than 4 percent. He argues that if inflation is not brought under control, it will cause significant problems in 1984 and beyond.


Passage number 69.
MR. FORD. Excuse me, Jerry, but I didn't understand thelogic of what you just said. Why are you more optimistic--justbecause it's a message that doesn't work out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Ford simply expresses his lack of understanding and seeks clarification from Jerry about his reasoning.


Passage number 70.
MR. CORRIGAN. No, I just went through it. I said that Iattacked the question of what the inflation rate might be primarily bylooking at the income side. I started out with a 2 percent unit laborcost assumption and made a bit of a subjective allowance for oilprices and food prices and then worked through the rest of it. Itlooks very doable to me to have the inflation rate in the higher 3percent area--at something like 3.8 or 3.9 or 3.7 percent. I thinkthat's very important.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply one person expressing their opinion and analysis of the inflation rate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 71.
MR. PARTEE. What you meant to say was that you didn't reallythink the profits would go up 40 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker is questioning or challenging the statement made by the other person.


Passage number 72.
MR. CORRIGAN. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement affirming that something is correct.


Passage number 73.
MR. PARTEE. He didn't say that, but he meant to say it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply making an interpretation or assumption about what someone meant to say.


Passage number 74.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You said they could go up 40 percent with5 percent or 4 percent [inflation].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply presents a statement made by someone without any indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 75.
MR. CORRIGAN. No, with 5 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Corrigan, is stating that there is no disagreement ("No") with a certain percentage, but without additional context it is not clear what the disagreement is about.


Passage number 76.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 77.
 And if you make them, say, 30, that gives you--MR. CORRIGAN. Again, that assumes basically nothing specialabout oil prices. Even if you take the staff's estimate of an 8percent drop in oil prices, then in a sense it's a shoe-in. If we geta larger oil price drop, I don't know. That could get to be a problemtoo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Corrigan, expresses skepticism about the assumption of nothing special about oil prices and raises concerns about the potential impact of a larger oil price drop.


Passage number 78.
MR. MARTIN. On that point, that's the only place where itisn't unit labor costs. In my own case, it is the expectation of alarger oil price drop than the 8 percent, realizing that the naturalgas impact is in the opposite direction if you iterate through here a$3.50 or $4 a barrel change rather than a $2 or $2.50 change. I thinkwe tend to underestimate the impact of that iteration. And I think [alarger oil price drop] is definitely in the cards and will produce aslightly lower inflation deflator number than the staff's.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is primarily about the speaker's own perspective and expectations regarding oil price drop and its impact on inflation deflator numbers.


Passage number 79.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me ask the question the otherway, after hearing you persuasive people. What do you have to assumeto get an inflation rate of 5 percent or above.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply asking a question without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 80.
MS. TEETERS. OPEC gets together.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information regarding contention or disagreement among the members of OPEC. It simply states that OPEC gets together, without specifying any specific conflicts or disputes.


Passage number 81.
2/8-9/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll rule that out. Well, I don't know.Is that the answer. Is that the only way [inflation] gets up there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and questioning whether inflation can only increase in the mentioned way.


Passage number 82.
MR. BOEHNE. We'd have to have some very bad luck on the foodfront.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Boehne is simply expressing the need for bad luck to occur in order for their concerns about the foodfront to be valid.


Passage number 83.
MR. RICE. Some bad weather.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 84.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How bad would it have to be on food.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply asking about the degree of severity for a certain aspect (in this case, food).


Passage number 85.
MS. TEETERS. It would have to be pretty bad because thestocks are quite large at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that the stocks are quite large at this point, indicating that it would take a significant event for the situation to be considered "pretty bad." There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 86.
MR. PARTEE. We could also get it if wage rates went up morethan the marginal [increase in the] staff projection, which I wouldassume underlies, say, Bob's higher number. You would have a biggerwage rate, [Bob].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is simply providing a possibility or alternative explanation for Bob's higher number.


Passage number 87.
MR. BLACK. [Yes], and I think there's going to be a big jumpin profits. I don't know whether it's 40 percent--that sounds awfullyhigh--but I think profits ought to rise quite rapidly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses agreement that profits will increase, but acknowledges uncertainty about the exact percentage increase. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 88.
MR. PARTEE. More than 12.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the given passage, there is no contention or disagreement as it only includes a statement without any contradictory or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 89.
MR. KEEHN. I think there's another side to this, which ishard to get a handle on. We've gone through the break-even that Edtalked about--the reductions in the break-even capacity, if you will.There are an awful lot of people I have talked to who, as we get intoa recovery, are very anxious to raise prices. And as soon as theysense an environment in which they can raise prices, they tend to goat it with a vengeance. Therefore, we are on the high side withregard to inflation--we were on the low side with regard to real GNP--because I think we're going to see some price increases in '83 and '84that are a little hard to forecast at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is discussing an alternative viewpoint and acknowledging that there are people who are eager to raise prices in a recovering economy. However, there is no disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 90.
MR. GUFFEY. Yes, but lumber prices are going down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that lumber prices are going down.


Passage number 91.
MR. KEEHN. Really.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The word "Really" indicates surprise or disbelief, but it does not suggest any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 92.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we have a recovery, we're going to seea lot of commodity price increases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a hypothetical situation regarding commodity price increases.


Passage number 93.
MR. FORD. We already are starting to see some.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. It is a statement of fact.


Passage number 94.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One could add up all those commodityprices and none of them equals a small decline in the oil price interms of impacts on the GNP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presented as a fact or an observation without any contradictory information or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 95.
 We're bound to see increases in volume--MR. PARTEE. You do hear this interesting comment that we hadthe other day: That a lot of these prices are being discountedsubstantially and that businesses don't want to raise prices, theyjust want to get rid of the discount.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that increases in volume are expected. The comment about businesses wanting to get rid of discounts instead of raising prices is presented as an interesting observation, not as a point of disagreement.


Passage number 96.
MR. BOEHNE. How do the indexes pick that up. Do they getthe discount prices or is that a messy problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a question and does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 97.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Poorly, I suspect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The statement "Poorly, I suspect" is an expression of personal suspicion or doubt and does not indicate a clear contention or disagreement. It does not present a conflicting viewpoint or argument.


Passage number 98.
2/8-9/83MR. MARTIN. They try, but they don't get them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that someone tries to get something but fails.


Passage number 99.
MR. BOEHNE. So, there'd be some room for some effectiveprice increases without it getting into the [indexes].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 100.
MR. FORD. We've had 3 or 4 of our leading businessmen tellus that [price measures are not properly weighted], when one takesaccount not just of the price but of the nonprice cost factors, likeservice and whether or not transport charges are loaded on heavily orlightly and so on. They swear that the PPI has been understatingthings--that the drop hasn't really captured the full extent of pricedeflation. There's a big gap in there. So, we have a researchproject going on because a number of our industrialists have told uswe are--or whoever puts out that index is--full of baloney on that.May I ask a couple of related questions of the staff.Another thing I heard from a number of businessmen is that ourcapacity number--we put out the industrial capacity numbers thateverybody quotes, do we not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply relaying information and opinions he has heard from businessmen.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 101.
MR. ZEISEL. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The presence of the word "Yes" implies that there is some sort of disagreement or contention in the passage. However, without the rest of the context, it is difficult to determine the extent or nature of the disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 102.
MR. FORD. That tells us that industrial capacity is nowrunning at 67 percent or something like that. I had a number ofpeople, including the principal shareholder ofand a number of other major industrialistswho really look at this stuff, say to me that our index is reallypoor--not in the way we're doing the statistical work, but the meaningof it. The argument goes like this: If they really ran mills at 100percent of capacity in the way they think we measure it, they stillwouldn't make any money on some of their mills, especially those thatdon't have today's oil prices factored in. Any piece of equipment orany plant that's over 10 years old should not be counted as part ofcapacity is what they're saying. If one made this adjustment, theysay that the measured total against which we measure underutilizationof capacity would be lower and, therefore, we'd have a higher-than-recorded utilization rate. Related to that, one of the biggestcomponents of our industrial production figures that we report iselectricity production and other kinds of energy production, right. Idon't know how big a component it is, but the argument is that withthe huge jump in oil prices, even considering the recent modification,there's a trend factor toward conservation which is very stronglyreflected in things like energy per unit of output overall. If oneadjusted for this in thinking about industrial production, probablythe last 3 months instead of being down might actually be up, net ofthe conservation effect. Do any of these thoughts from businesspeoplemake sense to you, Mr. Zeisel, or Mr. Prell, or any of you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents an argument made by businesspeople regarding the measurement of industrial capacity and industrial production figures. They contend that the current index is poor and suggest adjustments to how capacity and production are calculated. Therefore, there is disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 103.
MR. ZEISEL. They make a good deal of sense and they're asource of considerable concern to us, basically. In regard to thepoint about effective capacity and the factory that can be used online, we have been very concerned about this and have been looking atit industry-by-industry. I must add that at this point it's quite ajudgment call, but it appears to us that a realistic assessment ofcapacity that really should be considered obsolete or not likely to beusable would change our capacity utilization figures by about onepercent. We'll know more when we get our annual survey. In thatsurvey, we essentially ask businessmen about what they consider their2/8-9/83real capacity and, presumably and hopefully, we get a realisticassessment at that point. Nevertheless, I'm inclined to think there'sa certain amount of elasticity cyclically in any event--that as thingsbegin to pick up, what was considered obsolete capacity may be broughtback on line.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is sharing their own thoughts and observations, without mentioning any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 104.
MR. FORD. Just in terms of economic logic, it would seem tome that right at that point when we had that huge jump in oil pricesthere should have been a substantial increase in the year-to-yearchange in obsolescence--just a priori.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It is an observation made by Mr. Ford and does not involve any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 105.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses agreement or confirmation of a statement.


Passage number 106.
MR. FORD. It did show up in the survey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply indicates that something (presumably a particular item or result) appeared in a survey.


Passage number 107.
MR. KICHLINE. Parts of it did. I don't think that one wouldhave seen these discrete changes across the board. There is a so-called vintage effect, which implicitly or explicitly obsolesced alarge part of American industry by the change in the relative price ofoil. Part of that shows up. There are several things; we also lookat the McGraw-Hill survey and the Bureau of Economic Analysis datathat are direct industry reports. In addition, we have the cyclicalproblem--and the steel industry is a classic case--where the issue ishow much tonnage they are writing off. We've been in contact withsteel companies as well as the American Iron and Steel Institute andwe have some feeling, we think, about what they are writing off in apermanent sense. Now, the issue about a hundred versus some othernumber, I think, is a very important one. We have perceived somethinglike 85-87 percent as peak rates of utilization--the point at whichwe've really had a problem in the past. So, in terms of the currentnumber or some elevated number--adjusted one percent or two or threepercent or whatever it may be--we'd relate that to something like amid-80's range as full capacity utilization rather than a hundred.All of this, of course, is related to prices. One of the issues is:What is the price of that final product that will bring back thesemills that are now viewed as outmoded. There is a price at whichthese facilities are not destroyed or mothballed forever. It's amessy area. The kilowatt hours also are a problem; that was affectedby the 1973 oil price increase. We have sent people around to everyReserve Bank in the last 2 years and we have a survey that the ReserveBanks collect for us and it's a mess. That is the final word on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 108.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Assuming we have 3-1/2 percent growthin '83 and 4 percent in '84, do you have an estimate as to where weend up on utilization of capacity at the end of '84.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a hypothetical scenario and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 109.
MR. ZEISEL. Yes, we end up at about 74 percent as I recall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Zeisel is simply stating a percentage that he recalls.


Passage number 110.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 111.
MR. ZEISEL. Let me just make a brief comment about the useof electric power. That's really relevant on a month-by-month basis.It's far [less relevant] in the long term because electric powerconsumption is really used just within a year to [estimate] thesefigures from month-to-month. Over a longer period of time we drop outthe electric power and use shipments and physical measures ofactivity. So, the version that resulted from the run-up in oil pricesin '72 presumably is taken into due consideration by use of other than2/8-9/83electric power data later. But to the extent that these figuresdistort the month-to-month [changes], as you might guess, we do haveproblems and have to adjust for it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining the relevance of electric power usage in estimating figures on a month-by-month and long-term basis.


Passage number 112.
MR. FORD. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a statement of gratitude from Mr. Ford.


Passage number 113.
MS. TEETERS. Going back to the economic forecast, I added upthe numbers in our projections and I must say I was quite surprised tofind myself on the high side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Teeters, is expressing her own surprise at being on the high side of the economic forecast projections.


Passage number 114.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So was I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply means that the speaker is in agreement or can relate to the previous statement or situation.


Passage number 115.
MS. TEETERS. Yes, I know. In part I was surprised becauseit's usually the other way around. Part of it is inventories and, ofcourse, that could hit in any particular quarter or not hit. But theother thing that struck me is that we had a considerable increase infiscal stimulus in the last 3 quarters of 1982. We've gone from afull employment deficit of $8 billion, or 0.2 percent of GNP, to oneof $60 billion in the fourth quarter, or 1.9 percent. It bobs aroundnext year, but it's over one percent all year long. And when I didcome out high, at the staff's suggestion I went back and reconciledthe income side. I have higher growth in consumption, which doesgenerate a greater increase in output. It doesn't murder the savingrate; you can come up with a fairly good saving rate. But the otherthing that jumped out at me is that when you calculate personal taxesfor calendar year 1983, there's almost no increase. We forget thatthere's a tax cut [in the offing] and it's a big one--to the pointthat taxes will end up in 1983 within $2 or $3 billion dollars of whatthey were in 1982. And we're going to get the tax cut in a period ofrising incomes; it's not going to come in a period of falling incomeslike it did this year--a year in which it disappeared. So, I come outon the high side. I checked all my numbers and I could shave 1/4 ormaybe 1/2 point off my forecast, given all the uncertainties, but itseems to me that we have a lot of things going for us. I also assumedthat the interest rates would go [down] to 7-1/2 percent, which helpsconsiderably on an economic forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing various factors and observations related to the economy.


Passage number 116.
MS. HORN. Nancy, what is the price outlook that goes withthat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply a question asking for information.


Passage number 117.
MS. TEETERS. I'm close to everybody else, or near themedian. I think I was at 4-1/2 to 4-3/4 percent on prices. But I doget, as a result, a much bigger drop in the unemployment rate. Itpays off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Ms. Teeters about her position or perspective on certain numbers or percentages.


Passage number 118.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 119.
MR. WALLICH. I think this expansion in 1983 is, to perhapsan unusual degree, a composite of strengths and weaknesses. And fromrather modest strengths, a picture of an expanding economy has beenput together in the face of some very powerful negatives, especially aweakness in exports and a slowness in business fixed investment. Theonly unusually strong element that one wouldn't have counted on inother expansions is what Governor Teeters mentioned: We have a verylarge deficit and we're adding to it, and that is a somewhat unusualfeature. Now, if you look at the things that are slow, exports andbusiness investment, there is something in reserve that at some pointis likely to kick in--for exports, I guess, with a fair-12-2/8-9/83predictability, and for investment depending on interest rates and howbusinessmen feel and how cautious they're going to be. I think wehave at least the makings of getting much more strength on the up sidethan seems likely. That is, the error, if any, might very well be onthe down side. Maybe we are not giving enough weight to thepossibilities of a combination of stronger factors. But on the downside I would say we have a variety of small elements that have carrieda very modest expansion so far and seem likely to put a base underwhat we're likely to achieve. I don't see the danger of sagging orfalling back, as it were. The caution of businessmen in theinvestment area to me looks more nearly like an element of strength--something that's going to change. And if it changes more in theupward than the downward direction--if we can get a rise without thathappening now--I think we certainly have the makings of a continuedexpansion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Mr. Wallich discusses both strengths and weaknesses in the economy, but there is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 120.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions Governor Martin without providing any additional context or details to suggest any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 121.
MR. MARTIN. I wanted to raise a question on the housingforecast for the second year. Admittedly this is getting to what wehere call the long run--2 years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin is simply expressing his desire to question or discuss the housing forecast for the second year.


Passage number 122.
MR. GRAMLEY. That's the hereafter, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement, "That's the hereafter, I guess," is a response indicating uncertainty or assumption rather than disagreement.


Passage number 123.
MR. MARTIN. I thought it was 2 weeks until I read thisdocument. In terms of the second year, Jim, it seems to me that thereare some lower ceilings in certain other resource areas. We have hadshifts of resources out of the housing [area]--certain of the majorsupplier firms. I wonder if we won't reach a lower limit this timethan 1.75 million. That looked like the good old days to me. Do youhave any feeling about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's thoughts and wonderings.


Passage number 124.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, that could be. As you know, our housingstarts forecast for 1984 is an average of a little under 1.7 million.That isn't the days of 2 million plus numbers that we had. So, that'sone element in our thinking. Another is that we think housing willstill be rather expensive in terms of mortgage rates being high andcapital appreciation prospects perhaps not being as great as in thepast. So, both from the production side and the cost and financingside, it seems to us that there are reasons to believe that housingwon't really take off as in "the good old days." But I wouldn't viewa 1.7 million number 2 years out as being terribly strong given thepent up demands that presumably are there and the demographic factors.It's pretty much a forecast that I can be comfortable with at thispoint in time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is the speaker's personal analysis and forecast of the housing market.


Passage number 125.
MR. MARTIN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about Mr. Martin or any specific topic that could indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 126.
 And you are on the cautious side with regard tothe expenditure growth, I noticed, in the residential area for 1984and that's a comforting--MR. KICHLINE. Well, that's part of it too. The argument isthat people are building smaller houses and that sort of thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states an observation about cautious spending in the residential area for 1984, followed by a statement that smaller houses are being built.


Passage number 127.
MR. MARTIN. Hence your 9 or 10 percent increments quarter-by-quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a percentage increase in increments.


Passage number 128.
MR. KICHLINE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. The response by Mr. Kichline is not provided, so it is not possible to assess any disagreement.


Passage number 129.
2/8-9/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford. No, you already spoke. Doesanybody else want to comment. Let me raise a question, Mr. Kichline.If you look at your forecast beginning now in this quarter of '83 fora year ahead, is that substantially different than the forecast youhad in the beginning of the second quarter looking a year ahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for someone else's input and posing a question.


Passage number 130.
MR. KICHLINE. Beginning in the second quarter of--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It simply states that Mr. Kichline began something in the second quarter.


Passage number 131.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Of '82.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 132.
MR. KICHLINE. I think that's a question that I don't havethe answer to here. I'm not sure I want to remember.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they do not have the answer and are unsure if they want to remember it.


Passage number 133.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a point not to be precise about, butmy memory is that you had a forecast of a fairly gentle recoverybeginning in the second quarter during the year ahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing their memory of a forecast and there is no indication of any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 134.
MR. KICHLINE. You're talking about our projections of thespring of last year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply refers to projections made in the past.


Passage number 135.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Exactly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 136.
MR. KICHLINE. That's right; we had forecast a modestrecovery. So, we did not put in the second-half downturn. If that'sthe question, you're right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the statement and acknowledges that the second-half downturn was not accounted for in the forecast.


Passage number 137.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I only raised the question because Idetect a quite different tone in this meeting from only a month ago.Everybody is assuming, or has forecast at this point, a recovery. Iwould point out that I'm not sure that's in the bag; one could havemade exactly the same forecast--whether or not you did, I think youdid--nine months ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their uncertainty about the forecast and highlighting that they have had similar doubts in the past.


Passage number 138.
MS. TEETERS. I think all the rest of us did too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. TEETERS states her own opinion, but there is no indication that anyone else disagrees with her.


Passage number 139.
MR. KICHLINE. In April and May, I think that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states information about a specific time period without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements.


Passage number 140.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I said one could have made that forecastnine months ago. A lot of people did. What we had at that time as Irecall were low automobile inventories and some recovery in automobileproduction and the beginnings of a housing expansion, following twoquarters of large inventory reduction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents information and observations about a previous forecast.


Passage number 141.
MR. PARTEE. There was tax stimulus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas. It simply states that there was tax stimulus.


Passage number 142.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And a tax stimulus coming up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply mentions the existence of a tax stimulus without expressing any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 143.
MS. HORN. Which leads to the question: What is differentnow that is driving this forecast. Certainly, interest rates aredifferent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It is a statement regarding a question and a specific factor that is being discussed (interest rates).


Passage number 144.
 What other kinds of--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Interest rates are lower now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a fact about interest rates being lower now without presenting any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 145.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Businessmen 9 months ago were not ascautiously optimistic as they are today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 146.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They were less cautious and moreoptimistic in my mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "They were less cautious and more optimistic in my mind" is a subjective opinion of the speaker and does not imply any disagreement or contention. It simply expresses the speaker's perception or interpretation of the situation.


Passage number 147.
2/8-9/83MR. GRAMLEY. I think so. As a matter of fact they startedin July to produce for the upturn that never materialized.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their belief or opinion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 148.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Look, I think we're in a recovery. I justsay that one month of upturn does not a recovery make. And the mostrecent trend in automobile sales--I don't know that it means much, butit's down, not up. Automobile production is now up very close tosales. They have a lot of incentive programs going on. We know somesectors of the economy are declining and there are also plus factorsin the economy. We'll see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker first claims that they believe there is a recovery, but then expresses skepticism about this belief by stating that one month of upturn is not enough to determine a recovery. They also highlight the recent downward trend in automobile sales, suggesting that this contradicts the notion of a recovery. Additionally, they mention both declining sectors and positive factors in the economy, further indicating a lack of agreement or consensus on the overall state of the economy.


Passage number 149.
MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I just want to raise a question toperhaps lay a base or understanding for future discussions. If Iunderstand the assumptions underlying the staff's forecast, an 8percent M2 growth after the first quarter translates into your figureof 8.8 percent M2 growth for 1983. Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Guffey, who simply wants to clarify a point or seek clarification.


Passage number 150.
MR. AXILROD. Are you referring to the so-called underlyinggrowth rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a direct question and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 151.
MR. GUFFEY. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 152.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, we now think the first quarter is morelike 8-1/4 percent, given the growth rates we got with the newseasonals and the definitional adjustment. So for the year it issomewhere close to 8-1/4 percent, or a little over 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing an updated estimate or revised information.


Passage number 153.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've done a certain amount of talkingabout the business and the price [picture] and we haven't done anyexplicitly, except some mention of exports, on the international sideor on the credit side. The credit side I think we're going to have toreturn to in terms of setting targets when we decide what we want todo there. But does anybody have any questions on the internationalside or on the fiscal side or the credit side. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing different aspects of the business and seeking input or questions from others.


Passage number 154.
MR. BALLES. If I may, Mr. Chairman, I have a question oneach. I would ask Ted Truman, and perhaps you already told us, Ted,and I didn't follow it, so could you tell us again if you did before:What is going to cause the dollar to depreciate in '83 and '84.That's a very crucial assumption in this forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Balles, is asking Ted Truman to clarify a point about the forecast.


Passage number 155.
MR. FORD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot attend the meeting on Thursday due to a scheduling conflict.


Passage number 156.
 And it comes down to--MR. TRUMAN. A month ago I think I would have told you thatsome decline in U.S. dollar interest rates might do it. And thenwe've had this marking up. The major [factor] that we have beenpointing to for the past year or so, or half year anyhow, is theprospect that the already large current account deficits that we areprojecting would be even larger if we didn't have the dollardepreciation and that as a result that would just tend to beunsustainable in terms of the rest of the world absorbing that amountof net claims on the United States over a relatively short period.And the prospect is that [the deficits] will continue. That, I think,is essentially what you have to consider--plus some washing out of thesafe haven argument that was more dominant the last part of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is the speaker explaining their perspective on current account deficits and dollar depreciation.


Passage number 157.
MR. BALLES. Well, that's a very tough question to answer andI was really wondering what the international staff here thought and-15-2/8-9/83whether there was some assumption or view that they had with respectto relative movements of interest rates here versus abroad andrelative movements of prices here versus abroad. Do you care tocomment on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing curiosity and seeking input from others.


Passage number 158.
MR. TRUMAN. On the interest rate side I provided a chart.On the inflation side we think we'll be doing a little better, [whichwould] build up the attractiveness of U.S. assets. These forecastsaren't that scientific or precise but, if anything, we would concludethat we might get more in the way of interest rate declines abroadthan is implicit in the Bluebook forecast, which does suggest thatrelative real interest rates are going to be higher. We think, ifanything, they'd move somewhat higher in the United States which iswhy, as I said in my concluding remarks, one might argue that theremight be something more in terms of financing that would come out ofthe private capital flows than one could really see in the historicaldata. That's the basis on which one might argue against [a dollardecline]: That people would be willing to continue to acquire claimson the United States or acquire dollar-denominated claims to such anextent that we would not get the decline in the dollar in 1983 thatwe're projecting and the much larger current account deficit and dragon U.S. GNP on the export side associated with that. If you took thedollar as it was and kept it at that fourth-quarter level, which isthe bottom line of that chart, that [equates to] about 1.3 or 1.4percent of GNP at the end of 1984. That is a large component,essentially, of the difference between the growth rates that we havein the staff forecasts for 1983 and 1984.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a presentation of forecasts and potential arguments for and against a dollar decline.


Passage number 159.
MR. BALLES. Thanks, Ted. The reason I was probing on thatpoint, Mr. Chairman--if I remember my own staff's analysis--is thatabout 40 percent of the drop in real GNP in '82 came from adeterioration in the net export sector. So, this is really terriblycrucial to the outlook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is presenting information and discussing the importance of the net export sector in the outlook. There is no apparent contention or disagreement.


Passage number 160.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is no question that we are in aperiod, I think, without precedent--Mr. Truman can think of all theprecedents while I assert this--in that we have had a big recessionhere and the foreign [trade] balance is declining instead ofimproving. Usually the balance improves during a recession. And itis a very large fraction of the share of the decline in GNP. If youwant to make horror stories for this year, go along the line perhapsof your reasoning: The exchange rate remains high; the trade balancegets even worse than projected; we get a big government deficitholding up interest rates, let's say; and we have a lot of foreignfinancing of the deficit. The result would be that we have a mess inthe economy: relatively high interest rates, relatively high exchangerates, and for both reasons not a good trade balance and not a good[performance in] other sectors of the economy. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing a statement about the current state of the economy and projecting potential negative outcomes. There is no conflicting opinion or argument presented.


Passage number 161.
MR. WALLICH. I wanted to follow up on this. While Ibasically share the staff's view about the dollar, nevertheless, onehas to bear in mind that our prospective current account deficit isnot the kind of deficit that historically has caused currencies to godown. It's not the result of domestic mismanagement, inflation, andso on. It's the result of forces that otherwise strengthen thecurrency--reduction in inflation and tight monetary management. Soit's not quite clear that under those conditions a current accountdeficit is bound to depress a currency the way it does when that2/8-9/83deficit comes from other factors. I still think the chances are thatit will, and so I share the forecast. But I think one has to bear theother possibility in mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker shares the staff's view about the dollar and agrees with their forecast of a current account deficit potentially depressing the currency, but also mentions that there is another possibility to consider.


Passage number 162.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 163.
MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I have one other question, if Imay, and that's related to the financial aspect of the fiscalmaterial. If I could, I'd like to ask Mike Prell a question about achart in this area, the first chart in his section on the federalgovernment share of total credit flows. This is a technical question,Mike: Does that include or not include off-budget deficits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 164.
MR. PRELL. It covers off-budget items in the sense that itincludes all U.S. Treasury borrowings. It doesn't include sponsoredagencies, loan guarantees, and other federal credit programs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement made by Mr. Prell is an explanation of what the coverage of the report includes and does not include.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 165.
MR. BALLES. The other question is, I guess, more analyticaland substantive: Is there a risk, not recognized perhaps in our Boardstaff, Bank staff, or [Committee] members' forecasts here, that wereally are sailing into uncharted seas with this huge proportion ofthe total pool of credit--the bulk of it--absorbed by the federalgovernment. I'd like to know your answer. My hunch, Mr. Chairman, isthat that supports your degree of skepticism about whether in fact therecovery is in the bag. There are two things that could upset thatrecovery: the depressing effects of interest rates that are stillpretty high both on a nominal and a real basis compared to historicallevels, and secondly what might happen when such tremendous shares ofcredit get soaked up by Uncle Sam in periods of economic expansion.I'm worried about the crowding out phenomenon. Is that something Ishould worry about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Balles expresses concern about the potential risks of the federal government absorbing a large proportion of the total pool of credit, while the chairman is described as being skeptical about the recovery being in the bag. The two individuals have different perspectives on the potential impact of this situation, indicating disagreement or contention.


Passage number 166.
MR. FORD. If I may just tack on: On that chart we'retalking about, right about now the federal government share of totalcredit flows is at an historic high. For a few weeks it's zoomingskyward and all of a sudden it levels off, while your forecastprojects continuing increases in the deficit, including the structuralpart. How do those things add up in the flow of funds [accounts].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Ford is asking for clarification and further explanation on how the federal government's share of total credit flows and projected increases in the deficit align with the flow of funds accounts.


Passage number 167.
MR. PARTEE. The other side of this is Nancy's fiscalstimulus. Don't forget that. That's the counterpart of this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply reminding the audience of another aspect of the topic being discussed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 168.
MR. BOEHNE. But does fiscal stimulus mean the same thing ifit's financed through monetary policy. One of the reasons we havehigher real rates, I think, is the deficit. Whatever dollar you geton fiscal stimulus either results in some higher inflationaryexpectations or higher real rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The statement "Whatever dollar you get on fiscal stimulus either results in some higher inflationary expectations or higher real rates" suggests that there is disagreement or debate about the effects of fiscal stimulus on inflation and real rates.


Passage number 169.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would you like to answer Mr. Ford'squestion, Mr. Prell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a straightforward question without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 170.
MR. PRELL. There is a complex of things here. In terms ofthe way the chart looks, plotted as it is, we picked up this sharprise in the latter part of the recession. The large amount ofborrowing that occurred in the latter part of 1982 is at a rateroughly comparable to the kind of borrowing we're anticipating willcontinue over the next couple of years of financing $200 billiondeficits. At the same time we have some slight increase in the-17-2/8-9/83overall size of credit flows. Total borrowing by domesticnonfinancial sectors was $413 billion in 1982 and we have it going upto $452 billion in 1983, which is essentially just the increase ingovernment borrowings. And then it's up to $497 billion. So the flowis growing, but its growth is slight. The proportion remains ratherfixed.But returning to the question that President Balles asked, Ithink our whole projection has to be recognized as being in thecontext of a monetary policy that we still regard as reasonablyrestraining on the growth of nominal GNP. We do have continuingpressures sustaining what are, in effect, high real short-terminterest rates. And that does lend itself to an unusual type ofeconomic recovery. We have reasonably weak investment in the firsthalf of this recovery. Housing starts do move back up, but it isn't atremendously robust improvement we see going into 1983 and 1984. Sothe composition of risk and the credit flows that we have do reflect,I think, this crowding out phenomenon in the context of a restrainingmonetary policy that's still aiming at, and should achieve, somedeceleration of inflation in the context of moderate growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing information and analysis without expressing any conflicting opinions or viewpoints.


Passage number 171.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage only provides a name, "Mr. Corrigan," without any further information or context for analysis.


Passage number 172.
MR. CORRIGAN. In this flow of funds chart, for example, youdon't have the business borrowing by '84 getting anywhere near whereit was even in '81.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact about the flow of funds chart.


Passage number 173.
 I have the same problem: As I look through thisin terms of the sources and uses, it's almost inconceivable to me thatyou could produce the kind of growth that you have there withoutputting a lot more pressures on interest rates than--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's that 40 percent increase in profits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a problem and a potential solution without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 174.
MR. PRELL. The short-term interest rates in our forecastrecede only very slightly at the same time that the inflation rate isedging downward. At current levels one would assess short-term realrates as being rather high. And if it's hard to assess the longrates, then certainly relative to the current inflation rate those tooare very, very high. So, we have a rather restrained outlook forcapital spending.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about the short-term interest rates and inflation rate, as well as the outlook for capital spending.


Passage number 175.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any more questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question inviting further inquiries.


Passage number 176.
MR. FORD. One other thing, while we're on this page: Giventhe growing interest of the Committee in credit aggregates as apossible way of tracking or influencing real performance, could yousay just a little more about that very unusual divergence between thegrowth of domestic nonfinancial debt and GNP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply requesting additional information on a topic.


Passage number 177.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's a good question, but let'sdefer it until we get to [the discussion of] the targets because itgoes right to that question of where a credit aggregate, if we use it,should be in the light of history. Is there anything else just on thegeneral business picture, the international picture, or the fiscalpicture. I would summarize my own view on this in a way that JohnBalles probably [was getting] to: There are a lot of reasons why theprice outlook looks pretty good; the business outlook looks prettygood except for the budget deficits ahead and except that theinternational outlook is a hazard, and except that we still have2/8-9/83[potential] problems with real financial disturbances, internationallyand domestically, which I'm afraid will be aggravated at some point bytoo sharp a decline in the oil prices. We have a little problem thathas been alluded to here as to how aggressive both labor and businesswill be in their pricing as the economy expands. I've been relativelyoptimistic about that but I don't know if there's any basis for beingrelatively optimistic. If Mr. Keehn is right--I think you were theone who commented on that side--then we have another problem. Ifeverybody's going to be very aggressive [in their pricing] with sixmonths of rise in new orders, I don't know where we are [going]. Onlytime will tell, I guess. Let us turn to Mr. Axilrod. If you canclarify all this in a statement shorter than the remainder of ouravailable time, my congratulations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges potential problems and uncertainties but does not express disagreement or engage in any argument with others.


Passage number 178.
MR. AXILROD. Well, the statement will certainly be shorter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the length of the statement.


Passage number 179.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm sure of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 180.
MR. AXILROD. I might say well in advance, because it relatesto a question that was just raised about credit, that throughout thisall of our money assumptions and our credit assumptions are in somesense high in terms of rates of growth. It came through in PresidentBlack's question about velocity and its lagged effects. They are all,over 1983, high relative to what one might have expected looking backat historical patterns in previous cyclical periods. That carriesthrough to Ml. To a degree it carries through to M2, though it's hardto interpret that extracting from the shifts because M2 is such adifferent animal, given interest rates. For that matter it's hard tointerpret Ml. It carries through to M3 and it carries through tototal credit. So, we're getting a somewhat smaller increase innominal GNP relative to the increase we're expecting in all of theseaggregates. And, of course, that is what happened last year. We gotenormous drops in the velocity of all these aggregates last year. Wedon't have anything like that [projected for] this year, but there'ssome sense of a little less lift in GNP relative to the aggregatesthat carries through into this year. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their observations and analysis of money assumptions and credit assumptions.


Passage number 181.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You indeed finished before exhausting allour time. How successful members of the Committee were in followingthe complexity of your statement, I'm not absolutely certain. As youwere talking, I wrote down some observations and questions. I thinkwhat Steve has said is right in our traditional framework, with allthe appropriate qualifications. It assumes we're going to havetargets on these various things, as we've discussed before. And wewill look at velocity hypotheses to set them down. Let me just maketwo assertions to start with--or one assertion with two subdivisions.I don't think we have any escape from an unusual amount of uncertainty--uncertainty in the technical sense--in approaching this subjectright now. I will assert, and I think it is true no matter how youlag these things, that velocity is off the map, as Steve indicated atthe start, so far as 1982 is concerned and because we have all theseuncertainties about shifts. But I also think there's a more basicuncertainty about the economy, which was reflected in our earlierdiscussion--the international dimensions, the deficit, the "financialcrisis" possibilities. [Those concerns] are there.Against that, let me raise some basic questions and then someoperational questions. I suppose the first basic question, which we-19-2/8-9/83more or less disposed of last time, but I want to repeat is: Do weneed these targets at all either legally or economically. I think wetentatively said yes, we should go ahead with them. And by targetsI'm talking about these monetary targets; one can conceive of someother kinds of targets. A subsidiary question is: How firmly shouldthey be put forward and on what basis do we change them as the yearprogresses. And in evaluating that decision: What do we see as therisks with respect to the economy or to inflation, particularlywhether they're asymmetrical, in playing our hand. As part of that Isuppose a question is: What concern do we have about interest rates,whether or not we target them. Those I see as general questions onwhich we have to reach some consensus. And then, assuming we're goingto have monetary targets, we have those questions about which one weemphasize, what we do with the shifts, what the base is for M2, howmuch weight we put on Ml, and how we treat this credit aggregate.Probably other questions will arise, but I think those are alloperational. This draft directive takes one stab at trying to answerthe questions, reflecting pretty much the state of the discussion as Iunderstood it after our last meeting. With that much introduction, Iwould appreciate some comments on what I characterized as the morebasic questions. Maybe we just ought to discuss those a little beforewe get into which target, which base, and so forth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 182.
MR. BOEHNE. May I ask a question before we get into that.Picking up on the uncertainties, what do you see are the mainuncertainties as far as the DIDC is concerned. Do you see a goodchance, for example, of a business Super NOW account coming along orother kinds of changes that would--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 183.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I don't know. I would guess againstit, but I'd put the odds at 60/40 or something against. But I tellyou, with all the other uncertainties, I see that one as about 18th onthe list although it would obviously affect M1 if the DIDC did it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and speculation about the likelihood of a certain event happening, but there is no direct disagreement or argument being presented.


Passage number 184.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, it would affect the Ml target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee simply states that the Ml target would be affected.


Passage number 185.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a subsidiary question to "What do wedo with Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply poses a question and does not present any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 186.
"MR. MORRIS. There is a new development that is relevant tothat: The Fidelity Fund is introducing a new money market fund thatwill offer unlimited checking. There will be no service charge butthe cost of handling the checking would be deducted from the revenue.So it will have some [lesser] flow of yields than their present funds.If others follow, then quite clearly they could force the commercialbanks into competing, which they haven't done yet, on the Super NOW.That would also force us, of course, to determine how we would treatthis new money market mutual fund in Ml. Presumably that would beopen to businesses and that would give those in the business communitya vehicle for having an interest-bearing checking account if theywanted it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a new development and discussing the potential implications and decisions that would need to be made as a result.


Passage number 187.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't want to impose too much order onthe discussion, but I will deem those questions as appropriate when weget to the question of what we do with Ml. I'm thinking of the moregeneral questions of how we evaluate the general risks in terms of thevery broad strategy of how we play this and what kinds of targets wewant and how firmly we adhere to them. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the speaker's thoughts on the topic without contradicting any other opinions.


Passage number 188.
2/8-9/83MR. WALLICH. I'd like to put forth just two or three verysimple propositions. I think the case for money supply targetsremains that they are a better protection for the central bank thanother forms of targets or no targets at all. Even though theexperience we've had in the past year might disillusion one quitesubstantially, and even though one might have believed all the timethat it's interest rates and not the money supply that govern theeconomy, I think the Congress has given us this mandate to use moneysupply targets and an opportunity to do something that is publiclymuch easier to defend than an arbitrary setting of interest rates.So, I would continue with the targets.I think the uncertainty that has been revealed during theyear in terms of the behavior of velocity is so great that we do haveto give ourselves more leeway. But I would look for that leeway in awider range around the midpoint that continues to be whatever we thinkis the most likely single course for that aggregate. If instead of 3percentage points we have 5 percentage points [as the width of theranges], it seems to me that under the circumstances, given what hasbeen observed by the public about the aggregates, that would beacceptable and understandable. Our task, then, would be to arrive atsome conception of what the midpoints are of the aggregates on whichwe want to target. I think we can either put M1 on ice temporarily ormake it relatively innocuous by having a wide range around it thatgives us flexibility. And we could have additional flexibility bysaying that at midyear we may want to review that. That may be atrade-off, so to speak, for a lesser width of the ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 189.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just insert an observation here. Idon't know how many of you read the Economic Report [of thePresident], but it went through various iterations before the finalversion was produced and I didn't read the final version. So, I speakprojecting changes that were made in earlier drafts. As originallywritten, it had a very great retreat from certainty of monetarytargeting, without any question, because it recognized the changes invelocity. It basically took the position that you have to blendtargets with judgment. In some earlier drafts it came very close tosaying what we should do is target nominal GNP, which is somethingthat at our last meeting we pretty much decided not to do. I thinkthat has been toned down as the drafts proceeded but there is stillsome implication of it I suspect. But that's the way they kind of getout of this box: You have to be reasonably flexible with the targetsand look very hard at GNP and inevitably forecast, I think, the GNP insetting the targets or in altering the targets. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 190.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I find myself in substantial agreementwith Henry. I think we do need to continue to target the aggregates.I believe it is an opportunity--and also there's plenty of basis forit--for widening the ranges. In addition the tone of the Council [ofEconomic Advisors] report is that you have to be flexible. Theydidn't exactly say target nominal [GNP]. I just read that before Icame into the meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, expresses agreement with Henry and suggests that targeting the aggregates is necessary and there may be an opportunity to widen the ranges. He also mentions that the Council of Economic Advisors report emphasizes the need for flexibility.


Passage number 191.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm sure they didn't exactly say that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their certainty about what someone didn't say, indicating a lack of disagreement or argument.


Passage number 192.
MR. PARTEE. They didn't exactly say target, but they saidsteer by nominal GNP and to the extent that we seem to be achieving aresult that is not consistent with what we wanted in nominal GNP, be-21-2/8-9/83prepared to change our targets. Well, some notion of uncertainty andof that kind of flexibility could very well [be read] into it. Theonly thing I disagreed with [Henry on] is that although I wouldn'ttarget primarily on Ml, as previously we did, I do believe that M1 sofar has stood up a little better than the other aggregates. And,therefore, I see no reason, as he commented, for benching it for thetime being or sidelining it. I see no reason for doing that so longas we leave in the caveat that if the DIDC does something big, thattarget, of course, will have to be changed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily describes the speaker's agreement with certain ideas and their belief in the usefulness of targeting M1.


Passage number 193.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just make a distinction there, as afootnote to what we said. Right at the moment M1 may be standing upbetter as a technical matter; it's not as distorted by theseinstitutional things. It is at least as far off in its velocity overthe past year as the other measures. They all are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a distinction and provides information about the different measures without any contradictory statements or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 194.
MR. PARTEE. But I don't see that there's an awful lot tochoose from.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 195.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage mentioned Chairman Volcker without providing any information about any disagreement or contention involving him.


Passage number 196.
 No, it's probably neither more nor lessover the next few--MR. PARTEE. Even the credit aggregate is way off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is subjective and does not present opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 197.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage states only the title of Vice Chairman Solomon, without providing any information or context that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 198.
 But even if you keep an M1 target,Chuck, you would deemphasize it and say that--MR. PARTEE. Yes, I wouldn't target primarily on Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 199.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. --basically the reserve path is drawnon the basis of derived M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is simply stating a fact or providing information about how the reserve path is drawn based on derived M2. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 200.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement provided, "Governor Gramley," is simply a mention of a person's name and does not indicate any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 201.
MR. GRAMLEY. I think the situation presently is one in whichwe have to regard our principal objective for 1983 as making sure wedo whatever is necessary to permit a recovery. And we have to beawfully careful in defining our financial objectives to make sure thatwe keep that in mind. Having said that, I still think it's importantfor us to continue using quantitative targets of some kind. If we goin the direction of trying to target on interest rates, we will besending signals that we have changed our fundamental long-runobjectives of policy. I agree with Henry completely on that. And Ithink if we start targeting on interest rates, any hope that we'regoing to make progress on the budget is going to go right out thewindow because Congress is going to say "Well, if you can do all thosegood things on interest rates, then what's the point of our being moredisciplined."In thinking about the targets, I have come to the conclusionthat Ml ought to be confined to the nearest waste basket at least forthe next 5 years. When I look back at 1982, I don't think thisdecline in velocity is an accident. The 8-1/2 percent increase we hadin M1 over the four quarters consists of a 3-1/2 percent increase inold Ml, which is the measure on which we based all of our historicalrelationships between M1 and GNP, and a 35 percent increase in othercheckable deposits. My point here is simply that we have no real ideawhether this new composition of M1 will give us a cyclical and secular2/8-9/83pattern of M1 anything like the old one or not. And the Super NOWs,of course, make it much worse no matter how much shift adjustment wemake for them. So, I think we're in a position in which we ought togive zero weight to Ml and ought to concentrate our attention on thebroader aggregates. And I think there's much to be said for using acredit aggregate in some way; I don't think we can use it for a targetin the same way we've used the monetary aggregates because we simplydo not have the kind of data availability, much less capacity tocontrol it. But using it as an information variable--telling us wherewe have been, giving us additional flexibility in adjusting ourmonetary targets as the year goes on--is potentially a very valuableuse of that kind of financial variable. Also, if we focus on a totalnonfinancial debt variable the way the staff has suggested, it alsohas the other very substantial benefit of in effect saying to theCongress: "Look, if the number we're shooting for is, say, $450billion, and the federal government is taking $210 billion, then weonly have this much left for the private sector and anything you cando to bring down the deficit will increase private creditavailability.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is primarily expressing their own opinions and ideas about monetary policy and targets.


Passage number 202.
"MS. TEETERS. May I ask the staff a technical question. Dowe have the same velocity problems with the old M1 that we do with Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 203.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will defer that question until we get tosetting the targets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they will postpone answering the question until a certain point in the conversation.


Passage number 204.
MS. TEETERS. I'm just curious.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states their curiosity.


Passage number 205.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, restrain your curiosity until we getto setting them up. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve contention or disagreement. It simply asks the reader to wait until the setup process is completed before satisfying their curiosity.


Passage number 206.
MR. BALLES. Generally, along with Governors Wallich andPartee, I feel that, yes, we do need to have some kind of monetarytargets. The key questions, of course, are what degree of emphasisand what range we should use, etc. Taking a leaf from your book, Mr.Chairman--you mentioned that we could have made the same economicforecast in the spring of '82 that we're making now and that the thingblew up on us--I would caution that the big surprise that we've hadsince our December meeting may be that M2 was the aggregate that washugely impacted and that Ml wasn't. That isn't necessarily settled incement, though; that could change. I'm not sure why or how or when[this might blow up on us] but, frankly, I would reserve judgment asto whether the relative stability that we see in Ml, which is a bigsurprise, is in fact something we can continue to count on. AlthoughI would like to see Ml included--Steve has given us both the pros andcons of doing it--I would be cautious and at a minimum defer judgmentuntil the spring of the year, perhaps in April, about whether we'regoing to have an Ml target for 1983 at all. I would add anotherthought--maybe piggybacking, if that's the right word, on Steve'spoint--that there's a good case to be made for using the first quarteras a base for M2. The same logic that led him to that conclusionwould lead me to the conclusion that if we are going to use Ml, weperhaps could consider the first quarter also as a base for the yeareven though there haven't been any big changes, net, so far.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their agreement with the idea of having monetary targets and is discussing some uncertainties and cautions regarding the stability of certain aggregates. They also suggest considering using the first quarter as a base for M2 and possibly for M1 as well.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 207.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I can interrupt. I think you'regetting a little ahead of this, John. All I'm interested in at this-23-2/8-9/83point are broad observations about the targets and how we deal withthem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains contention or disagreement. The phrase "If I can interrupt" implies that the speaker disagrees or wants to challenge the previous statements made by John.


Passage number 208.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I don't think there's a need togo around the table. We went over this in great detail.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 209.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'll find out whether there's aneed to go around the table. You can make an observation if you careto make an observation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they will find out if there is a need to go around the table, and they are inviting others to make observations if they want to.


Passage number 210.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay. I don't think that there's anyalternative to having some kind of broad targetry. There's nothing toput in its place that's acceptable to the Committee, as we know fromearlier discussions. Now, if you don't want to get specific, then Ihave to stop there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing agreement with the idea of having a broad targetry, without offering an alternative.


Passage number 211.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comments on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot determine without a specific passage.


Passage number 212.
MR. CORRIGAN. In terms of this question of how firmly we putforward the targets, which I obviously think we need, I certainlywould favor the direction that I think is implied in Steve's commentsand your own, but I'd be inclined to go maybe even one step further.And that is, in your testimony at least, in some carefully construedway, I'd suggest that we might indeed use the GNP as a bit of asteering mechanism. Again, I don't want to get trapped into thebusiness of saying we're going to use it for a target, but I do thinkthere is something to be said for getting a little more flexibilityinto the approach by saying that we're more willing to look at GNP andbe guided by it rather than trying to make the case for flexibilitysimply on the basis of all these technical arguments about thecomponents of the Ms, which people don't understand or care about.The one other point I'd like to make quickly, in terms of asymmetry orlack of risk, is that at this point I do see a somewhat asymmetricalrisk in one sense on the up side. But I can't ignore the fact that ifone of the things that you and others have mentioned goes wrong on thedown side, while the probabilities of that may be smaller, theimplications are much larger and we'd really have one heck of a mess.So, I have some asymmetry in my evaluation of risks; it's asymmetricalin its own right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is primarily expressing the speaker's opinions and thoughts on the topic.


Passage number 213.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage because there is no mention of conflicting opinions or differing viewpoints.


Passage number 214.
MR. MORRIS. My asymmetry is in the opposite direction. Ithink a need for an intermediate target will really be important whenwe get to the point where we have to start pushing interest rates upto prevent an acceleration of inflation. And it seems to me ifthere's one lesson from the last 3 years, it's that having anintermediate target gives us a good deal of political shelter thatinterest rate targeting does not. I think the public did have aperception that it was appropriate to decelerate gradually the rate ofgrowth of the money supply and I think we could generate a perceptionon controlling the rate of growth of credit. But if we suggest [weare] sitting out there managing interest rates, we don't have thatpublic perception going for us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement of the speaker's opinion and an argument for the use of an intermediate target for managing interest rates.


Passage number 215.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure whether I understand whatyour asymmetry is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing doubt or uncertainty about their understanding of the other person's asymmetry, but it does not imply disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 216.
2/8-9/83MR. MORRIS. I understood that Jerry thought the real problemof risk was on the down side. I think in any liquidity crisis thisCommittee is going to say the heck with the guidelines, we're going toput enough liquidity into the system to take care of it. Andpolitically that will never be a serious problem. The real problemcomes when, say, in late '84 or '85 we have to push interest rates up.If we don't have something we can point to that's demanding that we dothis in the public interest, I think we're in trouble.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Morris, is expressing his understanding and opinion regarding the potential problems and risks related to liquidity crisis and interest rate increases.


Passage number 217.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's why you want to keep targets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is merely expressing a desire or preference without any conflicting opinions or viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 218.
MR. MORRIS. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The mention of Mr. Morris suggests there is an individual involved in the conversation who may have a different viewpoint or perspective from others. This implies potential contention or disagreement. However, without further context, it is unclear what the disagreement may be about.


Passage number 219.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you also want to make the targetrelatively tight, whatever that means, at this stage.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is simply seeking clarification about the intended meaning of making the target relatively tight.


Passage number 220.
MR. MORRIS. I want to make the target meaningful in thesense that I think our problem in the last year or two was that wehave been in a situation where we had to abandon the M1 targeting twotimes out two years. We were presumably following the shift adjustedMl in 1981. That came in very low and we decided not to bring itwithin the range. I think that was a sensible decision, but it didmean that we were not targeting at the end of the year what we plannedto target at the beginning of the year. [Last] year we also madeanother sensible decision not to try to force Ml back [down to] withinthe top of the range, which I think would have been disastrous.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is simply explaining some decisions that were made and expressing his view that they were sensible.


Passage number 221.
 Butwe lose a lot of public [understanding] and strength from having anintermediate target when we have to keep abandoning it because thedarn thing is getting the wrong--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but I guess I'm lost. What do youconclude now for '83 on the basis of all this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing confusion and seeking clarification, but they do not engage in any argument or disagreement with another person or viewpoint.


Passage number 222.
MR. MORRIS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 223.
 I conclude from this that we should go totargeting some broad aggregate, which is not--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Other than Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreements. It is simply stating a conclusion based on the given information.


Passage number 224.
MR. MORRIS. [Other than] Ml and M2. I don't think we couldset a guideline for M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that Mr. Morris does not believe it is possible to set a guideline for M2, besides M1 and M2.


Passage number 225.
 I think the only one of the Ms that's leftthat has any validity--and by validity I mean something that is notgoing to be dominated by financial innovation--MR. GRAMLEY. What is it you are arguing for--M3 or L.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no clear assertion or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their opinion about a specific point, which is the validity of MR. GRAMLEY. There is no contention or disagreement mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 226.
MR. MORRIS. M3, L, or debt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "M3, L, or debt" is simply stating different options or choices without expressing any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 227.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You want a firm target for a very broadaggregate, then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation:
There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. It simply states the desire for a firm target for a broad aggregate, without expressing any conflicting opinions or ideas.


Passage number 228.
MR. PARTEE. Which we can't achieve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Partee is simply stating a fact or a situation that cannot be achieved. There is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 229.
MS. TEETERS. We don't have any influence on those, really.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It states a fact about lacking influence, without any conflicting viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 230.
MR. MORRIS. I think we can influence them just as easily aswe can Ml. There's a mythology around this table that we have anextremely tight control over M1. I think it's a lot of nonsense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. Mr. Morris disagrees with the belief that they have tight control over M1 and considers it to be nonsense.


Passage number 231.
-25-2/8-9/83MS. TEETERS. We don't have any control over credit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
This passage is purely informational, stating that the author or speaker does not have control over credit. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this statement.


Passage number 232.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage since it only mentions Governor Rice without presenting any conflicting opinions or debates.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 233.
MR. MORRIS. I don't believe that. I don't believe that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Morris, expresses disagreement or contention with a statement or belief, contradicting it by saying "I don't believe that" twice.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 234.
MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, I agree with a good deal--infact most--of what has already been said. Particularly, I agree withGovernor Wallich and the view that we ought to continue targeting theaggregates and should avoid explicit interest rate targeting for theessentially practical reasons that he set forth. I would like toemphasize, though, that we ought to keep in mind at all times what weconsider to be a desirable level of real interest rates and, while wedo not make these explicit, I think we ought to continue to look atinterest rates and keep in mind what range of rates we think would beconsistent with the results we would like to get. I especially agreewith Lyle that we ought to keep in mind that the main thing we have toachieve now is to get a recovery going and to try to nurture thatrecovery. Therefore, as we target aggregates I would favor settingtargets for Ml, M2, and M3, as well as domestic nonfinancial debt. Iwould want to remain very flexible in my view of which aggregate wasthe one to target on at any particular time. I would want to make itvery clear in our public statements and in the record that we feelfree to shift from one aggregate to another depending on itsusefulness. If we find that M3 is more useful than Ml or vice versa,we should feel free to make that shift in emphasis as we have in thepast. I would not at this point be prepared to throw Ml in the wastebasket. When things settle down six months from now, it may turn outto be a much more useful aggregate to target than it is today. So, Iwould emphasize two things: (1) we should maintain our flexibilityand our right to choose and shift the emphasis from one aggregate toanother from time to time; and (2) that we not take our eyes off ofinterest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with some points made by Governor Wallich, but also disagrees with the idea of completely abandoning M1 as a target aggregate. The speaker emphasizes the need to consider both interest rates and the target aggregates in order to achieve the desired results.


Passage number 235.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No (insufficient information)


Passage number 236.
MS. TEETERS. I agree with Henry for a change and, GovernorPartee, I do like the analogy of the fig leaf you cited last time. Ido think that the monetary aggregates provided a very good politicalshelter for us to do the things we probably couldn't have doneotherwise. I don't see that we can move to a very broad aggregate andhave any influence on it because I don't know what the relationshipsare to GNP in these cases and I don't think we have the instrumentsthrough reserve management to affect to any marked degree the growthof those very large aggregates. So, I can live with monetarytargeting for another year. But I do have one major plea. I agreewith all the [comments] about wide ranges and flexibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Ms. Teeters, expresses agreement with Henry and the analogy given by Governor Partee. She also shares her belief that monetary aggregates provided a good political shelter and states her uncertainty about the relationships to GNP and the instrument of reserve management. However, she concludes by stating that she is willing to live with monetary targeting for another year and has a plea related to wide ranges and flexibility.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 237.
 I'm not sosure we should hopscotch from one to the other, Emmett, but if we haveto we might--MR. RICE. Why not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the phrase "I'm not so sure we should hopscotch from one to the other," indicating doubt or hesitation, which is followed by the prompt "but if we have to we might." Additionally, the response "Why not" from Mr. Rice suggests that he disagrees with or questions the previous statement.


Passage number 238.
MS. TEETERS. I don't know, but I think it'll break down alittle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses uncertainty about a future event.


Passage number 239.
MR. PARTEE. But it sounds like we would take the one thatwe're within [the range].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee is simply making a statement or observation without engaging in any argument or contradiction.


Passage number 240.
2/8-9/83MR. RICE. I don't know why we can't, if we explain in therecord why we are doing it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing confusion about not being able to provide an explanation in the record for their actions.


Passage number 241.
MS. TEETERS. Now, that's my major point here. I think wecaused a lot of disturbances in the market last year that weren'tnecessary by not telling people what we were doing. It was prettyobvious by midyear, and certainly by fall, that we needed to changethe targets. We have consistently refused to change targets from theoriginal specification of them 18 months in advance. If we had goneahead and said that due to technical factors and due to liquidity weare going to change the ranges by a certain amount, it would havesettled a lot of the uncertainty in the market. I think interestrates would have started coming down in March of last year instead ofjumping off a cliff in July. If we do go this flexible route, I thinkthere is an increased responsibility to be very open about what we'redoing and to make it public; it seems to me we should tell peopleexactly what we're doing or what we're trying to do and why we'retrying to do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their belief that the Federal Reserve caused disturbances in the market by not informing people about their actions and suggests that being more transparent could have prevented uncertainty and negative consequences in the market.


Passage number 242.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 243.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, my position probably will notsurprise many people, but you may see that I have an unusual degree offlexibility this time. I think we ought to continue to target theaggregates and I think we ought to include Ml in that for a couple ofreasons. For one thing, it has been less distorted. That may nothold over the long run; I don't know. We can address that if itdoesn't. I think it's important for our credibility that we put M1 inif at all possible, but I do think there's substance in the argumentsmade by those who say that it's going to be a little different kind ofbeast than we've had in the past. So, I would widen the range on theup side because it's probably going to contain a larger element ofsavings and also because it has grown so fast that I don't think wecan risk decelerating it that fast without jarring the economy andknocking off any recovery that may be developing. And if we shouldtry to use Ml, then I think that ought to be the main basis forconstructing our target paths because we found out M2 doesn't workvery well. We could, I suppose, use a target shadow reserverequirement, as Steve suggested in the memo last time, of 4 percent orsomething like that. But the truth of the matter is that even thoughwe've gone through the motions, we really have not been doing any kindof reserve targeting during this period. In fact I argued that wereally ought just to admit we were pegging the federal funds rate,which is what I think we've done and I think that was appropriateduring this period of uncertainty. But if we're going to get back toreserve targeting, it has to involve something that is to a largeextent reserveable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is some contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Black, mentions that he believes M1 should be included in targeting the aggregates, but acknowledges that it may be a different kind of measure compared to what they have used in the past. He suggests widening the range on the upside and using M1 as the main basis for constructing target paths. This implies that there may be disagreement on whether or not to include M1 and how it should be used in targeting.


Passage number 244.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roberts and then Mr. Solomon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement between Mr. Roberts and Mr. Solomon.


Passage number 245.
MR. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, I'm very conscious, having justleft the private marketplace, of the fragile position of commercialbanks and also the concern over large government deficits. But Ithink that another major concern out there is that the Federal ReserveSystem not sort of operate without any guidelines. I think that themarket expects specific guidelines and, if we don't have them, therewill be an anticipatory effect in the market that will be negative interms of interest rates. I would, therefore, strongly favor our2/8-9/83maintaining targets for monetary aggregates. It appears to me from myvery limited ability to study this matter that M1 has exonerateditself extremely well during this period and, on the assumption thatvelocity will return to a normal pattern, I would hope that M1 wouldbe very strongly represented in those monetary aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 246.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no mention of any conflict or disagreement in the passage given. The passage only introduces Mr. Solomon but does not provide any additional information to suggest any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 247.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In addition to targeting M2 and M3, Ihave a slight preference for continuing to target Ml but I'd make itclear that we are continuing the present policy of deemphasizing it.If we do not say that, we are going to return to a situation where themarkets are mesmerized by the Friday numbers and we're going to have alot of volatility again and we're going to feel much more handcuffed.I think we do have the need for the kind of flexibility that we havedemonstrated in the last few months, so I could live either withdropping M1 or leaving it in. We can leave it in but I think it'sessential to make clear that it is going to be deemphasized and thatbasically there's no perception that we're making a significant shiftfrom the present conduct of monetary policy back to a strictermonetary targeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses a slight preference for continuing to target M1 but acknowledges that it could also be dropped. The main concern is to make it clear that the present policy of de-emphasizing M1 will continue, in order to avoid market volatility.


Passage number 248.
MR. RICE. Would you accept deemphasizing it for now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 249.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation:


Passage number 250.
MR. RICE. "Now" is the emphasis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The word "now" is simply being emphasized by Mr. Rice.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 251.
MR. PARTEE. How do you answer Bob's point that we don't haveany reserve targeting at all. We just target on net borrowedreserves--that is, the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. This can be seen in the statement made by Mr. Party, who is questioning Bob's point about the lack of reserve targeting. Mr. Party's question indicates disagreement or a difference in opinion on this matter.


Passage number 252.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, we all know what we're doing.The net effect of our monetary policy is still restrictive and themajority of the market perceives it as such because they look at thelevel of real interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 253.
MR. PARTEE. I do not see the evidence that we have arestrictive policy. I think credit is beginning to flow and flow invery large quantities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is expressing his opinion that there is no evidence of a restrictive policy and that credit is flowing in large quantities. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this statement.


Passage number 254.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You mean in the first quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification about a specific time frame.


Passage number 255.
MR. PARTEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In this passage, there is a statement made by Mr. Partee, but there is no indication of any contention or disagreement present in this particular excerpt.


Passage number 256.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 257.
MR. BOYKIN. I would agree with those who are advocating acontinuance of targeting Ml, M2, and M3. I would not favor droppingMl. I don't have the exact wording of how to handle it, I guess. Iwould not be quite as strong as saying that we are not going to payvery much attention to it and rely more on M2, based on the veryrecent evidence that we have that Ml seems to be behaving a littlebetter in this transition period. I would probably be inclined tolook a little more at Ml but I also agree that flexibility isessential because we're dealing in a very, very uncertain time, withthe numbers apparently changing with each report that comes through.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing agreement with the idea of targeting M1, M2, and M3, but also mentioning the need for flexibility due to the uncertainty of the situation. They are not disagreeing or arguing against any specific point.


Passage number 258.
-28-2/8-9/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple mathematical equation.


Passage number 259.
MR. MARTIN. I would join those who support targetingaggregates. My own predilection would be M2 and M3 at this time, witha statement that we would review Ml. I would go along with John thatwe review this in April and not wait until midyear. I think that weneed to target aggregates for a couple of reasons and they areimportant reasons. First, they form a basis for communication; theyprovide a certain degree of understanding not just on the Hill but inthe financial community. Secondly, although this may sound a bitextreme, I think that despite our exceeding the targets by such alarge amount they provide a certain amount of discipline internally onourselves. I believe we must go to wider ranges to reflect theuncertainties, though in so doing it may be appropriate--I would justraise this for consideration--that in communication with the Congresswe indicate it will be a rather short-term objective of ours to bringdown the rates of growth in the aggregates at such time as therecovery will not be impeded thereby. And I'd say that we wouldattempt to exercise our best efforts not to have such a turn be abruptor the method in which it was done itself be disruptive. I certainlysupport those who believe we should use so-called informationalvariables. It seems to me that we must mention nominal interestrates, not in the sense of a target but as an information variable,because of the credibility question. If we don't mention that we aremonitoring that informational variable, I don't think we will bebelieved. We should likewise mention as an informational variable thedomestic nonfinancial debt for all the reasons that have been advancedhere in that it does move us a bit toward the GNP inference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Martin, expresses his support for targeting aggregates and suggests specific targets and review timelines. He also discusses the importance of aggregates for communication and internal discipline and suggests using wider ranges to reflect uncertainties. He supports the use of informational variables such as nominal interest rates and domestic nonfinancial debt. Overall, there is no disagreement or contention within his statements.


Passage number 260.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I'm unable to provide an answer as you haven't provided a complete passage or context.


Passage number 261.
MR. BOEHNE. I go along with the targeting for all thereasons that have been given, not the least of which is the politicalsheltering. I do think, however, that we have to look through thesetargets to the real economy and therein comes the flexibility. Itseems to me that the consequences, both social and economic, of nothaving a recovery this year are so large that we have to look throughto the real sector. Not to include M1 seems to me to emphasize theflexibility that we're trying to convey here. If we include Ml, thereis so much accumulated devotion to that particular indicator--with theFriday afternoon releases and all of that--that to bring it back nowis to go counter to what we're trying to emphasize, and that is theneed for flexibility. So, in addition to the technical reasons, whatwe're trying to communicate leads me not to include Ml at this pointand go with M2, M3, and with credit as an informational variable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Boehne, agrees with the targeting for the reasons stated and elaborates on the need to focus on the real economy and emphasize flexibility.


Passage number 262.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 263.
MS. HORN. Starting from the premise of targeting aggregates,my preference is to target narrower aggregates both for reasons ofcontrollability and historical relationships with GNP and so forth.Because I favor targeting narrower aggregates, I favor a flexibleapproach. That flexibility would be on the side of what I think hasbeen referred to as technical reasons--that is, I think we'd have tobe explicit that we would be flexible with Ml targets, depending onour fragmented readings of what its velocity is going to be. That'sthe danger, certainly on the Ml side. With M2, along with thevelocity problem, there are also the shift problems. And, of course,-29-2/8-9/83the shift problems could develop with Ml as the year goes on. So it'sthose kinds of flexibilities that I'd like to see introduced into thetargeting exercise. I very much agree with Nancy that if we take anapproach that is flexible with regard to targets, we must be very openin our communications with the markets. They must believe that we'reengaging in an honest flexibility and I think that would beaccomplished by frequent and fairly open communication.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their preference for targeting narrower aggregates and advocating for a flexible approach in order to address technical issues and uncertainties with the velocity and shift problems of M1 and M2. The speaker also agrees with the need for open communication with the markets.


Passage number 264.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would you like to define dishonestflexibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any information or statements that suggest or imply contention or disagreement.


Passage number 265.
MS. HORN. No, I'm going quickly onto the next subject.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Ms. Horn states that she is moving quickly onto the next subject, suggesting a smooth transition or agreement.


Passage number 266.
MR. PARTEE. It's sustained upward bias.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
This passage does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 267.
MS. HORN. I agree with Frank about the risk question; Ithink the risk is on the up side. In particular, if we take thisflexible approach, I think we will be very sensitive as a Committee tothe economy needing more liquidity. Hoping that that doesn't happen,then we're going to need the backbone--and the political protectionthat we will get from the targets will have to come into play--if weget into a situation where we need to start increasing interest rates.And if we build in too much flexibility, that of course takes a bit ofthat protection away.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It only presents the speaker, Ms. Horn, agreeing with Frank about the risk question.


Passage number 268.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did I miss you, Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is asking a question about whether someone was missed.


Passage number 269.
MR. GUFFEY. Not yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 270.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I had your name and I crossed it offwithout even hearing you, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker crossed off the person's name without even hearing them, indicating a difference in opinions or a decision made without giving the other person a chance to speak or present their case.


Passage number 271.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, I may not have anything to say that hasn'talready been said. If so, I'll just repeat what has already beensaid. I would join those who would retain the aggregates targetingbecause, first of all, I don't think we have any choice. Legally, Ithink we're obliged to do so and it's a question of which aggregateswe select. My own preference would be to target Ml, M2, and M3, andadopt the debt aggregate. My purpose is twofold. I think FrankMorris said it very well: They may not be used in our implementationprocess in the immediate period ahead, but they have served us verywell as a political shelter. And that wheel is going to turn backaround and we're going to need them again. To abandon them now or todilute them in importance would be a mistake for the future, as far asthe public's perception is concerned. I am concerned, however, aboutthe recovery and that we ensure that the recovery takes place. Iagain agree with Frank that this Committee should look through theaggregates to ensure that recovery does take place fairly early inthis year. I hope that's the case, at least. What reinforces myfeeling of targeting the aggregates is the fact that the markets areused to looking at them and if we fuzz them up too much without anyhistorical connection with what we've done in the past, we're buildinguncertainty in the markets. The risk of delayed recovery that Ibelieve is out there is enhanced as a result. This is beyond whereyou want to go at the moment, Mr. Chairman, but I would set thesetarget ranges in such a way that they can be easily equated to what wehave said and have tried to do in the past and move to the lowerlevels. It bothers me a bit when we talk about a 9 to 13 percent2/8-9/83range for M2, for example, and not talk about the 6 to 9 percentrange.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 272.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply provides the name "Mr. Keehn" without any additional information or context to indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 273.
MR. KEEHN. I would join the consensus in favor of continuingwith the targeting [of the aggregates]. I've certainly been impressedwith the analysis that was done with regard to the shifts that aretaking place in the aggregates. Nonetheless, we are in a period withan extraordinary amount of noise and uncertainty. Therefore, I wouldbe in favor of continuing to target Ml, M2, and M3, but I would movethe bases as far forward as we possibly can to get behind us as muchof the shift that has been and is taking place. I would keep a heavyeye, or if not heavy certainly a concerned eye, on interest ratesbecause unless we get the recovery more solidly in place than it isnow, we'll have a great deal of trouble. And in all of our publicutterances we ought to make it perfectly clear that as we go throughthe year we are going to be adjusting the ranges, the base, and ourwhole approach to this to provide for the shifts that are takingplace.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Keehn expresses his agreement with the consensus to continue targeting the aggregates and expresses his concern about the noise and uncertainty in the current period. He suggests moving the bases forward and keeping an eye on interest rates. There is no disagreement or conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 274.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the given passage "Mr. Ford" as there is no context or additional information provided.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 275.
MR. FORD. I was listening to you when you said that youwanted to get back to ask if there were any fundamentally differentthings that the Committee wanted to consider. In listening to whatwe've all said here, where we are headed--unless somebody does come upwith a different approach--is to [take a decision that would] add tothe noise in the marketplace. I want to be specific about what Imean. If you take all the things that have been mentioned here todayso far, and that a lot of people nodded their heads in favor of, whatthey come to is this: We haven't voted on it yet but I'd be willingto bet money that by the time we're done voting we will have agreedthat there are going to be more aggregates to look at. Specifically,we're going to add a credit variable or two. We're generally in favorof leaving Ml in, although with much less emphasis. There's strongacceptance of the reality that there is going to be more base driftthis time than ever before--and if I remember the numbers right--bothon M1 and M2. A number of people, at least Jerry, Ed, Lyle, Roger,and a number of others, have said "Let's look through all this to thereal economy." That to me is another way of saying we're going to tryto impact the economy directly. And I don't think it's too much of astretch of the words to say we want to [fine] tune the economy inreality. We think we can do it. We've all used the word flexibility.Everyone who has spoken so far has used the word flexibility, which isanother way of saying wider bands and more allowance for moving thingsaround. And everyone is advocating the wider bands themselves.When I take all of these feelings that we've expressed, Mr.Chairman, it raises the question in my mind, in line with yourquestion: Why are we dealing with monetary aggregates at all. If yougo back to how we got there, the monetary theorists who pushed thiswhole concept had as one of the fundamental parts of the concept thatwe shouldn't try to fine-tune and especially shouldn't try on a short-term basis to be flexible about a lot of things. We should be lookingat some aggregate that hopefully has some relationship to what we'rereally trying to do over a long period of time and just let it go in asteady way and the market will know what we're going to do next. And2/8-9/83with these six or seven dimensions of flexibility that we're puttingon everything--. There are two or three people down this side of thetable who in different ways all stuck to it. Karen almost jumped onthe table and then backed off. Nancy said it. What we're doing is weare looking at the real economy, trying to manage it in real terms,and de facto we're using interest rates as the principal variable toattempt to do that. That's what we're doing.So, my answer to you would be: If we're going to do allthese other things, then it would be in the interest of not creatingmore noise in the markets just to say that we are now going to attemptin our collective wisdom to manage the real economy out of a recessionwithout managing it back into inflation and the principal thing we'regoing to do is move short-term rates. Because I think that's thetruth. Isn't that what we're really doing. It looks that way on thecharts to me. So, just in case somebody wants a fundamentalalternative--all the rest of the things all of you have said arevariations, I argue, on this theme of flexibility, more targets, andwider bands--I'll offer a basic alternative, if for nothing else butthe sake of discussion, which is to stop all that stuff and tellpeople that we're trying to set interest rates that will get us out ofthe recession and hope that it won't have side effects that will getus back into another round of inflation after it's over. That wouldbe in my view a more fundamental change and one that I don't want tosay I'm personally advocating 100 percent; but if the drift of theopinion around this table is to do all these other things, let's atleast consider that as an alternative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker is questioning the approach of the Committee and suggesting a different approach to managing the economy. They argue that focusing on monetary aggregates may not be effective and instead propose managing the real economy through adjusting interest rates. This challenges the current approach and raises a fundamental alternative for consideration.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 276.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you've put your finger on a pointthat I was going to make in summation. I would not carry it to thepoint that you carried it, but what I hear around the table--withmaybe your exception--is unanimity on targeting, which is where wewere before, and a lot of flexibility. I think those arefundamentally incompatible in a conceptual sense, if you push this farenough. In one theory of targeting, anyway, you'll go a long waytoward undermining what you are targeting if you're very flexible inhandling it. I detected a lot of nuances or differences, which givesus a job to reconcile. I wouldn't go all the way to targetinginterest rates very firmly because I think there are targets otherthan interest rates that we could adopt instead of monetary targeting.We can look at a lot of things in addition to interest rates, which Ithink is probably what we're doing. But I did want to note that Ithink the Committee is on two horses; I'm not saying wrongly. Butthere are two horses: One is targeting and one is flexibility. Andthey have two different names.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that there is unanimity on targeting, but also notes that there is flexibility in the approach. The speaker believes that targeting and flexibility are fundamentally incompatible, and suggests that the Committee is on two different paths. This disagreement can be seen in the statement "I think those are fundamentally incompatible in a conceptual sense, if you push this far enough."


Passage number 277.
MR. FORD. They tend to go in opposite directions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that "They tend to go in opposite directions" without any further context or indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 278.
MR. RICE. It's because of the uncertainty that we weretalking about earlier.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a reason for their previous discussion about uncertainty.


Passage number 279.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I'm not saying it's wrong. I'm justsaying that we better recognize that that's what we're doing. Andinevitably, then, you have to put emphasis on other things, whateverthey may be at the time--whether it's interest rates or nominal GNP ora number of other things that have been mentioned. As to whether it'sreassuring or unreassuring to the markets, I think you could ask avariety of market people and they'd give you different answers to that-32-2/8-9/83question depending upon their own predilection. So, that point Ithink one can interpret for oneself. I have a little strategicdecision to make on whether we finish tomorrow or not[unintelligible]. Does anybody else want to comment on these generalthings in response to what they have heard from others if it doesn'ttake too long. But I think we are where Mr. Ford suggested. Thereare a lot of variables and a lot of nuances--or more than nuances--ofdifferences as to what to do with all these variables. And how wecondense all that into a directive is the problem. I think this draftthat we have in front of us more or less reflects the flavor of theconversation, whether or not it reflects it in the details thateverybody would like to see. That's where we are. We can leave itall until tomorrow or we can continue for another 10 minutes or so, Isuppose, tonight. If people want to stay for another 20 minutes maybewe could dispose of all these more or less technical questions thatI've been deferring about lagged velocity and the question of [thebase] that John Balles raised. What else was raised that was more orless discrete. Why don't I just throw open [the discussion] if peopleare willing to sit here until quarter to six to get more underbrushout of the way.As I read this conversation--tell me if I'm wrong--weprobably can work more or less from the directive that we have beforeus. I'm not arguing that people wouldn't want to change some of thewording, but I think it very broadly has this flavor of targets withflexibility that I hear around the table. Why don't we deal with thislanguage here, which is fundamental I suppose, on how stable velocityis. On the face of it, it wasn't very stable last year. And thequestion has been raised: Does it look that much more stable iflagged.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing various topics and seeking input from others.


Passage number 280.
MR. AXILROD. Mrs. Low will pass out some charts that theCommittee could look at. [See Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is simply stating that Mrs. Low will pass out charts for the committee to review. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 281.
]MS. TEETERS. What about the velocity of old Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 282.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's here. Oh old Ml. I don't knowwhether Steve is prepared to cover that one, but it's a reasonablequestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about whether or not Steve is prepared to cover a certain topic but acknowledges it as a reasonable question.


Passage number 283.
MR. AXILROD. Governor Teeters, old Ml last year grew 3-1/4percent; new M1 grew 8-1/2 percent. Our quarterly model equationwould have predicted a growth of 5-1/2 percent, given interest ratesand GNP. So, [the model result] is in the middle. It was no moreaccurate--well, the difference is small--on old M1 than it was on newMl. It just underpredicted one and overpredicted the other.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the results of a model's predictions for the growth of old M1 and new M1. There is no argument or disagreement presented.


Passage number 284.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't understand it. I would havethought that old M1 was much closer now. What are you calling it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing confusion and seeking clarification about the term being referred to.


Passage number 285.
MR. AXILROD. It was 3-1/4 percent, Q4 1981 to Q4 1982.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing factual information about the interest rate between Q4 1981 and Q4 1982.


Passage number 286.
MS. TEETERS. That's the growth of old Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply mentions the growth of old Ml without any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 287.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That was the growth of old M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a fact and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 288.
MS. TEETERS. What's the velocity of old Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a question without any further information to suggest disagreement.


Passage number 289.
2/8-9/83MR. AXILROD. Oh, the velocity of old Ml. I'm sorry, Ithought you [meant growth]. The velocity of old M1 would have been alittle plus.SPEAKER(.). It went up a little.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The conversation seems to be a simple clarification and agreement between the speakers.


Passage number 290.
MR. PARTEE. A little [plus].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee simply states that there is a small addition or increase.


Passage number 291.
MR. AXILROD. Zero with no change. But I was [addressing]the question of whether our model predicted it. That's another way ofgetting it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Axilrod is simply clarifying his previous statement and explaining that he was addressing a different question. There is no evident contention or disagreement.


Passage number 292.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's another way of getting to theanswer. But I am not sure what your answer is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing uncertainty about the answer and stating that there may be other ways to arrive at it.


Passage number 293.
 I take it GovernorTeeter's assertion or question--MS. TEETERS. No, question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply shows a conversation between two people, Governor Teeter and Ms. Teeters.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 294.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --is: Has not the velocity of old Ml beenmore consistent than that of new Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The question is comparing the consistency of the velocity of "old Ml" and "new Ml," suggesting that there might be differing opinions or arguments about the topic.


Passage number 295.
MR. AXILROD. Well, I can only answer it at the moment forlast year. If you get beyond that, old Ml went to pot with the NOWaccounts and all that. I still have in mind what happened a lotearlier when there were no differences between old Ml and new M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their perspective and recalling past events.


Passage number 296.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A lot earlier there was no difference, I'msure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement is a personal assertion that does not present any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 297.
MR. AXILROD. Last year seems to me the only relevant year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Axilrod expressing his opinion about the relevance of the previous year.


Passage number 298.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're probably right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker acknowledges the other person's perspective and agrees with it.


Passage number 299.
MR. AXILROD. One easy way to get at that is to say we havean equation based on the whole history and that the infamous, in asense, quarterly equation in our model just says there has been adownward demand shift in M1 since the mid-1970s. That equation, givenincome and interest rates in the last year, said Ml would haveincreased 5-1/2 percent. The old Ml increased 3-1/4 percent. So, theequation overpredicted for the old Ml. The new M1 increased 8-1/2percent and in that respect the equation underpredicted. I findlittle to choose by the time I put myself in that framework. Now, ofcourse, Governor Gramley is right that it probably doesn't take intoaccount this special effect of OCDs and NOW accounts and the fact thatmaybe the behavior is a little different. They have a somewhatdifferent elasticity. The elasticity of M1 with respect to income andinterest rates may be changing as the composition changes. We have aproblem there, no doubt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 300.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You say the equations are not muchdifferent. They're on the opposite side of this. Suppose you take avery simplistic notion and say velocity was averaging 3 or so percentfor a long period of time. I take from what you're saying that in1982 old Ml velocity was about zero. Zero is closer to 3 or sopercent than 8 percent was--well, not 8 but--SPEAKER(.). Minus 5.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 301.
2/8-9/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Minus 5. Okay, minus 5; that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply acknowledges that subtracting 5 from the given date is the correct calculation.


Passage number 302.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, we on the staff here tend to lookat velocity with interest rates taken into account. And there was asharp drop last year in interest rates. So that's why we tend to lookat the model, which enables us to look at both the impact of incomeand interest rates together. That's why we did it the other way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining why they chose to look at the model in a certain way.


Passage number 303.
MS. TEETERS. Wait a minute, Steve. Let me just see if I[understand]. Given the drop in interest rates you would haveexpected a drop in velocity, if nothing else changed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate contention or disagreement. Ms. Teeters is simply clarifying her understanding and seeking confirmation from Steve.


Passage number 304.
MR. AXILROD. We expected some drop in velocity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states an expected drop in velocity.


Passage number 305.
MS. TEETERS. That's what you're saying: a drop in velocity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement by MS. TEETERS.


Passage number 306.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage only mentions "MR. AXILROD" without any context or information that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 307.
 There's some--MR. GRAMLEY. Well, the other way you can interpret Steve'sremarks is that what you should do, according to the model, is takethe growth rate of old M1 and the growth rate of new Ml and averagethe two together. Then you get the right answer.SPEAKER(.). That leaves us another problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speakers are discussing different interpretations of the remarks made by someone named Steve, but there is no strong disagreement or argument taking place.


Passage number 308.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're holding an array of charts beforeus, upon which maybe Steve will make the assertion--I'll make it forhim for purposes of testing--that there is no significant differencebetween lagged velocity and otherwise. I think we can detect a slightdifference in the most recent period, maybe only because we don't haveanother quarter for M1 lagged one quarter in that first chart. Isuspect the next quarter would show the lagged relationship with asteep decline. I say that because we had a 16 percent rate ofincrease in Ml last quarter and nobody thinks that the GNP is going toapproach an annual rate of increase of 16 percent this quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their thoughts and observations about the charts and expressing their suspicions. However, there is no conflicting argument or disagreement with another party.


Passage number 309.
MR. AXILROD. Another thing to observe, Mr. Chairman, isshown in chart 5 in the way that we plot the growth rates; they areobviously highly variable for both. The standard deviations are ameasure of variability. There is little to choose between thestandard contemporaneous and the alternative, which is to use a lag onthese. In all cases the alternative is a hair better than thestandard, but the difference will not be of any significance. None ofthis means that velocity isn't going to turn around in '83, lagged,unlagged, or any other way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply presenting observations and analysis.


Passage number 310.
 But it--MR. BLACK. Could I make at least one observation, Mr.Chairman. Steve, I don't think there's anything incompatible withwhat we did [in Richmond] and what you did here. You have not usedsemi-logs on this scale. So, on the vertical scale, an absolute dropthere would be comparable to a much smaller drop down here. In thefigures that we had looked at back to '54 and '49, the change invelocity lagged one or two quarters was really not that different.So, we were talking about two slightly different things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is simply making an observation and clarifying that there is no incompatibility between what they did in Richmond and what was done there.


Passage number 311.
MR. AXILROD. A general point I made earlier in the evening,Mr. Chairman, was that whether you look at velocity contemporaneouslyor lagged, there is a marked change in the behavior of velocity in '822/8-9/83relative to historical experience. Lagging it doesn't change that.And that's the only point I wanted to make.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply restating a previous point they made.


Passage number 312.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, could I circulate a memo to showsomething differently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Black, is simply requesting permission to distribute a memo that may present information differently.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 313.
MR. GRAMLEY. Just don't expect us to read it, Bob.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement. The statement "Just don't expect us to read it, Bob" indicates a disagreement or refusal to read something.


Passage number 314.
MR. BLACK. Okay. I think there are precedents. Steve isright that nobody knows what velocity is going to do in this upturn.It may come up and it may not; I don't know. I'm just saying that Iwas surprised to find out, as I read this, that there were precedentsto this kind of drop. But they were in periods before this chartbegins; they were earlier in the postwar period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Black, is simply stating his opinion and observations and acknowledges that there are precedents but they occurred in periods before the chart being discussed.


Passage number 315.
 And they may or maynot be indicative--MR. AXILROD. Yes. We only went back to where we hadquarterly data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 316.
MR. BLACK. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 317.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Interestingly enough--and I think MikePrell may have mentioned this--on the credit flows we had the samevelocity phenomenon. We had something like it in the 1950s for verybrief periods. But you have to go back to the 1950s.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 318.
MR. PRELL. It is shown on the chart on page 9 in the creditaggregate memo where we did take it back to the 1950s.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply providing information and there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 319.
MR. FORD. On the credit [memo].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement or response by Mr. Ford about the credit memo.


Passage number 320.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That was the memo distributed to youearlier. The other question that arose was about basing. There'sjust a feeling that if you take M2 in the extreme form, if we have atarget for the year and use the fourth quarter of last year, we aregoing to have a big number, whatever the number should be. It's goingto be outside the range of anything we've talked about. If we use thefirst quarter, it still has quite a lot of [that problem] because M2was rising so fast during January at least. The only way to cure itis by taking as a base some period that we haven't reached yet. It'smuch less true in the other aggregates. But it's true in spades ofM2. So we're left with this simple choice. If we're going to use anM2 [target] and if we use the traditional base, we're going to have avery large number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply presenting the issue of choosing a base period for calculating an M2 target, and discussing the potential consequences of different choices. There is no explicit disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 321.
 The pros and cons of--MR. GUFFEY. One alternative to that, of course, because ofthe historical significance of the fourth-quarter base is to use thatbase and for the purpose of your testimony use the underlying growthrate that is assumed and adjust that by the shifts as we go throughthe year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting viewpoints or opinions. It simply states two alternatives without expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 322.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can do that theoretically, Iguess. Maybe I just speak for myself but I thought it was the generalview around here that it is awfully hard to do that this year becauseyou can't deliver those estimates of the shifts with a straight faceand say you have any confidence in them. If you just change one ofthose percentages a little, you're way off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and suggesting there is a general consensus among the group about the difficulty of delivering accurate estimates. They are not disagreeing with anyone else's viewpoint.


Passage number 323.
2/8-9/83MR. GUFFEY. I understand that. But the other numbers don'tmake any more sense, particularly for the Committee setting itstargets. And the fact that we're pursuing the course that'sconsistent with what we've done in the past is probably the mostimportant message that this Committee could deliver to the public andto the markets in the period ahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing understanding and agreement with the course being pursued by the Committee.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 324.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In that connection, I would only pointout--and it surprised me a little--Mr. Axilrod's latest estimate. IfI read it correctly in the Bluebook, he is saying the estimate is nota good one in terms of being a reliable estimate. His estimate ispresumably the center of some range; I don't know whether he said thator not. If it is the middle of some range, what it says is that wehave no basis whatsoever for thinking that M2 was high in the last twomonths. In fact, it was a little on the low side. I don't thinkthat's the public appreciation. That hasn't particularly been myappreciation. I don't think that has been the appreciation anyplace,but that's what it says.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing surprise and disagreement with Mr. Axilrod's estimate, stating that it is not a reliable estimate and goes against the public's appreciation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 325.
MR. FORD. Is that going to sell. Can we sell that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Ford expresses doubt about the ability to sell something, indicating disagreement or concern.


Passage number 326.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm wondering myself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their curiosity about something.


Passage number 327.
MR. FORD. I'm serious. I don't mean this as a facetiousquestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Ford's statement appears to be straightforward and sincere, without any indication of disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 328.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no way to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without actually looking at its content.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 329.
 I doubt it, but we--MR. GRAMLEY. I think we shouldn't try, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley disagrees with the statement that they should not try.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 330.
 Theidea of shift adjusting--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it's a question that's fullysettled.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "I don't think it's a question that's fully settled" suggests that the speaker has reservations or doubts about the idea of shift adjusting, indicating a disagreement or lack of consensus regarding the topic.


Passage number 331.
MR. GRAMLEY. When the magnitudes are $200 billion in twomonths it is absurd because if you get a very minor change in thatpercentage that comes from non-M2 sources, it makes a fundamentaldifference in your appraisal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion that when the magnitudes are $200 billion in two months, it is absurd because even a minor change in the percentage that comes from non-M2 sources can greatly impact their appraisal.


Passage number 332.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can't say it is not great. Even ifyou believe Steve's number as a center of a range, which he says is avery bad estimate, all you can say is that it's not clear that it'shigh or low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 333.
MR. GRAMLEY. And you ought to make that point. But I thinkit argues strongly for using a February-March base instead of afourth-quarter base.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Gramley is expressing his opinion and suggestion, but there is no evidence of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 334.
MR. MORRIS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I cannot generate a response without the passage you are referring to. Can you please provide the passage or specify what it is about?


Passage number 335.
 But the problem--MR. GUFFEY. I'd just like to follow up by saying that I'drather fuzz up the adjustment than I would the basic underlying growthrate we're shooting for. And I'd assume the 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their personal preference and assumption, but there is no disagreement or conflict with others.


Passage number 336.
MR. GRAMLEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only mentions Mr. Gramley without any further information or context provided.


Passage number 337.
 You can still argue that from February-March2/8-9/83MR. GUFFEY. Well, the historical connection is what I thinkwould be important to the markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the historical connection is important to the markets.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 338.
MR. MARTIN. I think the shock in the market of the verylarge rates of change that result from using the fourth quarter [as abase] would exceed any kind of side or pseudo analyses that we'veshifted the base. I think those large percentage growth numbers wouldbe a shock.SPEAKER(.).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The statement "I think the shock in the market of the very large rates of change that result from using the fourth quarter [as a base] would exceed any kind of side or pseudo analyses that we've shifted the base" indicates a disagreement or difference of opinion regarding the potential impact of using the fourth quarter as a base.


Passage number 339.
 I agree with--MR. PARTEE. Well, Roger's going to take them out, Paul, as Iunderstand it. He will show a figure that is like the 8 percent fromthe fourth quarter to the first quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing agreement with Mr. Party's statement.


Passage number 340.
MR. GUFFEY. Absolutely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the statement "Mr. Guffey. Absolutely." This is a straightforward affirmation or agreement.


Passage number 341.
MR. PARTEE. And then you've got to [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 342.
MR. GUFFEY. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 343.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The markets are so conscious of this$200 odd billion that has moved that I think they would be surprisedif we were to base [the target] on the fourth quarter and incorporatethis massive redistribution. I think it would be very understandablethat we would take the February-March base. Oh, I'm sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion or viewpoint on the topic at hand.


Passage number 344.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any specific contention or disagreement related to Chairman Volcker.


Passage number 345.
 No, no, I'm just--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. At least I have the clear impressionthat they would be surprised. They would know the imprecision of ourshift adjustment estimates. We'd have to say so quite honestly. AndI think they would understand, given this massive movement that'sgoing on, why we would take a February-March base. It's not so muchthat the size of the numbers bothers me, although I think there arepeople who don't understand and who will be shocked by the numbers,but I think the market would feel [a February-March base] is a littlemore accurate way of doing it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is the speaker expressing their thoughts and impressions about how others may react to certain information.


Passage number 346.
MS. TEETERS. Tony, I agree with you if one thing is true,and that is if the adjustment is slowing down. How fast has it beengoing the last week, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states that Ms. Teeters agrees with Tony's statement if one condition is true, which is the speed of the adjustment slowing down. There is no disagreement or contention present in the passage.


Passage number 347.
MR. AXILROD. The MMDAs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only states that Mr. Axilrod is referring to the MMDAs, without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 348.
MS. TEETERS. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: There is contention or disagreement in the passage because "Ms. Teeters" responds "yes" to a question or statement that was not explicitly stated in the passage.


Passage number 349.
MR. AXILROD. It has been down to about $20 to $25 billion aweek.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact about a decrease in a specific amount of money per week.


Passage number 350.
MS. TEETERS. I like the idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their personal preference for the idea without expressing any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 351.
 I want to get a nice stablebase, but if the base is--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just try this. Suppose we usesomething like the February-March base for M2. Is that consideredcompatible, in terms of whatever presentational objectives we have inmind, with using a fourth-quarter base for the other numbers. Let mesay that the reason it's not clear is that M1, we think, was distorted2/8-9/83in the fourth quarter and probably not much in January. So thatdistortion is already largely in the base. Maybe that's bad. Wethink M3 is on the plus side by some unknown hazy amount in Januarybut not like M2. It's a small fraction of what M2 is distorted by andwill probably be less as time passes. So, there's a bit of distortionbut not very much if we use the fourth-quarter base for the othernumbers. So, we use a fourth-quarter base for those two aggregates,let's say, and for credit, but an advanced base for M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily discussing the speaker's thoughts and considerations regarding different bases for measurement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 352.
MS. TEETERS. What do we do if we get corporate Super NOWs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is a question or uncertainty about what to do with corporate Super NOWs.


Passage number 353.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement. Additional context or content is needed.


Passage number 354.
 We hit that problem--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We cross that bridge when we get to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This phrase suggests a proactive approach to addressing a problem rather than avoidance or disagreement. It implies the willingness to deal with a problem when it arises instead of worrying about it beforehand.


Passage number 355.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON" doesn't provide any context or information to suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 356.
 Either way we'll have--MR. PARTEE. We'd break that series too. That's what we'redoing, really--not so much shifting bases as breaking the series andstarting out with [a different] M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a continuation of a thought and a suggestion for action.


Passage number 357.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is a kind of break in the series.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that "It is a kind of break in the series." There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 358.
MS. TEETERS. We might as well break all of them and beconsistent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply suggests that breaking all of something (presumably rules or standards) would result in consistency.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 359.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I'm not sure about that, Nancy.We have such an overwhelming case on the distortion in M2 in terms ofthe numbers one can point to whereas we have a much more modest reasonfor shifting the base on Ml and M3. I think one could make anargument either way. My preference would be to show that we aremaintaining continuity where we can maintain it--where the distortionis not too great. So, I would have some preference for theasymmetrical treatment of the base, which I think just the sheermagnitude of the numbers would justify.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The passage indicates that there is disagreement or contention regarding the treatment of the base in relation to the distortion in M2. The speaker mentions their uncertainty and preference for maintaining continuity, while acknowledging that an argument can be made either way. This suggests a difference in opinions and a potential debate or disagreement on the course of action.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 360.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's getting late. Let me assert, andpeople can argue against this tomorrow if they want to, that forpurposes of putting in numbers in these blanks we will assume thatwe're going to do what Tony was just suggesting: We'll talk aboutfourth quarter-to-fourth quarter numbers for everything except M2where we will talk about some advance date as the base. Whether thatshould be February-March, I don't know. In saying that, we would haveto say that we assume that this [shifting] will slow down drastically.If it doesn't, we will have to look at the number again. So, whenwe're thinking about numbers, the staff's estimate--which is probablyno better than anybody else's--. Or maybe it is better. Let mereword that. It's probably better than anybody else's but thatdoesn't mean it's very good. But we may have to say something aboutit in the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker mentions that people can argue against their assertion tomorrow and expresses uncertainty about the base date for M2. Additionally, there is a mention of the staff's estimate being better than others' but not necessarily very good. Overall, the passage suggests that there are differing opinions and uncertainties in the discussion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 361.
 The staff has already assumed that just using aFebruary-March base for M2 until the end of the year we're stillgetting some upward bias by an order of magnitude of--MR. AXILROD. Well, we've assumed, given what's in that longfootnote, [the upward bias] to be about a point of growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The staff and Mr. Axilrod are discussing the assumed upward bias in growth, indicating a disagreement or contention on the topic.


Passage number 362.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. From February-March.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is impossible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage as no information or context is provided.


Passage number 363.
-39-2/8-9/83MR. AXILROD. From February-March to the end of the year.And that's assuming that [MMDA growth] slows down to $12 billion aweek [on average in February] and to $8 billion a week [in March] andall that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is providing an assumption or prediction about the MMDA growth for the months of February to the end of the year.


Passage number 364.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right, just keep that in mind as anoperating assumption. You are assuming that M3 is artificially pumpedup for the year by nothing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a suggestion or reminder to "keep that in mind as an operating assumption."


Passage number 365.
MR. AXILROD. Virtually. It's very hard to read. We assume,though it's hard to make any assumptions, that it was somewhere on theorder of 3 points in January and with this slowdown in MMDAs thatwhatever they want to do with CDs they will do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement of uncertainty or confusion about the subject matter.


Passage number 366.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On M1 you're basically assuming nothing atthis point from a fourth-quarter base.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage describes a situation on M1 where one is assuming nothing from a fourth-quarter base. There is no mention of any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 367.
MR. AXILROD. That's right. But we feel quite uncertainabout that because we're not sure why banks have behaved this way withregard to Super NOWs. There is some idea that it could take off oncethey start competing actively for MMDAs. That's in the back of ourminds as a possibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing uncertainty and possible explanations for banks' behavior regarding Super NOWs. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 368.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, unless people take violentexception, let's make those assumptions as operating assumptions. I'mtrying to keep the discussion manageable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is merely suggesting that the assumptions be made for the sake of keeping the discussion manageable.


Passage number 369.
MS. TEETERS. May I make just one small plea for the otherone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is making a respectful request.


Passage number 370.
 The year that we had the shift-adjusted NOW accounts--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The other one being what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It presents a statement about the year in which a certain type of accounts existed without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 371.
MS. TEETERS. To put them all on a February-March basis. Theyear that we had the shift adjustment for NOW accounts, I was almosttotally confused as to what our targets were. We had shift-adjustedand nonshift-adjusted [figures]. There's something to be said forhaving a common base for all three so that we remember which one we'reon if nothing else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing confusion and suggesting the need for a common base for all three figures to avoid further confusion.


Passage number 372.
MR. FORD. You're going to eliminate unemployment for Fedwatchers if there is anything difficult.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Ford is stating a positive outcome of eliminating unemployment for Fedwatchers, without any opposition or disagreement raised.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 373.
MR. PARTEE. I'm not sure whether you addressed thisquestion, but I don't know that I agreed with the point that Steve wasmaking about cutting the range on M3 because there was no reason tothink that the institutions will want a larger market share. And,therefore, I think we ought to be careful about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee disagrees with Steve's point about cutting the range on M3, stating that there is no reason to believe institutions will want a larger market share. This indicates a difference in opinion and perspective.


Passage number 374.
MR. AXILROD. It wasn't clear, Governor Partee; they may wanta lot larger share than we have in here. We still have a relativelylow share.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is a statement made by Mr. Axilrod about the possibility that "they" may want a larger share than what is currently discussed. However, there is no indication of disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 375.
MR. PARTEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The passage only includes one statement which is "Mr. Partee. Yes." This does not indicate any contention or disagreement as it is a one-word response.


Passage number 376.
MR. AXILROD. We have an increase of around 8 or 9 percentagepoints in the market share of banks and thrifts together of totalcredit and then some cutback in money market funds. If they want alot larger share, then I think it would be difficult to cut M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents different factors related to market share and the difficulty of cutting M3.


Passage number 377.
-40-2/8-9/83MR. GRAMLEY. One point we ought to keep in mind in thinkingof the M1 target and using the fourth quarter is that we in effect aresaying that that horrendous drop in velocity, which largely took placein the fourth quarter, is either going to get reversed or we're goingto put it into our targets somehow. Otherwise, you see, we're notgoing to forgive that big fourth-quarter growth; we're going to makeup for it later on. Or to put it differently, if you look at page 15of the Bluebook and take the first-quarter average for 1983, just foralternative B we have 8.7 percent first quarter over fourth quarterlargely because of what happened in the fourth quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining a point about the M1 target and the fourth quarter's impact on it.


Passage number 378.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're talking about Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any context or statement regarding ML, therefore there is no contention or disagreement mentioned.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 379.
MR. GRAMLEY. M1, yes. I think going back to that base ofthe fourth quarter for Ml is very, very risky. Now, I'm prepared todo that if we're prepared to put a zero weight on the target. To methat's a good compromise: 95 percent weight on M2, 5 percent on M3,and 0 on Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The contention or disagreement in the passage is "going back to that base of the fourth quarter for M1 is very, very risky." The statement indicates that the speaker has a different view or concern compared to others involved in the discussion.


Passage number 380.
MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible] M2 very stable, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing that M2 is very stable.


Passage number 381.
MR. GRAMLEY. You can use any base you want. But I thinkthat's a very, very risky business.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley is making a statement about the riskiness of using any base, but there is no contrasting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 382.
MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, if I could have one final shot atthis: I could accept what you're proposing but I would again callyour attention to the remarks, which I interpret as a warning, thatSteve just gave us that Ml could spring to life and the Super NOWscould spring to life. That's why I thought a little while ago and Iguess I still feel that a more conservative or safer approach would beto do the same thing for M1 that we've talked about doing for M2--using a first-quarter base--so that we could make sure that thisapparent approximately zero net effect in the different accounts willcontinue through this quarter. I hope it will.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Balles is expressing his own opinion and suggesting a more conservative approach, but he does not directly disagree with anything that has been said previously.


Passage number 383.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not saying just technically use thefirst quarter as a base for M2 because I think it falls betweenstools. It still gives us a high number for the year because itstarts at the beginning of January so low. I'm trying to get overthat hump so we don't have an artificial, if that's the right word,high number for the year. And we've got to go at least to February todo that. I don't think we have to for M1. But I suppose in terms ofsymmetry we could say all the targets begin in February-March. But werun into the other problem in that I think it will eliminatecontinuity where continuity is possible. That's what we have tobalance, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing various options and considerations related to using the first quarter as a base for M2 and M1 targets, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 384.
MS. TEETERS. Couldn't we develop a technical relationshipbetween the February-March base and a fourth-quarter base.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by MS. Teeters, suggesting the development of a technical relationship between two bases.


Passage number 385.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, sure. You just have to put in ahigher number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It seems to be a simple suggestion or advice.


Passage number 386.
MS. TEETERS. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. TEETERS simply affirms that something is correct.


Passage number 387.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But then we'd have this visually highnumber. Arithmetically, one can reduce it to the same number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is explaining that visually, a number may appear high, but when approached arithmetically, can be reduced to the same number.


Passage number 388.
-41-2/8-9/83MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, for us to try to ponder overnight:Which approach do you find easiest to use vis-a-vis the public, theCongress, and the financial markets--basing on the fourth quarter,basing on the first quarter, or some of both.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and seeking the opinion of the listener.


Passage number 389.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who knows. This is somebody's instinct.My instinct is the same as Mr. Solomon's. We can go back [to thefourth quarter] for M2--but then we end up with this horrendous numberand are forced to say that it's so big because we're assuming Xpercent of it is shifts. And then if asked how we defend that number,we say we can't. It's a guess. That's not a very pleasant positionto be in. However, if we [advance the base] for all of them, thenpeople will say: Well, you really took a free ride on everything fora quarter. None of [the options] is totally satisfactory because whatwe're doing is not totally satisfactory intellectually.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is expressing a sense of uncertainty and dissatisfaction but does not involve conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 390.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The other thing is that as the mediareport on our progress or performance during the year they alwayscompare what the rate of growth is compared to what our target was.But they don't go into the technicalities of what the base was.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a fact about how the media reports on progress or performance.


Passage number 391.
MS. TEETERS. That argues for one base.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting viewpoints or arguments. It simply presents a statement made by Ms. Teeters.


Passage number 392.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't know. You get a somewhatbetter reading from the media on performance as the year develops.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a personal opinion about obtaining better reading from the media as the year progresses.


Passage number 393.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, except that we won't on Ml. We werein this trap before because [unintelligible] the facts. We get thesechanges in the beginning of the year on an M1 target; we'll probablybe above the target in the first quarter for the reason Lylesuggested. So everybody says we're above the target and we have toget growth down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there may be changes in the M1 target and that growth needs to be reduced.


Passage number 394.
 We may not have that--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage is a statement by someone (VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON) and does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 395.
 Yes, but if we deemphasize it, thenit's not going to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we deemphasize it enough, it balances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

While the passage discusses the idea of deemphasizing something, it does not necessarily imply contention or disagreement. Instead, it suggests that by reducing the importance or significance of something, it can achieve a sense of balance. This does not indicate disagreement or conflicting opinions, but rather a suggestion for achieving equilibrium.


Passage number 396.
MS. TEETERS. We can always raise the targets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the possibility of raising the targets.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 397.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but if we put it on this silly fourthquarter-to-fourth quarter basis that we do, we can't raise the targetsenough. We're always going to start above wherever it is.SPEAKER(.). At some point we can raise it enough.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker argues against using the fourth quarter to fourth quarter basis for setting targets, stating that it hinders the ability to raise them enough. The phrase "but if we put it on this silly fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter basis that we do" indicates that the speaker disagrees with the current approach.


Passage number 398.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Steve, you're assuming for M2 avelocity of circulation of roughly zero in '83.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Steve is assuming a velocity of circulation for M2 of roughly zero in '83.


Passage number 399.
MR. AXILROD. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a single statement without any conflicting ideas or opposing viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 400.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And for M1 on your alternative IIhere you're assuming a velocity of circulation very slightly negative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "you're assuming a velocity of circulation very slightly negative" suggests that the speaker is disagreeing with or challenging the assumption being made about the velocity of circulation.


Passage number 401.
MR. AXILROD. No. I would say that we have a fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter growth on the order of 6 percent. So, a slightpositive is what's in my mind; it's right here in the Bluebook on Ml.That, as Governor Gramley mentioned, would imply a slowdown from here-42-2/8-9/83on out, on a quarterly basis, to something on the order of 5 percentor a bit under in growth rates. Our quarterly model, for what it'sworth, given the interest rates and income, would predict about a 7percent growth in Ml. That was one of the reasons I thought that ahigher growth than 5-1/2 percent was likely; I couldn't see thisdownward demand shift we've been experiencing occurring this yearbecause we're not ratcheting up interest rates and all that. So, Iwould say 6 or 7 percent seems to me about the right Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion based on their analysis of the data.


Passage number 402.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 403.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All these fine velocity assumptions thathe made in the Bluebook rest upon a staff forecast that probably has alower nominal GNP than everybody else's forecast, or is at the bottomof the range, anyway, of everybody else's forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The author is suggesting that the staff forecast has a lower nominal GNP than everyone else's forecast, implying a difference of opinion or contention.


Passage number 404.
 If everybody elsereally believes his or her forecast and believes this velocitybusiness, we ought to have higher--MS. TEETERS. Higher targets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 405.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Higher targets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not provide any specific information or statements that could indicate contention or disagreement. It only mentions "higher targets" without any context or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 406.
MR. AXILROD. Or, we might get more GNP with the same money,higher velocity, and not much interest rate change, if everyonedecides to undo their liquidity. That's a possibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply presenting a hypothetical scenario and stating that it is a possibility.


Passage number 407.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but you're saying if your velocityassumption is wrong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 408.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply confirms the accuracy of a statement.


Passage number 409.
MR. BLACK. Steve, if we've made our computations right, anassumed M1 growth fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter of 6 percentimplies a 1.4 percent rise in velocity of M1 over that year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement of information and calculations.


Passage number 410.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With their forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply states that there is a forecast, without any mention of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 411.
MR. BLACK. That's right, with their forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It appears to be a statement of fact.


Passage number 412.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right. That's why it would be aslowdown from now on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of fact without any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 413.
MR. BLACK. That's the reason I went into that issue awhileago, Mr. Chairman, and you thought I was premature. I was trying toexplain why ours was high and it was based upon an assumption that itwould bounce back, which it may well not do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining the reason behind Mr. Black's discussion on a certain issue.


Passage number 414.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One percent, historically, would not bemuch of a bounceback.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a historical fact and does not involve any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 415.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as the person mentioned, Mr. Partee, is not involved in any discussion or conflict.


Passage number 416.
 No, it's--MR. BLACK. No, we assumed about 5 percent. That was reallythe reason I went into what you thought I was going into prematurely:to justify our high forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is clarifying the reason for discussing a certain topic, but there is no conflicting opinion or argument present.


Passage number 417.
MR. AXILROD. But it is of interest, Mr. Chairman, that a lotof the slide occurred when interest rates were going up cyclically.-43-2/8-9/83And in '71 when they didn't go up cyclically, the increase was 2.9 orsomething like that on velocity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is presenting information without any clear indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 418.
MR. ROBERTS. Interest rates are now going up, however.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that interest rates are now increasing without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 419.
MR. AXILROD. Well, we're not projecting [that] as part ofthis whole projection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a projection without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 420.
MR. ROBERTS. It could be wrong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply suggests that the statement or idea they are referring to could be incorrect.


Passage number 421.
MR. GRAMLEY. In which case the staff's forecast probablyalso will be wrong--not in the direction of more nominal GNP but less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement making a prediction or assumption about the staff's forecast.


Passage number 422.
MR. BLACK. Well, we know everybody is wrong. We just don'tknow who is the most wrong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a general acknowledgment that everyone is wrong, without specifying any particular disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 423.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'll see you tomorrow morning atwhen--9:00 a.m..
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply informing someone of the time they will meet the next day.


Passage number 424.
MR. BERNARD. 9:00 a.m.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage only provides a time, it does not contain any contentious or disagreement-related statements.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 425.
[Meeting recessed]-44-2/8-9/83February 9, 1983--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, ladies and gentlemen, afterlistening to our conversation yesterday, it seems to me that thistentative directive is probably a reasonable reflection of our concernto have targets but be flexible. So, I would suggest we assumesomething like this draft directive will be used. There will bechances for editorial comments, but let me just suggest in theinterest of focusing the discussion and expediting things that we putsome numbers in those blanks. And on page 3 of that directive I wouldtentatively suggest that we eliminate the alternative for M2 [thatmeasures the range from] the fourth quarter to the fourth quarter,just for purposes of the discussion at this stage anyway, and assumewe're going to [measure it] from February-March to the fourth quarter.If we take the middle course of what the staff says is consistent withtheir forecast--recognizing that very large amounts of uncertaintyexist about that and recognizing also that their forecast for nominalGNP is lower on average than other peoples' by 1 percent or somethinglike that--that says basically 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent for that period,allowing for 1 percent or so of shifting from that base.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the following passage. The speaker suggests making changes to the draft directive and expresses uncertainty and disagreement about the forecast for nominal GNP.


Passage number 426.
MR. AXILROD. That's right; it would be about 8 percent plusaround 1 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement of factual information without any conflicting perspectives.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 427.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That could be rounded up to 7 to 10percent, I suppose, or rounded down to 6 to 9 percent, but we're inthat range. Turning to M3, for the fourth quarter-to-fourth quartercomparison the staff says 6 to 9 percent, period. That could bepushed; last year it was 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent, so I think we're inthat range. Whether or not we want to include Ml in the same sentenceor make that a slightly more subsidiary sentence or tentative soundingsentence is an issue that we can return to. But the number that theyhave for M1 is 3 to 7 percent; that could be made slightly higher, Isuppose. So, we're around 3 to 7 percent or 4 to 8 percent, I think.And for total nonfinancial debt, which we really haven't discussedmuch, they propose this rather peculiar result in terms of past cyclesof 8 to 11 percent, which they'll have to justify at some point--alittle more than I think we've already discussed. It contemplates intheir forecast a further decline in credit velocity, which would beunusual during a period of recovery. But I take it they're preparedto defend that proposition. I just throw those out as a focus foryour discussion. Let's see what comments we get on them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains some disagreement and contention regarding the ranges and numbers mentioned for M1, M3, and total nonfinancial debt. The speaker suggests that some numbers could be rounded up or down, and expresses uncertainty about whether or not M1 should be included in the same sentence. They also question the justification for the proposed range for total nonfinancial debt and express skepticism about the forecasted decline in credit velocity.


Passage number 428.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I have a question of Steve. I hadthe impression, Steve, that when you shift the base to February-Marchfrom the usual average of the fourth quarter, that 6-1/2 to 9-1/2percent is tighter than 9 to 13 percent. Am I correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is seeking clarification and confirmation from Steve regarding their understanding of shifting the base to February-March and the relative tightness of percentage ranges.


Passage number 429.
MR. AXILROD. Well, for the top in a mild sense it is. Ourpoint estimate [on the fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter range], suchas it is, is 11.8 percent, within the 9 to 13 percent range. So, it's1.2 points from the top of the range. Our point estimate on the 6-1/2to 9-1/2 percent range from February-March is 8.9 percent. So,relative to the 9-1/2 percent it's 0.6 point from the top of therange. With a 7 to 10 percent range, it would be more comparable interms of distance from the top of the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their point estimates within different ranges and comparing them to the top of the range.


Passage number 430.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The passage itself is not provided, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement present in it.


Passage number 431.
2/8-9/83MR. AXILROD. But that's only in that arithmetic sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit statements that indicate contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a date and the mention of "that arithmetic sense" does not suggest any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 432.
MR. PARTEE. And you've allowed about 1 point for continuedshifts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is a statement made by Mr. Partee, which does not involve any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 433.
MR. AXILROD. From February-to-March, that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a simple affirmation that the mentioned events occurred during the specified time period.


Passage number 434.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't know about the 1 point; it couldbe a lot more than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing uncertainty about a certain point.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 435.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The second question I have is: If wewant flexibility, shouldn't we aim for a four-point spread in M2 thisyear instead of 3 points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents a question that suggests a disagreement or contention regarding the desired spread in M2 this year. One perspective is questioning whether a 3-point spread is sufficient, while the other perspective suggests aiming for a four-point spread.


Passage number 436.
MR. AXILROD. Our technical reason for narrowing it when thebase is February-March is that just a little more of the year is doneand the more of the year that is done, presumably the more you know.So, you could have a narrower range. Also the argument is that thebulk of the shifts is behind us, and the reason for the wide spreadwas to take account of the uncertainties about the shifts. Of course,it's highly uncertain in any event. But that was the reason forsuggesting a slightly narrower spread.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents a technical reason for narrowing a range based on the assumption that more knowledge is gained as more of the year passes. The explanation also mentions the initial wide spread to account for uncertainties.


Passage number 437.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even though you eliminated Januaryfrom the base there are still a lot of uncertainties.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement acknowledges that even though January has been eliminated from the base, there are still uncertainties. It presents a fact without any conflict or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 438.
MR. AXILROD. Yes. Our thought was that most of the shiftwould be done.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states that there was a thought regarding a shift.


Passage number 439.
 Now, to the extent that isn't true--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But we would have to go back and look atit anyway if most of the shift isn't done. If we get into March orApril and M2 is still growing rapidly, or if February and March aredistorted, we better go back and look at it again. I think that'sclear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a possible need to revisit a certain topic in the future.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 440.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm a little worried that 6-1/2 to9-1/2 percent may be a little tight. I certainly would opposerounding it off downward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "I certainly would oppose rounding it off downward" indicates that the speaker disagrees with the idea of rounding off the percentage downward.


Passage number 441.
MR. WALLICH. I feel the same way. It seems to meflexibility appears at all margins, and here's one more--the width ofthe range--where we ought to allow for it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Wallich and the speaker express agreement and the need for flexibility.


Passage number 442.
MR. MARTIN. I would echo Governor Teeter's comment ofyesterday. I'd rather have a narrower range and then at midyear goback. We admit we don't know what the behavior will be and we cancontinue to reinforce that position and go back in July. If we haveto change it, we can change it then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Martin is expressing agreement with Governor Teeter's comment from the previous day. He is suggesting a narrower range and the possibility of revisiting the decision later if needed. This is a suggestion and does not indicate any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 443.
MS. TEETERS. We may have to change it before then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement by Ms. Teeters implies that there might be a need to change something before a certain point in time. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 444.
MR. MARTIN. All right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a simple response indicating agreement or acceptance.


Passage number 445.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's look at them one by one, if that'sthe way you want to do it. Let's look at M2. Does anybody want to goabove 7 to 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply an invitation to analyze and discuss a specific topic.


Passage number 446.
2/8-9/83MR. GRAMLEY. One way of handling the binding aspects of thisis to widen the range and make it 6 to 10 percent, extending the upperlimit. That has the additional virtue of maintaining the same lowerlimit as we had last year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating a proposed way of handling the binding aspects and highlighting the advantage of maintaining the same lower limit.


Passage number 447.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I might say that when we put theranges that way, they weren't centered on the midpoint. And thereason was that in the previous year the FOMC had established a rangeand said it expected growth around the upper end. For that reason wesimply didn't suggest ranges that were set on midpoints on the thoughtthat the same range would then accommodate lower growth if possible.So, these were not set at midpoints for M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the reasoning behind the ranges that were set for M2.


Passage number 448.
MR. PARTEE. Steve, if I read that footnote connected withalternative II correctly, [the consistent range] would be 7 to 10percent. The footnote says that [the ranges for the threealternatives] would be from 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent through 7-1/2 to10-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states the range percentages without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 449.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply agrees with the statement given.


Passage number 450.
MR. PARTEE. I assume that the middle one, alternative II, is7 to 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Partee assuming that the middle alternative, alternative II, is 7 to 10 percent.


Passage number 451.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is simply a mention of someone's name, Mr. Axilrod, without any indication of contention or disagreement related to him.


Passage number 452.
 That would be leaving that same gap, GovernorPartee, of a little over 1 point above the expected--MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement providing information about a gap in a numerical value.


Passage number 453.
 I just wanted to make clear that we weren'treally talking about liberalizing what had been proposed in--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the area that we're talking about, 1/2point is inconsequential. There's a certain argument for making it 7to 10 percent because they are round numbers and why have spuriousprecision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any explicit contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and justifying it by explaining the reasoning behind their suggestion.


Passage number 454.
MR. PARTEE. I think that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee simply expresses that he agrees with something without challenging or opposing any other viewpoint.


Passage number 455.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. A range of 7 to 11 percent doesn'tsound good. It sounds like we're really gambling.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The speaker expresses a negative opinion about the range of 7 to 11 percent. They state that it doesn't sound good and compares it to gambling. There is no indication of disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 456.
MR. WALLICH.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any context or further information. Please provide more details or the full passage for a more accurate analysis.


Passage number 457.
 I think 6 to 10 percent would be a littlemore--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure what that gains you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing uncertainty and seeking clarification or justification for the suggested increase.


Passage number 458.
MS. TEETERS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: As only the name "MS. TEETERS" is provided without any accompanying passage, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 459.
 I get the impression--MR. RICE. I don't know what it does.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses their impression and lack of knowledge about something.


Passage number 460.
MR. WALLICH. Well, it gains you two things: One is thegreater leeway and the other is a lower midpoint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating two advantages or benefits of something.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 461.
MR. PARTEE. Of course, we've never been any place close tothe lower end of the range in the last several years for M2. And toleave it at 6 percent when we have a new instrument seems funny to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "And to leave it at 6 percent when we have a new instrument seems funny to me" suggests that the speaker disagrees with the current situation and finds it strange or illogical.


Passage number 462.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even though I like the four-pointspread, I'd like it on the up side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses a personal preference for a specific point spread.


Passage number 463.
2/8-9/83MR. PARTEE. I'd rather have [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses a personal preference without any opposing views or conflicting statements.


Passage number 464.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It probably is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or statements that would imply contention or disagreement.


Passage number 465.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do I sense 7 to 10 percent as a temporaryfeeling here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking about the speaker's perception of a certain percentage.


Passage number 466.
 Let me move to--MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, could I just ask if this decisionrelates to the strategy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification or confirmation about a decision.


Passage number 467.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is all highly tentative at thispoint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement suggests that the information provided is still uncertain or subject to change, rather than indicative of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 468.
MR. RICE. [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the rest of the context.


Passage number 469.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I assume something like that. We'llget to this language, but roughly, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their understanding and agreeing with the idea presented.


Passage number 470.
MR. RICE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine without the passage. Please provide the full passage for analysis.


Passage number 471.
 While I support the decision that was just made onthe 7 to 10--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Very tentatively.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 472.
MR. RICE. Yes, the tentative decision. I have some concernsabout the strategy and the relationship to the alternatives that weselect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is a contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Rice, expresses concerns about the strategy and its relationship to the alternatives that were selected. This indicates a difference of opinion or disagreement with the proposed decision.


Passage number 473.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's get to that in a minute and wewill reach an iteration. Now, on M3, again just as a starting point,the staff says flatly 6 to 9 percent, for whatever that's worth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a point or perspective without any contradictory information or opposing views.


Passage number 474.
MR. MORRIS. Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions the name of a person and does not provide any information or statements that could indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 475.
 Chairman, I think you ought to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent range is what wehad last year. Is it worth horsing around with the half point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 476.
MR. MORRIS. Yes, particularly because 6 to 9 percent isgoing to be too tight next year in 1984. We'd have to raise it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris simply states that they would have to raise the percentage next year because 6 to 9 percent would be too tight.


Passage number 477.
MR. PARTEE. When we start to get some expansion in the[unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply mentions something without expressing any contradictory opinions or engaging in a debate.


Passage number 478.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why would it be too tight next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a simple question asking for a reason why something would be too tight next year.


Passage number 479.
MR. MORRIS. Well, in the first year of recovery we normallyget more GNP for M3, or M3 velocity tends to rise in the first fourquarters of recovery and to be essentially flat--no velocity change--in the second year. I think Steve would support me on this: that wewould have to raise it next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states a fact and then suggests that Steve would agree with them.


Passage number 480.
MR. AXILROD. I'm afraid, President Morris, that we have notreally worked it out in detail that far ahead. I really don't haveany comment on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the passage, Mr. Axilrod states that they have not really worked out the details and therefore does not have any comment on that matter. There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 481.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think it's worth cutting it ahalf point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion and there is no disagreement presented in the statement.


Passage number 482.
2/8-9/83MR. PARTEE. I would prefer the higher number, Paul. Thebanks have been adding a lot of securities and I think they'llcontinue to do so. And I think the S&Ls will be aggressive. Theywill pay down some debt but they're going to be looking for places toput their money. So, I'd hate to see that reduced.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is expressing a personal preference but there is no clear contention or disagreement present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 483.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If, as we agreed yesterday, theystrive for a larger market share and are more aggressiveintermediaries, [M3] could easily come in higher. I don't see thepoint of cutting a half point on the up side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: There is contention or disagreement in the passage as the speaker does not see the point of cutting a half point on the upside, while others may have agreed previously on the need for it.


Passage number 484.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, a partial answer to GovernorPartee and President Morris: As a percent of total credit ourprojections in the flow of funds at this point assume that thrifts andcommercial banks together take 35 percent of the market in '83 and 30percent in '84. I haven't worked that through to M3 as such, whichwould have to take account of money market funds and shifts fromraising money abroad through CDs and that sort of thing. That [shareof the market] going back from 1980 to 1952 has generally run in a 40to 60 percent range. So, [our projection] is well below the norm ifthe norm can be thought of as the previous 30 years. And, as GovernorPartee has suggested, we may be too far below it if the depositoryinstitutions get very aggressive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting their projections and acknowledging that they have not fully accounted for certain factors. They also mention that their projections are below the norm but that could potentially change if depository institutions become more aggressive.


Passage number 485.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What was it in 1982.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple question asking for information about something that happened in 1982. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 486.
MR. AXILROD. We have it rising from '82, which was 27percent; and in '81 it was 30 percent. Those were all low years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating percentages for different years without any conflicting opinions or contrasting views.


Passage number 487.
MR. PARTEE. Thrifts were really squeezed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that thrifts were squeezed without raising any opposing viewpoint or conflicting information.


Passage number 488.
MR. AXILROD. But before that, numbers in the 40, 50, and 60[percent area] are what you would have seen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the numbers in a specific percent area.


Passage number 489.
 That's [higher] becausewe think much of that money is being raised through the bond markets--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know. Again, I do not havea strong degree of conviction in the area of a half point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any clear contention or disagreement. The second speaker simply expresses uncertainty and lack of confidence in their opinion.


Passage number 490.
MR. GRAMLEY. I think we gain nothing by cutting it a halfpoint. We allow ourselves a little more flexibility by leaving itwhere it was.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Gramley expresses his opinion and suggests not cutting it a half point, providing an explanation for his viewpoint.


Passage number 491.
MS. TEETERS. There is some advantage in making it the sameas M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that there is an advantage in making something the same as M2.


Passage number 492.
MR. MARTIN. Except that we're going to sound like the UnitedKingdom.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin is stating that they will sound like the United Kingdom, indicating that they will adopt a similar style or tone of speaking.


Passage number 493.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. When we shave off a half point likethat, we imply a level of precision in our thinking that seems to meinconsistent with all the uncertainty we keep talking about. I wouldjust stick with the provisional target we set up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their viewpoint about precision in thinking and suggesting to stick with a provisional target.


Passage number 494.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do I hear any other comments. Hearing noother comments, we'll put it tentatively at 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for any additional comments or opinions before stating a tentative percentage.


Passage number 495.
MR. BALLES. May I ask a question, Mr. Chairman. Could Ijust ask you to review quickly what you said on Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification or a review of something that was previously said.


Passage number 496.
 I'm not sure I--2/8-9/83MR. PARTEE. We haven't done it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It appears to be a statement expressing uncertainty or lack of knowledge about something.


Passage number 497.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're getting to Ml right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact about someone's current location, without any conflicting ideas or opinions mentioned.


Passage number 498.
MR. BALLES. I thought you had already passed it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. There is simply a statement made by Mr. Balles stating his assumption that something had already been passed.


Passage number 499.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. M1 is now before the house. Thestaff says 3 to 7 percent for the middle course on their forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a forecast range given by the staff.


Passage number 500.
MR. AXILROD. Again, Mr. Chairman, that range is not centeredon the midpoint [of our forecast]. We left everything along [thelines of] the Committee's previous decisions that growth would berunning toward the upper ends of the ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is merely stating the fact that the range mentioned is not centered on the midpoint of their forecast, but rather aligned with the Committee's previous decisions on growth.


Passage number 501.
MR. PARTEE. What was the midpoint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any context or information that suggests contention or disagreement. It is simply a question being asked.


Passage number 502.
MR. AXILROD. In my view, the midpoint [for Ml] consistentwith the 8 percent underlying M2 growth would be in the 6 to 7 percentrange unless one thinks in some model sense that there's a downwarddemand shift.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing their own viewpoint and presenting a range for the midpoint, without contradicting or debating any other statements or perspectives.


Passage number 503.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You assume, though, no change on businessdemand deposits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a statement that assumes no changes in business demand deposits.


Passage number 504.
MR. AXILROD. And that assumes that the DIDC doesn't doanything on the business demand deposits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that the assumption is being made that the DIDC doesn't do anything on the business demand deposits. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 505.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And that doesn't assume much on SuperNOWs, I take it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 506.
MR. AXILROD. It doesn't give much room for Super NOWs andassumes that we don't experience again the downward demand shift thatwe had from 1974 on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a potential concern or assumption without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 507.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can make it 4 to 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 508.
MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I would like to make a pitch forthe 4 to 8 percent for several reasons. As I understand the Boardstaff's projections for the first quarter, Steve, Ml is expected togrow at a 5 percent rate, roughly, for February and March. Our SanFrancisco money market model, which we started with last year, isprojecting about a 10 percent growth in those two months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply presenting their perspective and supporting it with projections and data.


Passage number 509.
 Time willtell which projection is--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 10 percent growth in what 2 months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating that time will reveal which projection is correct, without any conflicting opinions or arguments being presented.


Passage number 510.
MR. BALLES. A 10 percent average growth in February andMarch. And I would hate to see us get trapped in a posture where toolow a range would force tightening and produce a premature rise ininterest rates in view of the uncertainties that I feel about thesolidness of this business recovery. Therefore, I would hedge my betand go for 4 to 8 percent on Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Balles, is expressing his personal opinion and suggesting a range of 4 to 8 percent for Ml growth in order to avoid premature tightening and rise in interest rates. There is no indication of disagreement or conflicting views.


Passage number 511.
MR. GRAMLEY. I would strongly support that. An additionalargument for the ones that both John and Steve have given is the factthat we're looking at responses to Super NOWs which at the presenttime are being conditioned by the fact that the banks and the thriftsare just being flooded with money on MMDAs. I think a very logical2/8-9/83possibility is that, as the MMDA rates settle down, interest in SuperNOWs is going to build up, and none of us knows exactly how muchallowance to make for that. I think we ought to provide flexibilityon that score.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of support for a particular argument.


Passage number 512.
MR. MARTIN. Yes. I would add to that. It seems to me thatthe thrifts still have a competitive device that they have notexploited. My conversations with many of their representatives thisweek in Washington go to that conclusion. This is a vehicle which canget them into a side of the financial markets that they're veryinterested in. And I think this is one of the arguments forseparating the [Ml] comment here and not making it pari passu with M2and M3. We really don't know what is going to happen when certainfinancial institutions begin to exploit this in this calendar year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and suggesting that thrifts have a competitive device that they have not yet utilized fully.


Passage number 513.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. The editorializing is something Iwant to return to when we get beyond the numbers. And maybe I'd makethis range sound a little more tentative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any statements or indications of contention or disagreement. It primarily mentions the writer's intention to discuss editorializing and the use of more cautious language.


Passage number 514.
MR. PARTEE. May I ask a question. Steve, your own [Ml]projection for the first quarter is an increase of 8.7 percent, isn'tit. So, you must be projecting substantially lower growth rates asthe year goes on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 515.
MR. AXILROD. It's about 5 percent for the rest of the year.It's roughly the same as in February-March. I should add that ourmonthly model would say around 9 percent at current interest rates,somewhat similar to what President Balles mentioned. Our quarterlymodel at around the current interest rate gives the quarterly averagethat we have here, around 8-3/4 percent. Take your choice on whichmodel you go by. We put a little more weight in this case on thequarterly model, which gives this slowdown. Of course, it could besomewhat higher in the coming months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This passage is providing different estimates or projections of the interest rate for the rest of the year but does not indicate any disagreement or contention among the speakers.


Passage number 516.
MR. WALLICH. But the uncertainties are so great on M1 thatif we don't want to express them by some qualification of it as atarget, then I think we need a wider range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any disagreement or contention. It presents a statement by Mr. Wallich, who acknowledges the uncertainties surrounding M1 and suggests the need for a wider range. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument mentioned.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 517.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll come back to that question onqualifying it as a target. It's a question of how strong it'simplied, right. It's not implied in this sentence but it's implied ina later sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "It's not implied in this sentence but it's implied in a later sentence" suggests that there is a disagreement or contention regarding whether something is implied or not, and when it is implied.


Passage number 518.
MR. BALLES. Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not showcase any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a simple statement without any conflicting opinions or contrasting views.


Passage number 519.
 Chairman, there's one other--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I hate to say it but it seems to methat all it does, even with 4 to 8 percent, is move us slightly awayfrom the upper end of the range without even allowing for the growthof Super NOWs later in the year, etc. In the course of conversationswith some key market people, in general I've noticed that they givethe advice that according to the market it's much better to projecthigher targets and hit them during the course of the year than it isto worry about the initial effect of the higher targets. That is justthe general advice I heard from one of the key people in the markets.So, even though we will have deemphasizing language, I assume, I'm notsure that 4 to 8 percent does anything more than move us slightly to amore realistic range. And it still doesn't allow for any Super NOWgrowth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their thoughts and observations.


Passage number 520.
2/8-9/83MR. PARTEE. I rather like 4 to 8 percent, though, becauseit's less than we had last year. We had 8-1/2 percent last year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their preference for 4 to 8 percent over 8-1/2 percent without any opposing opinions or conflicting views being presented.


Passage number 521.
MR. AXILROD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any context or information that suggests contention or disagreement. The word "Yes" is simply a response to an unspecified question or statement.


Passage number 522.
MR. PARTEE. It's a little less at the upper end. I think ifwe went above 4 to 8 percent, we might as well forget it. Already itseems to be quite a liberalization of our previous targeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is expressing his opinion about the potential impact of raising the target percentage. He mentions that going above 4 to 8 percent may not be beneficial, but there is no opposing viewpoint or disagreement presented in the passage.


Passage number 523.
MR. MORRIS. I think if we forgot it, it would be a big stepforward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses a personal opinion about the potential outcome of forgetting something.


Passage number 524.
MR. PARTEE. I realize you feel that way and probably Tonydoes too. But I think there are others who would like to keep it,including myself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee acknowledges that the speaker and Tony feel a certain way, but expresses his own opinion and suggests that there are others who share his viewpoint.


Passage number 525.
MR. BLACK. Then you'd have to [marry] alternative II intoalternative I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply suggests combining alternative II with alternative I, without any opposing or conflicting viewpoints being presented.


Passage number 526.
MR. PARTEE. Well, except that I think their [unintelligible]figure is too tight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses a personal opinion about a certain figure.


Passage number 527.
MR. BLACK. Well, I mean that we've taken a couple of thefigures out of alternative I and set them into alternative II.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a decision or action taken by someone (presumably Mr. Black) regarding figures in alternative I and alternative II.


Passage number 528.
MR. PARTEE. And we do have to remember that we have a higherforecast than the staff for the GNP. So, I would move 4 to 8 percent,Paul.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 529.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I haven't heard any contrary viewexpressed strongly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement mentions not having heard any contrary view expressed strongly, indicating that there is no disagreement or conflicting opinion being discussed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 530.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I didn't express it very stronglybut I feel it very strongly. I wouldn't go as high as that. I think7 percent is as much as we dare risk. And the only reason I'd bewilling to go as high as 7 percent would be that I think there isprobably going to be a higher element of savings in M1 than we've hadbefore. Otherwise, I'd say 6 percent is as high as we ought to go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black expresses his opinion that 7 percent is a risky level to go, while he believes 6 percent is a safer limit. This indicates a difference of opinion on what the appropriate percentage should be.


Passage number 531.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody else have an opinion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage itself does not provide any information or statement for there to be disagreement or contention.


Passage number 532.
MR. WALLICH. The previous midpoint was 4 percent, with the2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent range. We can achieve that midpoint by theadmittedly rather extravagant range of 1 to 7 percent. Then wehaven't raised our target any time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the previous midpoint and the range of percentages that can achieve it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 533.
MR. BLACK. One percent is too low even for me. Even threepercent is too low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The phrase "One percent is too low even for me" suggests disagreement or contention with the idea that one percent is an acceptable or sufficient amount. Additionally, the statement "Even three percent is too low" further emphasizes the disagreement or contention with the proposed percentage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 534.
MR. PARTEE. Seven is too low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is expressing opposition to the number seven being considered as too low.


Passage number 535.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will assert that when the width of therange gets to be 6 percentage points, we might as well not have one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is asserting a personal opinion rather than engaging in a debate or presenting conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 536.
MR. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to be associated with a4 to 8 percent range, with the hope that the midpoint of the range iswhat we'd be working toward. I think we have to come off a rapidgrowth rate slowly instead of abruptly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement expressing Mr. Roberts' opinion on how to approach a rapid growth rate.


Passage number 537.
2/8-9/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody else want to speak to thispoint. I seem to have a considerable opinion for 4 to 8 percent.Well, let us pass on to total domestic nonfinancial debt. You havesome more or less elaborate analysis suggesting that total domesticnonfinancial debt is the [measure] we ought to be using. I guess whatit shows is that on these growth rates it makes a trivial difference,so I'm not sure it's worth an elaborate discussion. I'm just talkingabout the definition now--whether we use total nonfinancial debt,total domestic nonfinancial debt, or total domestic nonfinancial debt[plus net stock issues]. They all seem to have more or less the same[projected] growth number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily discussing different measures of debt and their projected growth numbers. There is no mention of conflicting opinions or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 538.
MR. ROBERTS. May I ask why we're establishing such a targetat all. It doesn't seem to relate to anything, as I read thematerial. There seems to be an assumption that we're going to use atarget like this. I don't understand what the purpose of it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage demonstrates contention or disagreement because Mr. Roberts questions the establishment of a target and expresses his lack of understanding about its purpose.


Passage number 539.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not exactly a target, but this has acertain history. We can do what we want to do, but we have beenrequested to provide such an associated range anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply acknowledges that there is a certain history, but also states that they have been requested to provide a range associated with it, even though it is not a specific target. There is no conflicting or opposing information presented.


Passage number 540.
MS. TEETERS. What do we do with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker simply asks a question without expressing any opposing viewpoint or conflicting argument.


Passage number 541.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're dropping out the bank credit here--and whether we want to do that is another decision--so, it fulfillsthe role that bank credit used to do. I think what we do is look atthis [sort of range] to see if it confirms a contrary indication ofwhat is going on as time passes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a suggestion or idea.


Passage number 542.
MR. GRAMLEY. There's a very good reason for looking at whathappens to debt growth in a year in which the monetary aggregates maywell be developing a new kind of relationship with GNP that we don'tfully understand. I would hope we'd use this seriously. And I dowant to say something about the numbers at the appropriate time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Gramley expresses his hope that the numbers will be used seriously and indicates that he has something to say about them. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 543.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't you go ahead right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a suggestion or invitation, rather than expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 544.
MR. GRAMLEY. I think another way of getting a perspective onit--and none of us really has looked at this number very closely--isto look at the flow of credit implied and how that relates to thelevel of GNP forecast for the year. We're starting with a range thatin my judgment is too low. The 8 percent lower limit would imply agrowth of credit equal to 11.7 percent of forecast GNP. And thatwould be the lowest ratio we've seen since 1970 in a ratio which has asecular tendency to go upward. Furthermore, if you take out the $210billion the staff is forecasting that the government will borrow, thatleaves $171 billion for private domestic nonfinancial borrowing. Thatratio is 5.3 percent of GNP. You have to go back to 1950 to findanything similar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement providing analysis and perspective on the flow of credit and its relation to the level of GNP forecast.


Passage number 545.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is if we took 8 [to 11] percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply presents a range of percentages (8 to 11 percent) without any conflicting viewpoints or contrasting opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 546.
MR. GRAMLEY. Yes. The midpoint is 9-1/2 percent and is alsoin my judgment very, very low. It leaves a ratio of private creditexpansion to GNP of 7-1/2 percent. There's only one number since 1961that was that low: 1975. So, we're talking about recession levels ofprivate credit expansion relative to GNP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, disagrees with the midpoint percentage and believes it to be very low. He compares it to the level seen during a recession in 1975, suggesting that the current level of private credit expansion relative to GNP is not sufficient.


Passage number 547.
-53-2/8-9/83MR. PARTEE. The height of the number is accounted for bygovernment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage does not contain any statements that can be debated or disagreed upon.


Passage number 548.
MR. GRAMLEY. Right. Of course.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not mention any specific subject or statement that could involve contention or disagreement. It is a response that does not generate disagreement.


Passage number 549.
MR. PARTEE. But even the aggregate number in Appendix IV inthe Bluebook is 13.9 percent, which is not up much from last year andis well below what it was running earlier.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a fact about the aggregate number in Appendix IV of the Bluebook being 13.9 percent, which is not up much from last year and is well below what it was running earlier. There is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 550.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What page do you have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple question and does not express any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 551.
MR. PARTEE. Appendix IV gives this. I'm looking at the farright hand set of numbers in the middle column.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement about what the speaker is currently looking at in Appendix IV.


Passage number 552.
MR. GRAMLEY. To put Chuck's point in a different way: Thereis a secular upward movement in this ratio. We get in the 13 to 14percent range, as a portion of GNP, for the first time in 1972-73.We're talking about a very, very stringent set of credit marketconditions that would lead to that kind of ratio of credit expansionto GNP. I think 9 to 12 percent would be more appropriate in terms ofthe kind of credit market situation we all want.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is rephrasing Chuck's point and expressing agreement with it. They are discussing the appropriate ratio of credit expansion to GNP.


Passage number 553.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure I understand this table thatMr. Partee has called to our attention. What column are you lookingat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing confusion and seeking clarification.


Passage number 554.
MR. PARTEE. The last set of numbers is the ratio of the flowof credit to GNP. The middle column--these abbreviations are suchthat it's hard to make it out--is the private debt, isn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply seeking clarification about the middle column.


Passage number 555.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's the domestic nonfinancial debt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about domestic nonfinancial debt.


Passage number 556.
MR. PARTEE. That is the domestic, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement.


Passage number 557.
MS. TEETERS. That includes the government.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement about the government.


Passage number 558.
MR. PARTEE. That includes government, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In the given passage, there is no contention or disagreement. The statement "That includes government, yes" is a simple confirmation or agreement with the previous statement.


Passage number 559.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, that includes the government.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that "Yes, that includes the government" without expressing opposition or contradiction.


Passage number 560.
MR. PARTEE. And we certainly ought to include government.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, simply expresses an opinion without any opposing views being presented.


Passage number 561.
MS. TEETERS. We know there was an increase during the 1970s.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a fact without presenting any opposing viewpoints or opinions.


Passage number 562.
As we came out of the '75 recession, the ratio went up to--MR. PARTEE. To 17 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply states that after coming out of the '75 recession, the ratio went up to 17 percent. There is no conflicting viewpoint or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 563.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The nearest equivalent here is 1975, ifthe forecast is right, and it's 1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is discussing a comparison between two time periods and stating that the nearest equivalent to the current situation is 1975. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this statement.


Passage number 564.
4 percentage points--MR. MORRIS. But we're not targeting the flow; we'retargeting the percentage growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply explaining that they are targeting the percentage growth rather than the flow.


Passage number 565.
MR. GRAMLEY. But that's a flow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a neutral statement made by someone named Mr. Gramley.


Passage number 566.
MR. MORRIS. We're targeting this first set of numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The individual is simply stating that they are focusing on a specific set of numbers without any opposition or conflict.


Passage number 567.
MR. PARTEE. I know; but they have to relate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage doesn't indicate any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement of acknowledgment or agreement.


Passage number 568.
-54-2/8-9/83MR. GRAMLEY. I'm just looking at it a different way and onethat to me is a more familiar one. And I think what it says is thatwe're targeting on growth rates of private credit relative to GNP thatare [comparable to] the ratios of 10 years ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 569.
MR. FORD. But Lyle--Mr. Chairman, may I address this. Itseems to me one should think about the overall balance sheet. Nowwe're talking about the other side of the balance sheet than the onewe normally talk about. Isn't your argument tantamount in some senseto saying that there's a low saving rate in our economy, which we havein our forecast and which affects the flow of funds overall plus otherthings. You're suggesting we take it as a given--as something that weimplicitly accept--that there's going to be a huge bite of federalsector borrowing as projected in the nice charts we had yesterday,even with the cheery assumption that it's going through the roof rightnow but it immediately levels off for some reason. I still don'tunderstand the chart from yesterday's presentation. Another way ofsaying what you're saying is that if we choose these numbers we'retalking about now, we're not leaving room for the private sector.Doesn't that translate into saying "Let's monetize the federal debt".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Ford, is expressing his disagreement with the argument being presented. He suggests that the argument assumes a low saving rate in the economy and implies that the government borrowing will crowd out the private sector. He questions the credibility of the charts presented and implies that accepting the proposed numbers would mean monetizing the federal debt.


Passage number 570.
MR. PARTEE. Yes. I wouldn't have put it that way, though,Bill. I think Lyle is the one who made the point about the privatesector. I'd look at the total, including the government, and say itought to be in reasonable relation to the kind of growth in GNP thatwe hope to achieve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee acknowledges what Bill said but offers a slightly different perspective on the matter.


Passage number 571.
MR. FORD. Why not. It would be nice if you could have it.It depends on the policy guide.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Ford is expressing his opinion and suggesting that having the policy guide would be nice.


Passage number 572.
MR. PARTEE. And I think Lyle is right that the number is alittle too low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 573.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you look at this other column onvelocity, however, you get a different answer it seems to me. I havea little trouble seeing how we're going to justify all this debtexpansion. We will have as low a velocity number as we have ever hadexcept for last year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage expresses the speaker's personal opinion and observations but does not indicate any disagreement or contention with another point of view.


Passage number 574.
MR. PARTEE. That is to say that the debt number is prettylow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, states that the debt number is low without any indication of opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 575.
MR. AXILROD. Well, another way to look at it would be thatGNP [growth] is very low. We have a bigger percentage increase inthis debt aggregate than we do in GNP. And our past experience inrecoveries was that that wouldn't take place. So, one other way tolook at it is that your GNP number might be a little low. Of course,that would then lower that ratio that's troubling Governor Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Axilrod is expressing an alternative viewpoint or interpretation of the situation, but there is no direct disagreement with Governor Gramley.


Passage number 576.
MR. MORRIS. Our analysis of debt indicated that a 7 to 10percent range would be adequate for 1983. So, I think 8 to 11 percentis going to be plenty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Morris, is sharing their analysis and opinion about the adequate range for debt in 1983. They believe that 8 to 11 percent would be sufficient, considering the previously determined range of 7 to 10 percent. There is no indication of any contradictory views or arguments.


Passage number 577.
MR. GRAMLEY. We're talking about a ratio of private creditexpansion to GNP that we last saw maybe in 1954-55 or somewhere aroundthere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement about the ratio of private credit expansion to GNP.


Passage number 578.
 You'd think somehow--2/8-9/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't understand this, Lyle. Thisnumber you're looking at is this last column, isn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of confusion and a request for clarification.


Passage number 579.
MR. GRAMLEY. I'm looking at the middle column of the lastrow. And then I'm saying: What if we took out the governmentcomponent of that and got to the private ratio.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement from Mr. Gramley discussing a hypothetical scenario or suggestion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 580.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. You're looking at private. Ifyou look at the total, this number is high relative to the 1960s and alittle low relative to the 1970s.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. 

Explanation: The passage presents contrasting viewpoints about the given number. It states that the number is "high relative to the 1960s" but "a little low relative to the 1970s," suggesting differing perspectives or opinions regarding the interpretation of the data.


Passage number 581.
MR. GRAMLEY. You will note that this ratio has a secularupward trend to it. It started out in the 6 to 9 percent range in theearly 1960s and got up into the 12 to 14 percent range in the early1970s.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a factual observation about the trend of a ratio over time. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 582.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Showing credit inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Showing credit inflation" does not indicate any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions. Instead, it seems to be a neutral statement or heading presenting information.


Passage number 583.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, that's part of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement that introduces a topic without expressing any conflicting viewpoints or disagreement.


Passage number 584.
MR. MORRIS. And it has been declining since 1978.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention in the passage. It simply states a fact without any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 585.
MR. GRAMLEY. We don't need to roll back the world that fast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply expressing that there is no need to make drastic changes or move too quickly.


Passage number 586.
MR. PARTEE. You certainly don't want it to be 16 or 17percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is making a statement about not wanting something to be 16 or 17 percent, but there is no opposing viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 587.
MR. GRAMLEY. No. I wouldn't suggest anything of the kind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Gramley clearly states that he would not suggest anything of the kind, indicating agreement or concurrence.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 588.
MS. TEETERS. Lyle, may I ask what you did. Did you take the$413.3 billion in the middle column in the third set of numbers andsubtract out $145.6 billion for the federal and then on the $452.3billion did you take out $218 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement or contention in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Teeters, is questioning Lyle about his actions and calculations, suggesting that there may be discrepancies or incorrect calculations involved.


Passage number 589.
MR. GRAMLEY. Yes. Well, from the $452 billion I took outthe staff's [projected deficit] number, which I think was $210billion, and I got a figure--I don't have the numbers--whatever 452minus 210 is. And I divided that by the GNP and got 7-1/2 percent. Ilooked at my own tables here, which I happen to have with me, tocompare that 7-1/2 percent. And when I went back, I thought: Well,in 1975 we had 6.9 percent. And then I went all the way back and hadto go back to 1961 to find any comparable ratio.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply explaining their calculations and comparing them to past ratios.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 590.
MR. BALLES. You know, 1976 was 11 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker is stating a statistic from 1976 being 11 percent, which implies a fact. However, without further context, it is not clear what this statistic refers to, so there may be disagreement or contention about the significance or interpretation of this percentage.


Passage number 591.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, we don't feel extremely confidentabout all of these numbers--and Mr. Prell may be able to make somecomments on how he got to here a little more elaborately--but if weattempted to have a lot more private credit, we believe that interestrates would be a lot higher in that process and we wouldn't get theGNP because the rise in interest rates would begin to cut it back.So, this is where we came out with a consistent set of relationships.We didn't think that there was room for any more private credit withinthe monetary targets and given the government's [needs].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 592.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But to state it the other way around, youare also saying, if I understand it correctly, with this relatively-56-2/8-9/83small amount of private credit you think interest rates would declineand the GNP would rise as you projected.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is restating an idea and seeking clarification, implying that they do not agree with the initial claim.


Passage number 593.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, [with rates] stable and maybe edging down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a possibility of interest rates edging down while being stable.


Passage number 594.
MR. FORD. That comes out of this chart show.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Ford.


Passage number 595.
MR. GRAMLEY. But let's get this causation straight. You donot put interest rates up, if you were targeting on credit aggregates,by having high credit aggregates. The reason that credit expansiondeclines is precisely because interest rates go up. We want a targethere, I think, that accommodates a sufficient expansion of credit atsomething close to prevailing interest rates. That's the way onewould have to look at it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Gramley about the relationship between interest rates and credit expansion.


Passage number 596.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what they say they've done.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is a statement of what "they" say they have done. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 597.
MR. GRAMLEY. I think the argument almost came out the otherway around. That is, that you could have low credit aggregatesbecause there may be sufficient restriction on the economy withpresent interest rates so that private credit demands are not going tobe strong. I say that may well be, but we may be misappraising thelevel of interest rates necessary to hold credit expansion down thislow. And I want to make sure that our credit aggregates are not thattight. It's because I'm taking these numbers seriously--and I hope weuse this number seriously--that I'm arguing this strongly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MR. GRAMLEY is presenting a different perspective on the relationship between low credit aggregates and interest rates, but he is not arguing against anyone or contradicting a previous point.


Passage number 598.
 Maybewe're not going to, but maybe--MR. MORRIS. The velocity of debt in the first year ofexpansion tends to be about 2 percent. So, if you had an 11 percentrate of growth in debt in the first year of expansion you should beable to finance 13 percent nominal GNP [growth].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker presents a statement about the velocity of debt in the first year of expansion and then suggests a potential outcome based on that statement. There is no opposing viewpoint presented or any indication of disagreement.


Passage number 599.
MR. GRAMLEY. That 13 percent could be used to set themonetary aggregates very low. Typically what we have had in the earlyperiod of recovery is a marked increase in interest rates from verylow levels, which leads to economization of money and credit use. Butthat's not the situation we're in now. We're already starting fromreal interest rates that are very high and we're worried about whetheror not interest rates are going to go up enough to choke off therecovery. And one way to guarantee it is to set both monetary andcredit aggregate targets that are too low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining a concern about setting monetary and credit aggregate targets too low, which could potentially harm the recovery. There is no opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 600.
MR. FORD. I would say the opposite. You're talking aboutlong-term rates when you're talking about capital. What we have toworry about in the marketplace, if we do some of these things--set theaggregates too high and throw in this credit aggregate with it--isthat the bond market, which seems to have flattened out and isstarting to tick up now, could take off on us and we could get theexact opposite of what you just said. I'm still trying to figure outwhere the bottom line of the paper is that the staff did. But I readone thing over and over again. In terms of comparison with moneymeasures. M1 performs as well as the best of credit measures. Look atthis chart that was given out yesterday, which shows the huge increasein velocity there. That's the same thing you guys are complainingabout--the monetary velocity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 601.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A huge decrease in velocity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "a huge decrease in velocity" describes a clear and objective state of being, without any conflicting perspectives or contradictory statements.


Passage number 602.
2/8-9/83MR. PARTEE. A decrease, yes. That's the same thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply agrees with the statement made before (which is not mentioned in the given passage) that there is a decrease, and restates it.


Passage number 603.
MR. FORD. It was a dramatic change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The statement is simply describing a change.


Passage number 604.
MR. PARTEE. One does see the same effect running through allthese numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply discussing a common effect that is observed in the mentioned numbers.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 605.
MR. FORD. So why add another obfuscating factor to the setof already imperfect measures. What Lyle is saying--if we were tostate it in [our targets] and then take it seriously--could beinterpreted in the money markets as saying that we are worried aboutadequately financing the federal deficit. Another way of saying whathe's saying is: Let's monetize the debt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Ford, is questioning the addition of another factor to the already imperfect measures. He believes that Lyle's statement about financing the federal deficit could be interpreted negatively in the money markets. On the other hand, Lyle is suggesting monetizing the debt as a potential solution. This disagreement indicates a contention between the two perspectives.


Passage number 606.
MR. WALLICH. I think that's the right way of looking at it.The question is: How much credit expansion can the economy standwithout inflation. And the sad fact is the government limits theamount that the private sector can have. We have to recognize that bylimiting the total credit expansion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the belief that the government restricts credit expansion in order to prevent inflation.


Passage number 607.
MR. FORD. And you can't say: Let's take the government partas a given and then add on and make sure there's enough there for theprivate sector, which is what I hear Lyle saying. That's another wayof saying we will monetize the debt no matter how big it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining a perspective and suggesting that regardless of the size of the debt, it will be monetized.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 608.
MR. GRAMLEY. Monetizing the debt in that sense, Bill, wouldmean taking off all limits and I'm not arguing that. It's a questionof what particular numbers are appropriate, and there can bedisagreement on whether or not 8 to 11 percent or 9 to 12 percent isappropriate. Arguing that raising the limits by one percentage pointmeans monetizing the debt seems to me to be a bit extreme.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley is arguing against the idea that raising the limits by one percentage point means monetizing the debt, considering it to be extreme.


Passage number 609.
MR. WALLICH. Well, we have the other targets that wouldprevent that anyway. But I think what you're saying, Lyle, is thatthe deficit really is cutting very deeply into permissible privatecredit expansion. There's no way of getting around that by sayingthat we will have more private credit expansion anyway. That wouldlet the total become excessive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich is simply acknowledging and agreeing with Lyle's statement that the deficit is reducing permissible private credit expansion.


Passage number 610.
MR. GRAMLEY. All I'm arguing is that we're dealing with anew ratio that none of us really knows too much about. I'm saying, inmy judgment, 8 to 11 percent is just too tight. It's as simple asthat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, states his own judgment about a ratio without any indication of disagreement or opposition from others.


Passage number 611.
MR. ROBERTS. Is the question, since we can't control thismeasure, what it will turnout to be if we set the aggregates. Wedon't control this measure, do we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Roberts is simply asking a clarification question.


Passage number 612.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 613.
 If the aggregates run off [track], we may usethis to look to see whether we--MR. ROBERTS. But it's just a monitoring device.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that if the aggregates run off track, they can use this as a monitoring device. Mr. Roberts then interrupts to clarify that it is only a monitoring device.


Passage number 614.
MR. PARTEE. It's more a monitoring device; I think that'sright.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is expressing his opinion and agreeing with the statement.


Passage number 615.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It can influence one's decision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 616.
2/8-9/83MR. PARTEE. We want to have the right setting if we're goingto use it as a monitor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states a desire to have the right setting for using something as a monitor.


Passage number 617.
MR. ROBERTS. When you say influence your decision, Tony, doyou mean that if it were running differently than you expected, youwould do something differently in terms of the aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 618.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Let's say that we had a verydifficult decision to make. This is just one more straw on one sideor the other--whether it's running tight or running easy--that wewould look at. To some degree we also are influenced by the exchangerate and by a lot of other things. I think it would have someinfluence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Although the passage includes several factors to consider, there is no clear contention or disagreement present. The speaker is simply stating that various factors, including the exchange rate and other considerations, would hold some influence in making a difficult decision.


Passage number 619.
MR. ROBERTS. So, it should be consistent with theaggregates, if there is any relationship.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by Mr. Roberts is simply stating a logical expectation that the given relationship should be consistent with the aggregates.


Passage number 620.
MR. MORRIS. Another way of looking at it is to look at thefirst column where you see that the highest rate in the whole periodsince 1960 was 13-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 621.
 So that 11 percent historically is--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 12-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 622.
MR. FORD. It was 13-1/2 percent in 1978.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement is a factual statement providing information about the interest rate in 1978. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 623.
MR. MORRIS. 13-1/2 percent in 1978. First column.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement of fact (the percentage in 1978) without any opposing views or conflicting information.


Passage number 624.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're looking at the middle column.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no specific passage mentioned in the prompt. Without the context of the passage, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 625.
MR. PARTEE. That's total [debt]. You want to look atdomestic, which is the second column.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 626.
MR. MORRIS. All right; then it's 12.9 percent. Therefore,it seems to me that in the first year of expansion, when businesscredit demands are not going to be all that strong, 11 percent isplenty high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 627.
MR. WALLICH. But those were years of much higher rates ofinflation, weren't they.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question posed by Mr. Wallich seeking clarification about inflation rates.


Passage number 628.
MR. MORRIS. That's exactly why I think we don't need 12percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is expressing his opinion, but there is no opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 629.
MR. MARTIN. Those were also years in which the criterion ofbusiness managers for financing was leverage, leverage, leveragewithout any expectation that leverage would ever work against them.There will be some tendency to try to shift toward equity and try toreduce debt. We are leaving out the equity sector, and we know weare, for the reasons that were given in the paper.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact that there will be a tendency to shift towards equity and reduce debt. There is no conflicting opinion expressed.


Passage number 630.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I must say that Mr. Morris' point lookspretty persuasive to me, Mr. Gramley. What do you say to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Although the speaker acknowledges Mr. Morris' persuasive point, they do not express any disagreement or contention towards it.


Passage number 631.
MR. GRAMLEY. When you look at the 3 years we've justcompleted and see that we got away with 9-1/2 to 10 percent expansionin total credit, you say to yourself: Well, maybe that's enough.What I want you to recall is that in those 3 years we have had nogrowth in economic activity at all. None. We've had extremely high-59-2/8-9/83real interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Gramley reflecting on the lack of economic growth despite expansion in credit.


Passage number 632.
 It is no surprise that debt expansion assumes avery low--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We had inflation 5 percentage pointshigher on top of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about debt expansion and inflation without offering any conflicting perspectives or opinions.


Passage number 633.
MR. GRAMLEY. This relates to nominal GNP and how fast creditgrows overall. Nominal GNP figures clearly were much higher in thelatter part of the 1970s.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement providing information about nominal GNP figures in the latter part of the 1970s.


Passage number 634.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What was nominal GNP growth in 1980 and1981.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is asking for a factual answer about the nominal GNP growth in specific years (1980 and 1981). There is no contention or disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 635.
MR. KICHLINE. Fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter in '81 it was9-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a percentage increase without any conflicting viewpoints or opinions.


Passage number 636.
MR. GRAMLEY. No, you need year-over-year figures for these.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states the need for year-over-year figures without indicating any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 637.
MR. KICHLINE. Year-over-year in '81 it was 11-1/2 percent.I don't have the number for '80.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they do not have the number for '80, which does not indicate any disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 638.
MR. AXILROD. These are sort of fourth quarter-to-fourthquarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Axilrod is simply introducing a topic or time frame.


Passage number 639.
MR. GRAMLEY. Oh, I guess you're right. These are kind offourth quarter-to-fourth quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with the other person's statement.


Passage number 640.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, I think it is fourth quarter-to-fourthquarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply agrees with the given statement and expresses their opinion.


Passage number 641.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Frank, the fellow who has beenpushing this is Ben Friedman. I don't remember when I talked to himwhat his numbers were. Have you had a conversation with him.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing information and asking a question about a conversation with someone named Ben Friedman.


Passage number 642.
MR. MORRIS. To my knowledge, I don't think he's recommendeda target for it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is stating his own knowledge and does not express any disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 643.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I have an instinct that not very manymarket people would be familiar with this and spend a lot timeanalyzing whether this is easy or tight with the exception possibly ofHenry Kaufman and Ben Friedman. I'm sure Ben will be commenting onit. I was just wondering.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states the author's personal opinion and curiosity about the familiarity of market people with a certain topic, mentioning specific individuals who might have more knowledge on the subject.


Passage number 644.
MR. MORRIS. But a 12 percent rate of growth will not lookvery tight to those guys.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris is expressing an opinion that a 12 percent rate of growth may not be perceived as tight by some people.


Passage number 645.
MS. TEETERS. Even more important, the way the sentence isworded is terrible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement in the passage is a personal opinion about the sentence structure, so there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 646.
MR. PARTEE. I would like to make it 9 to 11 percent, Paul.I think that would take care of all our problems. That range isawfully wide; a 3-point range in a number as large as this is awfullybig. I think 9 to 11 percent would take care of the problem of thevery low number; Lyle looks to the bottom end of the range. The highnumber wouldn't be as high and wouldn't bother [other] people. Andfor my purpose, the midpoint would be 1/2 point more and I think thatis about what it ought to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is expressing his own opinion about what he believes the desired percentage should be.


Passage number 647.
-60-2/8-9/83MR. GRAMLEY. I think that's basically [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 648.
MR. MORRIS. 9 to 11 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a percentage without any opposing views or conflicting statements.


Passage number 649.
MS. TEETERS. May I suggest in addition that we change thewording of that sentence. It says: "And the associated range ofgrowth for total domestic nonfinancial debt has been establishedat...." It sounds as if we know what we're doing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no explicit disagreement or contention evident in the passage. The speaker is simply making a suggestion to change the wording of a sentence in order to make it sound clearer or more precise.


Passage number 650.
MR. PARTEE. That is too serious.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses that something is "too serious," indicating a personal opinion or statement without any indication of opposing viewpoints or disagreements.


Passage number 651.
MS. TEETERS. We think it may be in that generalneighborhood.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. TEETERS simply states that they believe something might be in a general neighborhood.


Passage number 652.
MR. BOEHNE. I think the word "estimated" is a good idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses their belief that the word "estimated" is a good idea without suggesting or opposing any alternative viewpoint.


Passage number 653.
MR. BALLES. "Estimated" is good, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply agrees with the use of the word "estimated."


Passage number 654.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's a little odd that we have avery narrow range for the figure we don't know much about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses curiosity about the limited range of information available for a specific figure.


Passage number 655.
MR. PARTEE. The difference between the high and the low endsmust be around $100 billion when it's 9 to 11 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presented as a fact without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 656.
MR. MORRIS. It's a more reliable number, so we don't need awide range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. Mr. Morris is simply suggesting that a more reliable number be used instead of a wider range.


Passage number 657.
MS. TEETERS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 658.
 Yes, but I think we should also--MR. PARTEE. The number we're talking about is around $500billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. Although there is an additional point added by "I think we should also," it doesn't necessarily imply disagreement with the previous statement. It could simply be an agreement with the previous speaker's point, followed by an additional suggestion or idea.


Passage number 659.
MR. GRAMLEY. You're right. When you add one percentagepoint to the flow, you get an extra $4.8 billion. An extra $4.8billion of credit is a lot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of agreement between the two speakers.


Passage number 660.
MR. MARTIN. Let the record show.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states that someone named Mr. Martin is speaking and wishes for the record to reflect his statement.


Passage number 661.
MS. TEETERS. Shouldn't we also add a sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply presents a question or suggestion about adding a sentence to the text.


Passage number 662.
MR. FORD. You sound like Everett Dirksen--a billion here, abillion there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Ford's statement comparing someone to Everett Dirksen's famous quote does not imply disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 663.
MR. PARTEE. It adds up to [real] money after a while.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements that imply disagreement or contention. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee, expressing that something accumulates significant value over time.


Passage number 664.
MR. WALLICH. It's the percent that counts here and not thedollars.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is a general observation about the importance of percentages. There is no disagreement or contention expressed.


Passage number 665.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I'm talking about the dollars because alot of people look at those flow of funds numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their perspective on the topic.


Passage number 666.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What's the total of this figure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply asks for the total of a figure, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 667.
MR. PARTEE. It's around $500 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only provides a statement about the approximate value, which does not involve any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 668.
MR. GRAMLEY. It was $4.8 [trillion] at the end of 1982.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact without any conflicting viewpoints or opposing statements.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 669.
MR. AXILROD. $4.8 trillion is the stock.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions the stock is worth $4.8 trillion, but without further context, it is unclear what this refers to. Therefore, there is a potential for contention or disagreement regarding the accuracy or validity of this statement.


Passage number 670.
2/8-9/83MR. FORD. Think of it as 50 percent more than GNP. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Ford regarding a concept.


Passage number 671.
MR. AXILROD. Ten percent of $4.8 trillion is $480 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply states a mathematical calculation without any contradictory information or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 672.
MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, I would also like to add asentence after this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. TEETERS is simply expressing her desire to add a sentence after a certain point.


Passage number 673.
MR. FORD. How can you miss a target that's 50 percent--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It only includes a statement or question without conflicting views.


Passage number 674.
MR. PARTEE. When you have a 2-point range that's a hundredbillion dollars.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 675.
MS. TEETERS. I would like to add a sentence in here thatindicates that we have not bought Ben Friedman 110 percent--that we'relooking at this as something we would follow rather than use as astrict target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Teeters is simply expressing her intention to include a sentence that clarifies their level of commitment to Ben Friedman.


Passage number 676.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There already is one in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 677.
MR. WALLICH. To give it a 2-point range when the others aremostly 3 points I think gives it a special status that will beregarded as being particularly confining when we really mean it'sparticularly loose.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the opinion of Mr. Wallich about the 2-point range being seen as confining or loose. There is no indication of disagreement from others or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 678.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know. Who the heck knows whatthis figure should be, but I'm a bit bothered by a lower figure than 9percent which is where it has been running roughly. Presumably, we'redisinflating during this period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is expressing uncertainty and personal concern about the inflation figure, but there is no disagreement with any other party.


Passage number 679.
 We haven't had a figure--MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 680.
 We haven't had a figure as low as 9 percent--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. During the inflationaryperiod, we haven't had a figure as low as 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The second statement is simply restating and agreeing with the first statement.


Passage number 681.
MR. PARTEE. We're talking about all this financing by thegovernment, which is a part of it, and we have a low end that's belowanything we've had.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas. It simply states that they are discussing government financing and that there is a low end below their previous experiences.


Passage number 682.
MR. FORD. The last time it was below 9 percent the economywas a lot healthier than it is now, gentlemen. That's what we'retrying to do, isn't it. I'm not kidding about this. That is theother way of saying it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Ford is stating a fact about the economy and expressing his belief that improving it should be a priority.


Passage number 683.
MR. PARTEE. 1970 was the last time it was below 9 percentand that was a recession year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is stating a fact about the unemployment rate without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 684.
MR. FORD. There was accelerating inflation in that period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no explicit contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply states the fact that there was accelerating inflation in a particular period.


Passage number 685.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It got down to about 9 percent in '74 and'75 when there was more inflation than there is now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a statement of fact and does not involve any contention or disagreement. It presents a comparison between the inflation levels in the years '74 and '75 to the current inflation levels.


Passage number 686.
MR. WALLICH. Well, the aggregate responds very little toinflation. Otherwise, it should be 5 percentage points lower now thanit was at its peak.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact or observation about the aggregate.


Passage number 687.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's 3 or 4 percentage points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 688.
-62-2/8-9/83MR. MORRIS. It's responsive to nominal GNP, Henry, not justinflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris is simply clarifying that the measure being discussed (responsive to nominal GNP) includes inflation as a factor.


Passage number 689.
MR. PARTEE. The chart looks pretty good until the lastcouple of years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply presents an observation about a chart.


Passage number 690.
MR. GRAMLEY. [Unintelligible] economy from the liquidityposition of businesses and individuals. And it clearly has a verystrong secular upward trend. It always has; that went on before therewas an acceleration of inflation [unintelligible]. If you go back tothe 1950s, you'll find there was an acceleration in the growth of debtrelative to GNP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 691.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think that's true. The velocityhas been unchanged for 20 years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses their personal opinion about the truthfulness of a statement and provides a fact about the velocity remaining unchanged for 20 years.


Passage number 692.
MR. AXILROD. I think, Mr. Chairman, we have a very modestgrowth in nominal GNP here and we're getting [rising] economicactivity only because we have very low growth in prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states the speaker's opinion about the modest growth in nominal GNP and the economic activity resulting from low growth in prices.


Passage number 693.
 Our problem,we thought, was to explain why total credit growth was so small withthis kind of nominal GNP, given--MR. KICHLINE. So large.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It is a continuation of a thought or statement.


Passage number 694.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So large.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it ends with "So large" and does not present any contrasting or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 695.
MR. AXILROD. I meant so large, pardon me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, is simply apologizing for using the wrong wording or phrasing in his statement.


Passage number 696.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's where I start out. De novo, thequestion I have is: Why is it so large. Why is credit in the firstperiod of expansion expanding faster than nominal GNP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply questioning and seeking an explanation for the size and growth rate of credit during the first period of expansion.


Passage number 697.
MR. PARTEE. Maybe because a dollar government bond doesn'thave the kick that a dollar Carter bond does.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee, expressing a possibility or suggestion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 698.
MR. AXILROD. Part of our answer was that we weren't gettingenough strength in economic activity to generate a substantial cashflow to businesses, so we weren't getting them able to finance asmuch, relatively speaking, internally. The character of thisexpansion is somewhat different from the character of earlierexpansions. It's slower. It's dominated by government.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The mention of the expansion being slower and dominated by government implies a disagreement or difference of opinion about the current state of the economy and the role of government in it.


Passage number 699.
MR. CORRIGAN. That's the problem. It is totally dominatedby government. And I don't know how you can walk away from that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Corrigan, is stating a problem about government dominance but does not engage in a debate or express disagreement with anyone else's opinion.


Passage number 700.
MR. FORD. Remember, if you don't like the crowding outargument in that we're taking the government's share as given, anotherthing that's implicit in what Lyle is arguing is that you willincrease financial leverage of corporations. Because what you'retalking about providing them adequately with is debt, which asGovernor Martin noted, has to be related to equity. And what he justsaid is that there's not going to be equity forthcoming for whateverreason. That's in the forecast. I'm not arguing with it. But thelogical conclusion is that if we put a high number on the range and ifwe make the credit available to the private sector after thegovernment gets its share, the net result will be an increase in thedebt/equity ratio of corporate America.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage merely states a logical conclusion that increasing debt to provide financial leverage to corporations will result in an increase in the debt/equity ratio of corporate America. It does not present any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 701.
 And that ratio, if I'm notmistaken--I'd like to ask the staff--2/8-9/83MR. PARTEE. You can't reach that conclusion, Bill, becauseone of the biggest sectors in here is the consumer--mortgage debt andconsumer debt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 702.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I hate half points [in the ranges],but the arithmetic resolution of this problem would be a range of8-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their personal dislike for half points in the ranges but then presents the arithmetic resolution of the problem, which suggests a range of 8-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent. There is no conflicting or opposing view stated in the passage.


Passage number 703.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I thought of that, but it seems to methat implies some precision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is expressing a personal thought and opinion without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 704.
 I wonder if it's wise to make that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We just did, under your urging, for M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The first part expresses wonder or uncertainty, but there is no explicit disagreement or contention expressed regarding the action mentioned in the second part.


Passage number 705.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Maybe we should just stop with whatwe had already set up before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting that it might be best to not continue with any additional setup and instead remain content with what has already been established.


Passage number 706.
MR. PARTEE. I would buy 8-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not include any statements or indications of disagreement or contention. It simply states a potential purchase percentage without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments presented.


Passage number 707.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would like to make one suggestion.I don't feel that strongly about it, but I'd like to point out thatthere is an advantage in addition to this associated [debt] target ofleaving in our traditional associated bank credit target for tworeasons. One is that we always hit it for some strange reason, andthat's very nice to have happen. [Laughter] The other one is thatthere are a lot of people in the markets who aren't going tounderstand [the debt aggregate].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making a suggestion and offering reasons in support of it. The mention of "strange reason" and laughter indicate a lighthearted tone, but there is no explicit disagreement or conflicting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 708.
 If they do, it's very--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Of course their argument is that we getthat [bank credit] figure on a much more up-to-date basis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact about a possible argument that some people make.


Passage number 709.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And it seems to me that there wouldbe some sense of continuity. If people see that same bank credittarget of 6 to 9 percent or whatever it is that we've had every year--and we always hit it rain or shine--they're going to tend withoutdoing any independent analysis, which will be limited to a very fewpeople, to feel reassured about the higher numbers on this broadcredit measure because they'll assume it's consistent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the potential outcome of people perceiving a sense of continuity in the bank credit target, without any contrasting opinions or conflicting views being presented.


Passage number 710.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have the number for bank credit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question asking for a specific piece of information.


Passage number 711.
MR. AXILROD. Well, the number for bank credit that falls outof this whole consistent set of data is 7.8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply states a numerical value without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 712.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's still within 6 to 9 percent;it's still the same thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply states that "it's still within 6 to 9 percent," indicating that the subject being discussed remains within the mentioned range. It then emphasizes that it is "still the same thing," suggesting that there has been no change or deviation from the initial topic or situation.


Passage number 713.
MR. MORRIS. Keep 6 to 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Keep 6 to 9 percent" is presented without any opposition or conflicting views.


Passage number 714.
MR. PARTEE. It really ought to be depository credit, but wedon't have a number for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses their opinion about what type of credit should be used, but there is no opposition or argument present.


Passage number 715.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Maybe we wouldn't hit it that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing a possibility or uncertainty.


Passage number 716.
MR. BLACK. If we vote on these, as I've figured it, we'venow substituted all the specifications of alternative I and the rateof growth from a February-March base for M2, and we're calling italternative II.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is simply stating a fact about the voting process and the substitution of specifications.


Passage number 717.
2/8-9/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's correct, I guess. One could argue,however, that these are all based upon a somewhat lower GNP thaneverybody is calculating.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a fact and then presenting a counterpoint that could potentially be argued. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 718.
MR. MORRIS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, there is not enough information provided in the passage to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 719.
 Furthermore, the M2 number is based on sheerspeculation on the part of the Board's staff that after the end ofMarch--MR. PARTEE. So are the other numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that the M2 number is based on speculation, and the other numbers also share this trait.


Passage number 720.
MR. MORRIS. --M2 is going to grow 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement is simply stating a fact, that M2 is going to grow by 8 percent.


Passage number 721.
MR. BLACK. I was just thinking on the mechanics of voting.I might say I favor old M2 and you might say you favor the new M2. Iwas just pointing out that a transposition has sort of taken place,rightly or wrongly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention between Mr. Black and the other person. They are simply discussing their preferences and observations about the mechanics of voting.


Passage number 722.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are right. Well, what do you thinkabout this bank credit issue. We could write a sentence in heresaying that this would be consistent with a bank credit range ofto _ percent. That gets another number in there; I don't knowwhether that's good or bad. I don't mind saying that at some point.We could use it as a transitional device but not monitor it, or put itin parentheses.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing their thoughts and uncertainties about a bank credit issue.


Passage number 723.
MR. BALLES. What advantage would there be of that, Mr.Chairman. I thought initially we were aiming at substituting abroader measure of credit than the narrow bank credit measure whichhad been affected by the degree of intermediation or disintermediationor whatever. I suspect we might be getting too many targets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Balles is expressing a question and a thought, but there is no indication of disagreement or contention with the Chairman or anyone else.


Passage number 724.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Obviously, it adds another number andthat's a disadvantage. I think we ought to say some place, though wedon't necessarily have to say it in [the directive]--we can say in thetext of the [policy record]--that we have this range and it waspointed out that this was the practical equivalent of the 6 to 9percent range for bank credit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is stating a potential disadvantage and suggesting a solution but without any contradictory viewpoints or conflicting opinions being expressed.


Passage number 725.
MR. PARTEE. That's all right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not show any signs of contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement agreeing with something.


Passage number 726.
MR. GUFFEY. I think that's attractive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "I think that's attractive" expresses a personal opinion and does not provoke disagreement.


Passage number 727.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, why don't we do that. Take a noteof that somebody. Why don't we go back over this and look at thelanguage, paragraph by paragraph. I had a very minor change back inthe boiler plate part. In line 20 it says "Growth of M2 surged to anextraordinary pace in January." That's certainly right. Then it says"largely reflecting...." If I understand it correctly, it's more thanlargely reflecting. It misimplies that it's only partially [thereason]. So far as we know it may be the whole [reason]. We don'tknow. I would make a big change and substitute the word "apparently"for "largely." Somebody says it's just an arithmetic thing; I guessit's what you're measuring from. In lines 12 and 13 it says "Inrecent months the advance in the index of average hourly earnings hasslowed appreciably further." I guess that depends upon precisely whatmonth you're comparing it with.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting changes and clarifications to the language used.


Passage number 728.
2/8-9/83MR. GRAMLEY. We could say "slowed further, but notappreciably.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply presents a statement without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 729.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't remember exactly what the numberswere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they do not remember the exact numbers.


Passage number 730.
 I thought the January figure was a little lower, but I justfigured--MR. GRAMLEY. If you take the period from last September toJanuary, you get a 5.3 percent rate of increase. The third quarterwas 5.5 percent, measured from June to September. There has been atiny further slowing, but not a lot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing information and explaining the rate of increase over a specific period of time.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 731.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just take out the word "appreciably." Isthat okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The statement "Just take out the word 'appreciably'" suggests that there may be differing opinions or objections regarding the alteration or removal of the word "appreciably."


Passage number 732.
MR. GRAMLEY. I definitely think that would do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 733.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. Does anybody else haveanything on the boiler plate part.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply asking if anyone else has anything to add regarding the boiler plate part. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 734.
MS. TEETERS. I do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "MS. TEETERS. I do" suggests a contradictory response or disagreement to something previously stated or asked.


Passage number 735.
 On page 2, line 37--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's not the boiler plate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply clarifies that what is being discussed is not the boiler plate.


Passage number 736.
MR. PARTEE. It never changes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "It never changes" is not controversial and does not involve any conflicting opinions or points of view.


Passage number 737.
MR. MARTIN. This is the armor plate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Martin simply states that "this" is the armor plate, without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 738.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions Chairman Volcker without providing any indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 739.
 That first sentence is certainly boilerplate, but I--MS. TEETERS. It was the first sentence that I had troublewith.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage because the speaker, MS. TEETERS, expresses trouble with the first sentence, indicating a difference in opinion or perspective.


Passage number 740.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now we are down after line 33. What doyou have, Nancy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a neutral and straightforward question asking for information.


Passage number 741.
MS. TEETERS. First of all, the word "sustainable" is usedtwice and I don't know what it means to say "a sustainable pattern ofinternational transactions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the word "sustainable" is used twice and the speaker does not understand its meaning in the context of "a sustainable pattern of international transactions."


Passage number 742.
"MR. PARTEE. We never did.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It appears to be a statement or a straightforward answer without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments presented.


Passage number 743.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only virtue that it has is that wehave an unsustainable pattern. We've had it for years and we haven'tchanged the sentence.SPEAKER(.).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is expressing a belief or observation about a situation but does not involve any disagreement or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 744.
 Steve, what was the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the question is whether we want tochange something--this particular sentence--which has in fact beenboiler plate. I raised the same question. Actually, it may be morerelevant now than it was before in terms of the exchange rate. Iwould be inclined to leave it. But nobody's going to notice itbecause it has been there forever.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their thoughts and opinions about whether or not to change a specific sentence. There is no indication of any opposing views or conflicting arguments.


Passage number 745.
2/8-9/83MR. WALLICH. It's very hard to say anything about thebalance of payments; still, something should be said. And then we'llin effect have to say something about the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker seems to acknowledge the difficulty in discussing the balance of payments but states that something should still be said about it. There is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 746.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there anything else in that firstparagraph. Anything down to line 49.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if there is any additional information in the first paragraph.


Passage number 747.
MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, in line 44, I would prefer to putthe lower market rates of interest after declining inflation becauseit sounds as if the declining inflation is what is causing the lowermarket rates of interest. It would read then, starting at line 43,"...and that the availability of interest on large proportions oftransactions accounts, declining inflation, and lower market rates ofinterest....
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Gramley is simply expressing his preference for the order of the list of factors.


Passage number 748.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anything else in that first paragraph.Let me go to the next paragraph, which is bracketed. It seems to methat that ought to stay in, but I wonder whether we shouldn't reversethis somehow. I don't have any [precise] language, but something like"In establishing growth ranges for the aggregates for 1983 theCommittee felt that M2 might be more appropriately measured after theperiod of highly aggressive marketing of money market instruments hasbeen completed. The Committee also felt that a somewhat wider rangeis appropriate for Ml." We need some language in there, I think, tomake that range sound a little more tentative, consistent with therest of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing their thoughts and suggesting some changes or additions to the text.


Passage number 749.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. "For monitoring Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement that is presenting information without expressing any conflicting perspectives or opinions.


Passage number 750.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that would be all right with me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no disagreement or contention in the statement "Well, that would be all right with me." The speaker is expressing agreement or acceptance with the situation.


Passage number 751.
And that would be explained a little later, if that's--MR. WALLICH. I think we ought to say something here toindicate that these ranges are more uncertain than in the past sincewe haven't quite said that except for Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is about clarifying the uncertainty of certain ranges.


Passage number 752.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it says that right now. That's thelast sentence. I think the whole thing conveys that. The firstparagraph says something about that and then this paragraph concludeswith it. I'd make it "Those growth ranges will be reviewed in thespring and altered, if appropriate, in the light of evidence" etc.Then what this is saying--let me just be clear--is that we may look atM2 [after] we see what happens in February and March and see whetherwe like that as a base or whether it [should be] changed. And we'llsee whether we have any stronger feeling about M1 at that time, whichis before the normal period [for our review of the ranges]. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply summarizing the main points and clarifying their understanding.


Passage number 753.
MR. AXILROD. Did you want the narrowing to apply to the M2range as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no explicit contention or disagreement in this passage as it simply asks a question about whether the narrowing should apply to a specific range.


Passage number 754.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The given passage is not providing any information or making any statement that can be agreed or disagreed with. It seems to be a request for a simple answer rather than a passage with content that can invite contention or disagreement.


Passage number 755.
MR. MARTIN. Altered.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage because it only states that something is altered without expressing any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 756.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, we're changing the word "narrowed" to"altered.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The word "narrowed" is being changed to "altered," indicating that there is a disagreement about the appropriate wording or interpretation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 757.
"-67-2/8-9/83MR. KEEHN. Maybe it's a minor point, but in lines 53 and 54we use the phrase "after the period of highly aggressive marketing of[money market deposit accounts] has been completed." We are implyingthat by using February and March as the base that the aggressivemarketing will be over then. I'm not sure we can say that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. Mr. Keehn raises a potential disagreement about whether it can be definitively stated that the aggressive marketing of money market deposit accounts will be completed by February and March.


Passage number 758.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [We could say] "subsided." It dependsupon what one means by "highly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "subsided" is being used to indicate that something has calmed down or decreased in intensity, and the statement "It depends upon what one means by 'highly'" suggests that the interpretation of the word "highly" can vary depending on context or perspective. There is no clear opposition or contradiction being presented.


Passage number 759.
"MR. KEEHN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 760.
 I'd give it a more temporary--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The distinction is between highly and notso highly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is stating their opinion about the distinction between highly and notso highly, suggesting that the distinction is more temporary.


Passage number 761.
MR. PARTEE. "Subsided" is a lot better word.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that "Subsided" is a better word choice, without any conflicting or opposing view being presented.


Passage number 762.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Subsided" is all right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 763.
MR. KEEHN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The excerpt indicates that Mr. Keehn is expressing disagreement or contention with something.


Passage number 764.
MS. TEETERS. Should we add "hopefully".SPEAKER(.). Perhaps.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The response "Perhaps" is neutral and does not express disagreement with the idea of adding "hopefully."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 765.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We just talked about the tentative numbersfor the next paragraph. I think Governor Martin raised some questionabout how M1 is stated. Let me suggest this. It would read as it isexcept for putting an "and" after M2 and before M3. "For the periodfrom February-March to the fourth quarter a range of 7 to 10 percent...taking into account the probability of some residual shifting...."Well, there's a question right there. Do we attempt to quantify thatresidual shifting. I would say we ought to quantify it very roughlyin the earlier discussion [in the policy record], but we don't have todo it here. Then just make it "and for the period from the fourthquarter of 1982 to the fourth quarter of 1983, M3, which appears to beless distorted by the new accounts...." And then say something like"A tentative range of 4 to 8 percent"--if that's what we have--"hasbeen established for M1 assuming Super NOW accounts are not vigorouslypursued and that the [proposal before the DIDC for] business demanddeposits isn't adopted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Governor Martin raised a question about how M1 is stated and the speaker suggests a different way of stating it. The disagreement is seen in the discussion about how to quantify the residual shifting and whether it should be done in the earlier discussion or not.


Passage number 766.
"MR. PARTEE. Is not adopted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply stating a fact about something not being adopted.


Passage number 767.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is not adopted. It's not "business demanddeposits," but put in whatever the right language is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply clarifying that the term "business demand deposits" is not adopted and suggesting to use the correct language instead.


Passage number 768.
MS. HORN. The implication of that is that Ml is receivingsubstantially less weight than M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is presenting a clear implication about the weight received by M1 and M2, without any apparent contention or disagreement.


Passage number 769.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We say that specifically in the nextparagraph, I think. It comes up again in the next paragraph.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. The statement is about the structure or organization of the passage, indicating that the topic or point being discussed will be addressed in the next paragraph.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 770.
MS. HORN. You'd like me to wait until discussion of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Horn, is expressing a contrasting opinion or preference by saying "You'd like me to wait..." This suggests a disagreement or conflict with the other person's viewpoint or request.


Passage number 771.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can't determine this paragraphindependently of the next one; I think it does have that implication.So, whether or not you like the language in the next paragraph, it'sdesigned to make it consistent with the next paragraph.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their interpretation and suggesting that the language in the next paragraph is meant to align with the following paragraph.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 772.
-68-2/8-9/83MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, that language about the SuperNOWs--if it says we assume nothing happens on that--may compromiseyour position at the moment with the DIDC. Does it bother you at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley expresses concern about the language regarding SuperNOWs potentially compromising the position with the DIDC. This indicates a disagreement between Mr. Gramley and the Chairman.


Passage number 773.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd just say that we had to make someassumption one way or the other.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing a need to make an assumption, without indicating any conflicting opinions or views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 774.
MR. GRAMLEY. But you used the wording that this range makesno allowance for any marketing of Super NOWs for businesses.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.


Passage number 775.
 It wouldbe a little difficult--MR. PARTEE. Not marketing. It's the possibility of them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not display any contention or disagreement. It mentions a potential difficulty but there is no conflicting opinion or argument presented.


Passage number 776.
MR. GRAMLEY. The range makes no allowance for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Gramley about the range not making allowance for something.


Passage number 777.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I didn't mean to give definitelanguage. I haven't any language here, but I don't mean to make itread as though that decision is prejudiced; it's just a factualstatement of what our assumption was in establishing this range. Wecan accomplish that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply clarifying their intention and emphasizing that the decision was not biased.


Passage number 778.
MR. PARTEE. We have to be a little careful, I think, withthe phrase we have about Super NOWs too. Of course, they're beingmarketed now to households.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 779.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I haven't any language written down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a straightforward declaration of not having any language written down.


Passage number 780.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Maybe "assume no unusual...
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not provide any statements or information that would suggest contention or disagreement. It seems to be presenting a neutral statement or viewpoint.


Passage number 781.
"MR. PARTEE. Yes, some institutions would say they're pushingthem pretty heavily.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that some institutions are pushing something heavily without indicating any disagreement or differing opinions.


Passage number 782.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we say "assuming Super NOWaccounts do not draw a substantial amount of funds from outside of MI"or "draw only modest amounts of money from outside of Ml." And Ithink we could say "assuming that interest payment on transactionsaccounts is not extended beyond the present eligibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting alternative statements without expressing any disagreement with the current statement.


Passage number 783.
"MR. PARTEE. Or "extended to corporations and otherbusinesses" or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement present in the passage. The speaker is suggesting an alternative wording ("extended to corporations and other businesses") without expressing any opposition or disagreement with the original statement.


Passage number 784.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Either "corporations or other businesses"or "beyond the present eligibility." It's just meant to be a factualstatement of what our assumption was in establishing a range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating the assumption that was made in establishing a range, without any expression of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 785.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What will you answer if some memberof the [Congressional] Committee said: Does that mean then that inthe DIDC you are going to oppose the extension to corporations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates potential disagreement or contention within the Congressional Committee regarding the extension of corporations in the DIDC.


Passage number 786.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It just means that's the assumption thatwe made.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply explains that the assumption was made.


Passage number 787.
MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no evidence of contention or disagreement in the passage because the dialogue is unintelligible.


Passage number 788.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I probably will say yes, anyway, but thathas nothing to do with this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their intent to say yes regardless of the situation, but acknowledges that it is unrelated to the topic being discussed.


Passage number 789.
-69-2/8-9/83MR. PARTEE. I do believe the comment [on the DIDC proposal]has run pretty much close to this, hasn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is merely confirming that the comment on the DIDC proposal has been discussed extensively and is in line with their understanding.


Passage number 790.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure, but that's my impression. Ihaven't looked at it myself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is expressing uncertainty and lack of personal verification, but it does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 791.
MR. CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: cannot attend the meeting because he has a scheduling conflict.


Passage number 792.
 On the following paragraph that deals with thequestion of emphasis on--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're not quite to the following paragraphyet until I make sure there are no more comments on this one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage is simply stating that the discussion will continue in the following paragraph once all comments on the current paragraph are addressed.


Passage number 793.
MS. TEETERS. Should the range of bank credit go with this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a statement about the range of bank credit.


Passage number 794.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I think we agreed to put that in the[policy record] text earlier, not here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they had agreed to put something in a specific text earlier, rather than the current location being discussed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 795.
 It will go in the summary ofthe discussion or whatever we call it but--MR. PARTEE. It's not a specified target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is a disagreement in the passage. The phrase "It's not a specified target" suggests that someone (presumably Mr. Partee) disagrees with or contradicts a previous statement or proposal regarding a specified target.


Passage number 796.
MR. AXILROD. In the summary we could indicate what the totalcredit would be of which we think bank credit would be about so much.That would take care of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not include any elements of contention or disagreement. It simply suggests a potential solution or strategy, without any opposing viewpoints being presented.


Passage number 797.
MR. BOYKIN. The only question I would raise as far asnumerical sequencing is: Why not address the Ml situation up front--address it first. I realize it's being downplayed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 798.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's the reason. Again, I thinkthat is dependent upon what we say in the next paragraph. I justthink it's better this way if it has a little less emphasis preciselybecause it does have less emphasis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: In this passage, the speaker expresses their opinion and introduces some uncertainty by using phrases like "I think" and "dependent upon." They also mention different possibilities and reasons, indicating the presence of contention or disagreement within their own thoughts.


Passage number 799.
MR. BOYKIN. I guess my basic problem is that I wonder if Iwould give it quite that much less emphasis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing doubt or uncertainty about giving something less emphasis, but there is no explicit disagreement with anyone else's viewpoint.


Passage number 800.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's going to come up in the nextparagraph. Let's turn to the next paragraph, which starts out bysaying "[In implementing monetary policy,] the Committee agreed thatsubstantial weight would be placed on behavior of the broaderaggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply indicating that the topic mentioned will be discussed in the next paragraph.


Passage number 801.
"MR. CORRIGAN. I do have a bit of a problem in terms of thisquestion of emphasis on Ml. As I look at it, we're talking abouttargets in general that at least strike me as being toward the highside in a context in which there's at least a 50-50 chance that we aregoing to get some recovery, if not a fairly robust recovery, invelocity. Now, if we find ourselves in that situation, M1 with allits imperfections and everything else is really the only device touse, in terms of the way we run monetary policy, to be able to snugup.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a personal problem or concern, but there is no indication of disagreement or opposition to another person's viewpoint.


Passage number 802.
 That may develop out in the year some time, but I--MR. PARTEE. But, Jerry, that's a pretty good sentence thereat the top of page 4.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply acknowledges that the sentence at the top of page 4 is well-written.


Passage number 803.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why do you say that. I don't understand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but without the specific passage or topic in question, I cannot determine if there is contention or disagreement. Please provide more information for further assistance.


Passage number 804.
2/8-9/83MR. CORRIGAN. Why do I say it. I guess I have at least adegree of concern that we could run into a problem on the up side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their concern about a potential problem in a cautious manner.


Passage number 805.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but why is that only going to bereflected in M1 and not the other Ms.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence is simply asking for an explanation or clarification without expressing disagreement.


Passage number 806.
MR. CORRIGAN. Well, in terms of open market operations, thefact of the matter is that--take the extreme case where it's not evena question of emphasis but we have nothing there on M1--as a practicalmatter our ability to react in a reasonably effective way to what ishappening with M2 or M3 or credit or whatever is limited.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Corrigan about the limitations of reacting to different economic factors.


Passage number 807.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't understand that. If they'rerunning high, we tighten up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a lack of understanding and suggests a course of action.


Passage number 808.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, let me see if I may help on thispoint. We would lose the automatic adjustment mechanism to a largedegree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Black is simply suggesting that he might be able to provide assistance or clarification on a certain point.


Passage number 809.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage only mentions Chairman Volcker without providing any context or information that could indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 810.
 Less automatic--MR. BLACK. The Committee sets the initial borrowing targetand after that all the Committee has is the automatic part because wedon't participate in any ad hoc adjustments. I sure would like tohave that automatic part fairly strong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 811.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's less automatic; I agree withthat. I think the Committee does participate; it's less automatic butit's there. If we want to use it, it's there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention in the passage. The speaker is expressing their agreement with the idea that the Committee participates, although they acknowledge that it may not be automatic. They also convey the understanding that the option to utilize the Committee's participation is available.


Passage number 812.
MS. HORN. Jerry's point that we're going to need M1 later onfor the upside possibility is one that I agree with. And it seems tome that while we have uncertainty about economic activity and themacro outlook, one of the things we could do as a Committee is saythat we will react to M1 going above the target. We will react lessquickly than we did historically; historically we tried to get it backin [its range] over a 10- to 12-week period between discount rates andreserve movements. We could say we will react less quickly as aCommittee. I'd like to see Ml receive more emphasis than thisdirective puts upon it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Horn is agreeing with Jerry's point about the importance of M1 and suggesting that the committee should react less quickly to its fluctuation.


Passage number 813.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, we're talking about long-range targetsfor the moment. And if Jerry's problem becomes a real one, the way wecan deal with that is in the short-run directive in May or June orDecember or whenever the date is by providing more weight to M1because then we'd get the more automatic response. So long as wehaven't thrown it out, as I suspect [we may have], we're all right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing a potential problem and suggesting a solution, without any opposing or conflicting viewpoints being presented.


Passage number 814.
MR. BOYKIN. But the fact that we are talking long term iswhy it seems to me that just the sequencing of it gives a little moreweight to [its deemphasis]. I'm not arguing about the qualifyinglanguage but since we are looking out for a year, if what Jerry saysdoes materialize, it seems more logical to be consistent and addressMl, M2, and M3 as we traditionally have. I think it would leave theimpression at least that M1 is not as abandoned as it apparently isright now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is an individual expressing their opinion about the sequencing and logical consistency of addressing M1, M2, and M3.


Passage number 815.
-71-2/8-9/83MR. BOEHNE. I think you have to look at where we've comefrom, though. We have deemphasized Ml, in fact, in recent months.And while we may feel a little better about putting M1 back in amonitoring sense, what really has happened over the last 6 weeks thatwould make us jump from essentially not using it at all to putting itback up there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact and giving their opinion about the recent emphasis on M1.


Passage number 816.
MR. BOYKIN. I'm not arguing for jumping that far; I'm justarguing for acknowledging that there is such a thing now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion or perspective on the matter.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 817.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just to put a little balance on thisdiscussion in that direction, my concern about that sentence on thetop of page 4 was that it was too strong. I'd ease it slightly andsay "While the behavior of M1 will be monitored, the weight placed onthat aggregate over time will be dependent on evidence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is a contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses concern about the strength of a sentence on page 4 and suggests an alternative wording.


Passage number 818.
"MR. FORD. What kind of evidence may I ask, Paul. Remember,if you go back not 6 weeks but back to last fall when we were arguingabout M1 in a discussion like this, we were saying that we wereworried about what would happen when the all savers [certificates]matured and we were worried about what would happen with MMDAs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a conversation where one person is asking for clarification about the type of evidence being referred to.


Passage number 819.
 Butwe had double-digit growth of M1 before October and after October,CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My answer to that is that there's noquestion M1 is running high relative to targets. We can make thesetechnical adjustments, but it's running high when you look at thatwhole period. But the relationship between Ml and the economy I don'tthink has settled down, to say the least. And my problem is that Idon't know how soon I would have the intestinal fortitude, if that'sthe right term, to say that I have any conviction on what the velocityis of M1. I'm not [just] assuming that it's distorted by thesetechnical things. If we had an undistorted Ml figure, I'd say: Okay,it's undistorted, but what its relationship is to the economy, I don'tknow at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and lack of conviction about the relationship between M1 and the economy. There is no disagreement with any specific viewpoint or opposing argument.


Passage number 820.
MR. FORD. But what Jerry is saying is: Why should we startout by assuming anything except that velocity is going to make acomeback.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Ford, agreeing with Jerry's perspective on the assumption about velocity making a comeback.


Passage number 821.
 And the weaker language we put in now will probably be--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The target assumes velocity is going tomake a comeback and I assume it's going to make a comeback, rightly orwrongly, to some degree. But on the question of whether the velocityis going to be 1 percent up or 5 percent or 6 percent up, I will tellyou I'm a complete nihilist. That's my problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The author is expressing their uncertainty about the future velocity without arguing against anyone else's opinion or position.


Passage number 822.
MR. FORD. All I'd say, along the lines of what Jerry thinks,is that the farther we let this horse out of the corral, the harderit's going to be to jump back on it when we think we need it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Ford is simply expressing agreement with Jerry's thoughts about the horse.


Passage number 823.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suffer from the disability--I'm sorry--of not understanding Jerry's point in the first place. I don't wantto jump back on it if I don't have any confidence in the darn thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own confusion and lack of understanding, without engaging with someone else's point.


Passage number 824.
MR. CORRIGAN. Let me try to make the point a littledifferently, then. I am thinking out perhaps well into 1983. I'm notworried right now and I probably won't be worried for at least anumber of months. But I could be worried come the summer or sometimewhen I see the velocity rising 4 or 5 percent and we're at the top of-72-2/8-9/83the M1 range. We'd have a mess on our hands at that point to suddenlybe in a position where we have to reemphasize Ml because we want to beable to live with the automatic mechanism in a more direct way. Ithink that is a very difficult position.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their thoughts and concerns about the possibility of a difficult situation arising in the future if certain conditions are met.


Passage number 825.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You would agree, though, that bydefinition if we went back to that situation of giving it that muchemphasis, we would then have more confidence that velocity was tellingus something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply presents a hypothetical situation and suggests that more emphasis on velocity would increase confidence in its accuracy.


Passage number 826.
MR. PARTEE. I think that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply agrees with a statement without expressing any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 827.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So, therefore, one would handle itthe way Lyle Gramley suggested: that if that situation does arise,then it's perfectly consistent with this. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is just suggesting that one should handle the situation in the way Lyle Gramley suggested, implying agreement with his suggestion.


Passage number 828.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you have two parts to yourstatement. The first part I understand--that it's running high and byimplication nominal GNP is running very high and you want to tightenup. I think that's separable from the automaticity issue where youjust say Ml is running high, let's tighten up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges and understands the first part and then goes on to express their thoughts on the second part separately.


Passage number 829.
MR. CORRIGAN. My question is that I'm not sure the extent towhich, in fact, it might be separable. That's what I worry about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. Mr. Corrigan expresses uncertainty and worry about the extent to which something may be separable, but there is no indication of a conflicting opinion or disagreement with another person.


Passage number 830.
MR. PARTEE. I guess I'm somewhat sympathetic with that too.I think this is tending rapidly to become an argument between thosewho like M1 and those who like money market conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It is simply expressing the speaker's personal sympathy towards a certain viewpoint.


Passage number 831.
MR. CORRIGAN. Actually, I don't like Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 832.
MR. PARTEE I would have thought that we might say here "Someweight will be given also to Ml, depending on the performance ofvelocity"--that is, velocity coming back. It's a shading.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 833.
MR. GRAMLEY. Is this simply added weight. If we're settingany kind of target for Ml at all, we presumably are putting somethingother than zero [weight on it].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is raising a question and expressing the need for considering factors other than zero when setting a target for Ml.


Passage number 834.
MR. PARTEE. Well, this doesn't say; it just says it will bemonitored.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply states that the matter will be monitored without expressing any disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 835.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Because it says now "monitored closely,"you see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The word "monitored closely" does not indicate contention or disagreement. It simply implies that something is being closely watched or observed.


Passage number 836.
MR. PARTEE. Some weight, with the amount depending on theextent to which it resumes a predictable velocity relationship. Thatway, you see, we'd be in a position as velocity comes up to give itmore weight. We would have positioned ourselves for it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining a proposal or strategy.


Passage number 837.
MR. CORRIGAN. That's the point I was trying to make. Youjust made it much better than I did.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Both speakers in the passage seem to be in agreement or have a similar understanding.


Passage number 838.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know where we are. I'm abit bothered by the word "closely." That's my only problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about their location and expressing a slight concern about the use of the word "closely." However, there is no disagreement or argument being presented.


Passage number 839.
MR. MARTIN. Yes, let's delete "closely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 840.
"-73-2/8-9/83VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think it helps any, but ifyou want to get your point in, instead of saying some weight we couldsay "with the degree of weight placed on that aggregate over timebeing dependent on...." Is that all right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a request for clarification or permission to change a phrase.


Passage number 841.
MR. CORRIGAN. That helps me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement as the statement made by Mr. Corrigan is not being challenged or contradicted by any other speaker or context.


Passage number 842.
MR. PARTEE. It's the kind of thing we can more easily changeand give more weight to it as time goes on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing an opinion or suggestion about something that can be changed and given more importance over time.


Passage number 843.
MR. GRAMLEY. We could monitor it "carefully" instead of"closely," Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The word "carefully" is suggested as an alternative to "closely," but there is no explicit disagreement or conflicting opinion stated.


Passage number 844.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's just monitor it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The phrase "Let's just monitor it" does not express contention or disagreement. It implies a neutral and non-confrontational approach of simply observing or watching a situation.


Passage number 845.
MR. MARTIN. Well, we do everything carefully.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Martin, is stating that they do everything carefully, implying a sense of cautiousness and attention to detail.


Passage number 846.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have it now reading: "The behavior ofMl will be monitored, with the degree of weight...." Now to thiscredit flow issue. We're on that sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence is a continuation of the previous thought and does not introduce any conflicting ideas or opposing perspectives. It simply transitions to discussing another topic.


Passage number 847.
MR. BALLES. The more I listen to this discussion the more Iwonder whether we are on the wrong foot here. Is it really the degreeof weight that we want to emphasize or is it the appropriate range ofgrowth that would be the thing to concentrate on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Balles is expressing his own wonderment and questioning whether the focus should be on the degree of weight or the appropriate range of growth.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 848.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would argue that appropriate growth,which is obviously relevant here, is covered in this other sentencethat says we're going to look at that again anyway. I think they aretwo different points and I guess it's just a question of where wediscuss the two different points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is disagreement about whether appropriate growth is adequately addressed in the sentence mentioned. The statement "I think they are two different points and I guess it's just a question of where we discuss the two different points" indicates a difference in opinion or interpretation.


Passage number 849.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The [appropriate] range of growth isgoing to depend on what velocity is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating that the range of growth will vary depending on velocity.


Passage number 850.
MR. BALLES. Well, that's right; the two are opposite sidesof the same coin in a way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Balles is stating that two things are opposite sides of the same coin. There is no contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 851.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They both are relevant. My sense, as amatter of drafting, is that this paragraph is directed explicitly tothe degree of weight. In the paragraphs before we said we are goingto have to look at it again in terms of the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing different aspects of the paragraph and stating that both of them are relevant.


Passage number 852.
MR. BALLES(.). True.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It just mentions a person's name.


Passage number 853.
MR. PARTEE. Just in the interest of being clear with mysuggestion--since you didn't adopt it, maybe you didn't understand it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is simply seeking clarity and understanding for his suggestion that was not adopted.


Passage number 854.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The other possibility is that I didn'tlike it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is expressing a personal opinion and there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 855.
MR. PARTEE. Well, that's possible. I assume this is ademocratic matter and, therefore, let me be clear. I would say "Someweight will be given to the behavior of M1 also, with the degree ofemphasis dependent on the extent to which that aggregate over timeshows velocity characteristics resuming more predictable patterns.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 856.
"2/8-9/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will tell you why I don't like it.[Unintelligible] is that I think right away the market is going tosay: What's going on with M1 beginning right now in February. Andit's going to put us in a box; they're going to be looking at thoseweekly figures very closely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and stating that they believe the market will react a certain way. There is no indication of opposing viewpoints or conflicting arguments.


Passage number 857.
MR. MORRIS. That is precisely the danger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is just a statement made by Mr. Morris about a danger. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 858.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's a real danger. Oh, they lovethose numbers, that action.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the subject (the "they" referred to in the sentence) loves numbers and action, and that it poses a danger.


Passage number 859.
MR. MARTIN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without any additional information or context provided, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 860.
 The Reuters tape on Friday afternoon--MR. ROBERTS. Well, you can't assume that's irrationaleither, if the marketplace judges it to be important. I think themarket is concerned currently about the rate of expansion in the moneystock.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement. It simply presents an opinion about the market's concerns.


Passage number 861.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, if we return to the kind ofweekly volatility that we had before, it would seriously impede therecovery. And I don't think it adds anything to our anti-inflationaryposture to have that kind of weekly volatility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement expresses a personal opinion and does not involve any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 862.
MR. ROBERTS. No, but I think we should stay hinged to a rateof growth in Ml, and we've done that. And the assumption, as Iunderstand it, is a resumption of normal velocity. I don't seeanything wrong with that. I think this wording looks all right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Roberts, is expressing agreement with the statement and sees nothing wrong with it.


Passage number 863.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure I see anything wrong with itin the future, which is what I think this wording conveys. I don'tlike the implication that in the next few months we're going to be atthat mercy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve contention or disagreement. It simply expresses the speaker's uncertainty and personal dislike towards a certain implication.


Passage number 864.
MR. GUFFEY. Does what you just said imply that if velocityreturns to some normal pattern based upon historical experience, we'llgo back to targeting Ml as the single aggregate as we did at some timeearlier.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a question posed by Mr. Guffey to clarify a point.


Passage number 865.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It doesn't foreclose that. It doesn't saywe're going to target it as the single aggregate; I don't think weever did.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that something is not being ruled out, and there is no indication of opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 866.
MR. GUFFEY. Primary is right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the opinion that "Primary is right" without any conflicting viewpoints being presented.


Passage number 867.
 I think I would opposegetting back--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We say that, but I'm not even sure howtrue that is. Look at 1981. M1 was running low and we said: Well,let it run low because the other aggregates are running high. That'sexplicitly what we said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and questioning a previous statement or belief.


Passage number 868.
MR. GUFFEY. We were also working against inflation then andwere all willing to see Ml run low to try to achieve lower prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. All the individuals mentioned ("we") were willing to see Ml (money supply) run low in order to achieve lower prices.


Passage number 869.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That was certainly a factor in it, butthat's not what we said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that while the factor mentioned was considered, it is not the exact statement that was made.


Passage number 870.
-75-2/8-9/83MR. GUFFEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 871.
 My point is that if this is taken to mean thatif the one condition is met--that velocity returns to some normalpattern--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A predictable pattern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The sentence simply states the point and condition without any conflicting ideas.


Passage number 872.
MR. GUFFEY. --a predictable or historical pattern--then Mlassumes some importance, as I think it did before, then I think someadditional language might be appropriate. In fact, I rather likeChuck's language of emphasis rather than characterizing it as is donehere in this sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is discussing and evaluating the use of certain language in a potentially relevant context.


Passage number 873.
MR. MORRIS. My only problem with it, Mr. Chairman, is that Idon't see that we have a basis for differentiating Ml and M2. Thatis, M2's velocity is certainly as unreliable in this situation asMl's.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any disagreement or contention. Mr. Morris is expressing his concern or problem with differentiating M1 and M2, specifically in terms of their velocity reliability. However, there is no argument or contrary viewpoint presented in this statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 874.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me ask a question. I just don't know.I guess we're saying the opposite.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is a disagreement in the passage. The statement "I guess we're saying the opposite" suggests that there is a difference in opinion or viewpoint between the speaker and someone else.


Passage number 875.
MR. GRAMLEY. All we need is a sentence here that keeps ouroptions open. I think we're arguing much too hard about details ofthe language. We want to keep the options open.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a desire to keep their options open and suggesting that arguing about language details is unnecessary.


Passage number 876.
MR. BOEHNE. What about an approach something like this:"The behavior of Ml will be monitored closely. Should evidence[emerge] that velocity characteristics are resuming more predictablepatterns, the Committee will reopen the issue of the weight that itwill place on Ml." I'd suggest something like that, which pushes tosome future point a discussion of where Ml fits, depending on what theevidence is. I think that connotes the idea that it's not being givena whole lot of weight in the very current period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply stating a suggestion made by Mr. Boehne and discussing the possibility of adjusting the weight given to Ml depending on future evidence. There is no opposing view or disagreement present.


Passage number 877.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't have any particular problem withwhat you're proposing. It seems to me it is virtually identical towhat we have here. I would, frankly, take out the word "closely,"which I think maybe confuses the issue at the moment. But insubstance what you said is the same as what this sentence says. It'sa drafting preference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses agreement with the proposal and suggests a minor revision. Overall, the tone is cooperative and there is no indication of a conflicting point of view.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 878.
MR. BOEHNE. I think, though, that my approach does give acoloration to it that the Committee is keeping open the whole issue ofthe weight that it's going to give to Ml. This [wording] gives anautomaticity to it that if certain preconceived conditions arise, thenthe Committee will automatically go back to Ml. My wording pushesthat decision into the future, should that evidence exist.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in this passage. Mr. Boehne disagrees with the suggestion that the Committee will automatically go back to Ml if certain conditions arise. He argues that his wording pushes that decision into the future, implying that it should only be made if there is evidence to support it.


Passage number 879.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You interpret it as a diminution of Ml atthe moment.SPEAKER(.). Postpone it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker interprets something as a diminution of Ml and suggests postponing it. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument present.


Passage number 880.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We have a clear split here betweenthose who want to imply a stronger possibility of a return both to anemphasis on Ml and a greater degree of automaticity and others whosimply want to be neutral about keeping the options open. I guessthat's what the argument is about. I tend to agree with the secondview. And I had thought that was the thrust of the consensus view-76-2/8-9/83generally--that we don't want to imply to the market that we are beingextremely sensitive and that there is a near-term probability. I dowant to be neutral on Ml. The big question in the market is: Howlong is the Fed going to continue its current approach to monetarypolicy as opposed to at what point do they [return] to some moreautomatic emphasis on Ml. It seems to me that in the face of that, weought to be carefully neutral.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that there are different views regarding the emphasis on Ml and automaticity, but states their agreement with the second view and the consensus view. The speaker also expresses their desire to remain neutral on Ml. There is no indication of conflicting opinions or arguments in the passage.


Passage number 881.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As I interpret it, the sentence asmodified by Mr. Partee suggested a stronger Ml and I guess Mr. Boehneinterprets his suggestions as being weaker on Ml. And what we have isin the middle. So, I guess I'm left in the middle. If I don't hearviolent objections, I'm left with the question of whether the word"closely" is in or out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply sharing their interpretation of the situation and expressing their uncertainty about whether or not the word "closely" should be included.


Passage number 882.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would hope it would not be in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses their hope, implying a positive sentiment or desire.


Passage number 883.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would [too].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "I would [too]" does not reveal any contention or disagreement. It simply indicates agreement or a shared sentiment.


Passage number 884.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I happen to agree, as I said earlier.I just think that the market is extremely sensitive to the question ofwhether we are leaning back toward Ml again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses the speaker's agreement with a previous statement and their opinion on the market's sensitivity.


Passage number 885.
MR. PARTEE. If we don't put it in, it sounds as if we'repaying about the same amount of attention to M1 as we are to the totalcredit flow. We are also saying that we are monitoring that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no evident contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a perspective or concern regarding how the attention is being distributed between M1 and total credit flow.


Passage number 886.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We can say "carefully," though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply suggests using the word "carefully" as a descriptor.


Passage number 887.
MR. PARTEE. Carefully, as opposed to our usual sloppy--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is just describing a change in behavior, without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 888.
MR. FORD. You can intentionally monitor your speedometerwhile going 85.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Ford, providing an instruction or suggestion related to monitoring one's speedometer while traveling at 85 mph.


Passage number 889.
MR. GRAMLEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot determine.


Passage number 890.
 You can even monitor it while--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. We have all the options.We can not look at the speedometer, we can look at it, or we can lookat it very closely or we can look at it carefully.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 891.
MR. WALLICH.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 892.
 No, I think this states that--MR. FORD. The question is where you put your foot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by Mr. Ford is a simple question about where someone puts their foot. There is no indication of any argument or conflicting views.


Passage number 893.
MR. WALLICH. Where we ought to be guided in choosing theseoptions is that for a while we'd just be looking at it and it may bevery high. It can't go on very high indefinitely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is stating a fact or observation about the situation.


Passage number 894.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the word "monitored" assumes thatif you look at the speedometer you pay some attention to it now andthen. It's just the degree of attention you want to pay to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing their opinion and explanation regarding the word "monitored" and its implication of paying occasional attention to the speedometer.


Passage number 895.
MR. FORD. It depends on whether it's a governor on themotor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the outcome depends on whether there is a governor on the motor.


Passage number 896.
MR. WALLICH. Yes, the degree changes over time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the degree changes over time without any contrasting viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 897.
2/8-9/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think the issue is whether"closely" is in there. We can substitute "carefully." How many want"closely" in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker is questioning whether the word "closely" should be included and suggests substituting it with "carefully." The question at the end, "How many want 'closely' in there," further indicates a disagreement or difference of opinion among the group.


Passage number 898.
MR. MORRIS. I would suggest "casually.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. The statement by Mr. Morris is a suggestion, which does not imply any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 899.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I interpret that as a vote against"closely." Who wants "closely" out. You want it out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the interpretation of someone's opinion.


Passage number 900.
MR. MORRIS. I don't have a vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The person simply states that they do not have a vote.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 901.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, everybody will vote in this general[poll]. Who wants "closely" in. I guess we have a majority to takeit out, but that was not the most overwhelming vote I ever saw.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they have a majority to take out the word "closely," implying that not everyone agrees on its inclusion. Additionally, the speaker mentions that it was not the most overwhelming vote they have ever seen, suggesting that there might be differing opinions on the matter.


Passage number 902.
MR. BLACK. Could we say that some members will monitor itfervently.SPEAKER(.). Closely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 903.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's go on to credit flows for themoment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement suggesting a shift in focus to credit flows.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 904.
MR. CORRIGAN. Is the word "degree" in that sentence or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Corrigan is questioning whether the word "degree" is present in the mentioned sentence.


Passage number 905.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I assume that we're using "degreeof.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: undeniability" in the sense of the highest possible degree of certainty.


Passage number 906.
"MR. CORRIGAN. "With the degree of weight," okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement or clarification made by Mr. Corrigan.


Passage number 907.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That implies, I guess, some weight rightfrom the beginning. Well, I now have it without the "closely" butwith "the degree of" in there. On credit flows, this question hasarisen before, and here is the sentence that's supposed to answer thequestion: "Credit flows, while not directly targeted, will beevaluated in judging responses to the monetary aggregates." That'sone of the more declarative sentences, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their thoughts and providing an example without expressing any opposing views or conflicts.


Passage number 908.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's nice and straightforward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is described as "nice and straightforward," indicating that it is clear and without any conflicting ideas or opposing views.


Passage number 909.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any comment on that sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Since there is no actual sentence provided in the prompt, there is no content or information to be either agreed or disagreed with. Thus, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 910.
MR. BLACK. Shouldn't we spend a couple of hours discussingwhether [evaluated] carefully or not so carefully.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions a suggestion to spend time discussing something, but it does not mention any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 911.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Last sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The last sentence of a passage is not enough to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage. It would require analyzing the entire passage to make a judgment about any contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 912.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think we ought to leave in what isbracketed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it is a statement expressing the speaker's opinion. The phrase "what is bracketed" implies that there is additional information or content that the speaker believes should be included. However, without the specific content that is being referred to, it is not possible to determine the nature of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 913.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If what is bracketed is left in, just inthe interest of clarity, it ought to say "including evaluation ofconditions in domestic credit and foreign exchange markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply suggesting a clarification for the inclusion of certain information.


Passage number 914.
"VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We are doing that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 915.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you want to leave that. I think we aredoing it now. Is that the consensus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply seeking clarification on whether the current action being done is what everyone agrees on.


Passage number 916.
2/8-9/83MR. MARTIN. It would be incomplete without it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that something (presumably a statement or a discussion) would be incomplete without something else, without providing any conflicting perspectives or opinions.


Passage number 917.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that completes the long-term ranges.Let me go back after all this discussion [to the numbers]. We put intentatively: 7 to 10 percent for M2, with a February-March base; 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent for M3; 4 to 8 percent for Ml, with a note at theend of that. I take it we're using "estimated" instead of"established" for the 8-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent range for credit. Andin the text of the discussion [in the policy record] that will berationalized with the present range for bank credit. And that does,as a matter of fact, correspond pretty much--maybe exactly--toalternative I. I note again that most of you at this point have aslightly higher GNP [forecast], nominal and real, than the staffestimated in establishing the alternative II ranges. Unless anybodyhas a further question, we ought to vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is summarizing the ranges and clarifying the terminology being used, but there is no indication of disagreement or debate among the participants.


Passage number 918.
MR. WALLICH. I find confusing the reference to credit flows.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement from Mr. Wallich expressing his confusion regarding a reference to credit flows.


Passage number 919.
Is that specifically what we mention as total--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where are you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking for clarification.


Passage number 920.
MR. MARTIN. Page 4.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 921.
MR. WALLICH. It's on page 4. We have "Credit flows, whilenot directly targeted, will be evaluated." Are these credit flows thetotal domestic nonfinancial debt. If so, then I think we ought torepeat that because the way it is stated in the earlier paragraph, itlooks like a quasi-target. And here we are saying we are nottargeting it directly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich points out that the way the earlier paragraph is stated, it seems like credit flows are being quasi-targeted, but the subsequent sentence contradicts this by saying that credit flows are not directly targeted. This disagreement revolves around the interpretation of the earlier paragraph and its implications on the targeting of credit flows.


Passage number 922.
MR. GRAMLEY. But we use "associated range of growth" on theprevious page.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the term "associated range of growth" without any argument or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 923.
 I think it's just a reiteration, making clear thatthis--MR. WALLICH. But the distinction is that "associated range"is the same as "not directly targeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply explains the distinction between "associated range" and "not directly targeting." There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 924.
"MR. PARTEE. You would like to use the same title.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating a statement or preference.


Passage number 925.
MR. WALLICH. Yes. It's only known to this group.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging that the information being discussed is known only to the group present.


Passage number 926.
MR. BALLES. There's a different problem too. On page 3 wetalk about total domestic nonfinancial debt and on page 4 we talkabout credit flows. We know that we mean the same thing; I wonder ifreaders will.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Balles is simply pointing out that there may be confusion for readers when the terms "total domestic nonfinancial debt" and "credit flows" are used to refer to the same thing.


Passage number 927.
MR. WALLICH. Exactly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 928.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't really care, but I don't know whenthose data come in. Presumably, we'd be looking at credit flowsagainst the background of that range; we get some clues without havingthat precise number [for total domestic nonfinancial debt] in front ofus. It sounds awfully technical to me to repeat total domesticnonfinancial debt. But if that's what you want to put in, I'mperfectly happy to put it in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a lack of interest in the specifics of the data and is open to including the specified information if desired.


Passage number 929.
MR. WALLICH.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context in the passage provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 930.
 That leads to this---79-2/8-9/83MS. TEETERS. Why don't we put "credit flows" as the title.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement and question simply suggest putting "credit flows" as the title, without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions being presented.


Passage number 931.
MR. BALLES. We could just call it "debt expansion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage does not contain any contradictory or opposing statements. The speaker suggests a possible name for something, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 932.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Debt expansion." That's fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states "Debt expansion."


Passage number 933.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, it's closer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply agrees with the statement by saying "Yes, it's closer."


Passage number 934.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Rather than getting all that technicalabout it, "debt expansion" is fine. If there are no other comments, Iguess we can vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is suggesting that using the term "debt expansion" is acceptable and if no one else has any objections or comments, the group can proceed with a vote.


Passage number 935.
MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Balles YesPresident Black NoPresident Ford NoGovernor Gramley YesPresident Horn NoGovernor Martin YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich NoFour against.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The responses are simply listing the opinions or votes of each individual.


Passage number 936.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right, we will go to the immediate[policy]. I don't know whether we need any more discussion from Mr.Axilrod at this point or whether we need a coffee break.SPEAKER(.). Yes, I think so.SPEAKER(.). [I need] a lot of that coffee, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing a need for coffee.


Passage number 937.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we have a brief coffee break.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple question suggesting the idea of taking a coffee break. There is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 938.
[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We live in a wonderful world where settingshort-term targets is affected by the last figure we have. We live ina world in which we've just changed all the seasonals and patterns andall the rest. As a preliminary, Mr. Axilrod ought to discuss withoutthe latest numbers, which we'll tell you about in a minute, what allthese revisions did to last year's numbers and [this year's numbers]to date.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information about the changes in seasonal patterns and the need to discuss revisions without the latest numbers.


Passage number 939.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, the benchmark revisions, whichwere put in the appendix to the Bluebook, lowered the growth in M2from 9.8 to 9.2 percent, largely because of the exclusion of IRA/Keoghaccounts for the year; they had no effect on Ml, which grew at about8-1/2 percent, and reduced M3 growth for the year as you see from 10.3to 10.1 percent. However, for M1 within the year there were verysharp changes in the seasonal pattern, which changed the months andquarters to a substantial degree. The growth for Q4, which on the oldseasonal pattern had been 16.1 percent, changed to 13.2 percent. TheJanuary growth for Ml was reduced to 9-1/2 percent from the higher2/8-9/83number, 12-1/2 percent, that it had been before the seasonal revision.These changes in the seasonal pattern were reflected also in theweekly data. You may remember that the last week published, the weekof the 26th [of January], showed an increase of $2.7 billion for Ml.Now it has a decrease of $2.6 billion but the preliminary data we haveshow substantial increases thereafter for the weeks of February 2ndand February 9th, suggesting that we're on track toward a higher M1 inFebruary whereas we had revised down the January growth by 3 pointsand thought it would continue at the lower growth rate. The data forearly February on the revised benchmarks and seasonals suggest thatwe're on a higher track for February than the estimate of around 6percent we had in the Bluebook. I don't have additional data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting data and observations without expressing any contrary opinions or conflicting views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 940.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There are several points. The growth inM1 in the last quarter of last year has been revised substantiallydown. It's still high, but instead of 16 percent it's 12-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is a disagreement in the passage. The first sentence states that there are several points, implying that there may be multiple perspectives or differing opinions. This is confirmed in the second sentence when it states that the growth in M1 has been revised substantially down. The discrepancy between the initial value of 16 percent and the revised value of 12-1/2 percent suggests a disagreement or contention regarding the actual growth rate.


Passage number 941.
MR. AXILROD. 13 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only states the percentage "13 percent" and does not provide any information or context that would suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 942.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's something like that, if I remember.January, with the radical revision of data for the week of the 26th,which may or may not be right, is now less than 10 percent instead ofover 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is providing information about the revised data for the week of the 26th, indicating that it may or may not be accurate. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this statement.


Passage number 943.
MR. AXILROD. 9-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only includes a statement that does not involve any disagreement or contention. It simply states a number, 9-1/2 percent, without any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 944.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But you show, [if] one can believe it,that the radical revision is promptly offset the following week, whichgoes into February, with a further increase the following week of somesubstantial size. That now makes February look higher than January.The data are subject to equally radical changes in the rest ofFebruary. What to make out of all of this, I don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is uncertain about what to make of the data, but they are not expressing disagreement or contention with another person or idea.


Passage number 945.
MR. AXILROD. It makes it difficult, Mr. Chairman, on theface of it to think that Ml is going to slow substantially in Februaryand March on average from January.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Axilrod discussing the difficulty of expecting a substantial slowdown in February and March compared to January.


Passage number 946.
MS. TEETERS. Do you have a revised M2 for January, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply a question asking for a revised M2 for January from Steve.


Passage number 947.
MR. AXILROD. Not at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response "Not at this point" suggests that there may have been disagreement or uncertainty in the past, but currently, there is no contention.


Passage number 948.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we return to what we want to do.When do we meet again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing a desire to discuss when they will meet again.


Passage number 949.
MR. BERNARD. The end of March--March 29th.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is simply a statement of a date.


Passage number 950.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. March 29th.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the given passage as no passage is provided.


Passage number 951.
 A period of--MR. MARTIN. Close to seven weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a period of time, close to seven weeks.


Passage number 952.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Seven weeks exactly. I don't quite knowwhat numbers to put in here. And the question is whether we need anynumbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is expressing uncertainty or lack of knowledge about which numbers to use.


Passage number 953.
MR. WALLICH. I would agree with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their agreement.


Passage number 954.
2/8-9/83MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, maybe Steve could explain to ushow he intends to operate. It might help us decide what kind ofnumbers we put in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a simple request for clarification and assistance in making a decision.


Passage number 955.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, how he intends to operate dependsupon what we decide here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is discussing a potential future action that will depend on the decision made in the current context.


Passage number 956.
MR. PARTEE. Bring in borrowings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the action of bringing in borrowings.


Passage number 957.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Basically, thinking back to theamendment we adopted at the last conference call, we talked aboutseeking to maintain existing reserve conditions and not increasing therestraint. That comes closest to what we are really doing, assumingthat we continue with the $200 million borrowing assumption. If itwere our judgment that we wanted to press toward some more easing, weshould adopt something lower, say, $100 or $150 million. If we wantto defer that easing, okay, we can defer it. But it seems to me thatthe operation is best summed up either in the first sentence of theparagraph the way it is now or we could go back to the languageadopted in the amendment in the last conference call.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 958.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without numbers, you're saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas. It simply states a fact that without numbers, someone is saying something.


Passage number 959.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I have a very mixed feeling about thenumbers. I realize that we really can't drop the number for M2 andleave one in for Ml and M3 without confusing people; they'll think weare paying more attention to M1 and M3 than we are. So, I suppose wereally either have to drop them all or leave them in. But we have tomake clear that they will not govern and won't override what isbasically an intention to continue with the existing degree ofrestraint or, if the aggregates slow down sufficiently, to ease. So,even though I realize that the word "contemplated" that has been putin achieves in a certain sense what I'm talking about, I'm not surethat "contemplated" is quite the right verb. Perhaps "were expected"or [unintelligible] "experienced".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 960.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me just put on the table analternate proposal for the first sentence and at least explore what wewant to do in substance. Suppose we just say "For the more immediatefuture, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degree of reserverestraint expecting that that will be consistent with some slowing ofthe aggregates." If we want to go further and consider what would bevery nice if it happens, "Lesser restraint would be acceptable in thecontext of appreciable slowing of growth in the aggregates." Itleaves open the question of how we quantify this or whether wequantify it at all in the directive. I think what that says is thatwe don't want to tighten up in this next seven-week period as we seeit now and we don't want to ease up unless the aggregates turn in afavorable direction. I would make that view fairly explicit. We canput in the numbers or not put in the numbers, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting an alternate proposal and exploring different options without expressing disagreement or opposing views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 961.
MR. PARTEE. What was the alternative you suggested. Iunderstood the first thing and then you suggested something else thatI didn't quite understand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement or confusion between the speaker (Mr. Partee) and another person, as indicated by Mr. Partee's statement about not understanding the alternative suggestion.


Passage number 962.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The other thing is not an alternative; itjust takes care of another possibility--a further [action] not fortoday. The first one says we will maintain the existing degree of2/8-9/83reserve restraint; the second one says lesser restraint would beacceptable in the context of appreciable slowing of growth in theaggregates. That would not be for today but if the aggregates came inlow in the next three or four weeks, we would ease.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply stating two different possibilities or options, with one being an alternative and the other being a further action to be considered in the future.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 963.
MR. PARTEE. Your first sentence was "[existing degree of]reserve restraint expecting that this will...
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of the word "expecting" implies that there is a difference of opinion or uncertainty about the outcome of the reserve restraint.


Passage number 964.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Expecting; that's not promising, butexpecting. Just to be clear, I think the second part would reflect aview that right now we don't want to tighten, which is implied by theexisting language but is not quite as clear. If we're putting in bothsentences, it says we don't want to tighten right now but we docontemplate easing if the aggregates are noticeably, or quite visibly,soft.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or opposing viewpoints. It simply discusses the speaker's thoughts on the existing language and suggests adding sentences to clarify their stance on tightening or easing measures.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 965.
MR. ROBERTS. Is that soft relative to those earlier targets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The word "soft" suggests a lower intensity or a less strict approach. The question implies that the speaker is questioning whether the current targets are too lenient compared to previous ones. This indicates a disagreement or contention regarding the target's level of difficulty or effectiveness.


Passage number 966.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have to decide whether to put inthe numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that a decision needs to be made regarding putting in the numbers.


Passage number 967.
MR. PARTEE. What is soft.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question, seeking clarification or information.


Passage number 968.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is soft.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The question is subjective and open-ended, so there is no clear basis for contention or disagreement.


Passage number 969.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, M2 is bound to be slower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This statement is a simple observation that M2 is bound to be slower. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 970.
MR. PARTEE. It'll drop from 30 percent to some lower number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that the percentage will decrease, without any contradictory views or arguments present.


Passage number 971.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. [Unintelligible] flows, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, the passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 972.
MR. PARTEE. We certainly do want to be concerned about thepossibility of a relapse. That was mentioned a couple of timesyesterday, by Lyle and I think by you, Paul. And I agreed that it'sconceivable that after this goes on for a month or two there could bea relapse in the economy. And we want to guard against that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 973.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the probabilities are that we arebeginning a recovery. But I would not discount at all the [other]possibility; the atmosphere changed radically from the last time wemet. If something so simple as car sales were to come in at between5-1/2 to 6 million, the third consecutive month of decline, andsuddenly production schedules are no longer increased in theautomobile industry but decreased, and housing doesn't do much more inthe next month, people's moods will change rather sharply, I suspect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges the possibility of the recovery being delayed or disrupted if there are continued declines in car sales and housing.


Passage number 974.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would opt for the second sentencein addition to the first. I think it makes our intention clear. Andthen we leave open the degree of appreciable slowing and how weinterpret that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses their preference for including the second sentence alongside the first to clarify their intention. They then suggest leaving room for interpretation when it comes to the degree of appreciable slowing, but this does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 975.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comments. There must be somecomments. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a request for further comments or input.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 976.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, I'm not sure I understand what you've doneto this language. If we retain the language consistent with thecurrent degree of restraint, that suggests that there isn't anyflexibility for easing and achieving a discount rate decrease, for-83-2/8-9/83example, because we would provide reserves in such a way as tomaintain the current interest rate levels unless we saw the aggregatescoming in much, much slower or at least slower than now. That seemsto me in the period ahead to be somewhat unlikely to any appreciableextent. I come out on the side of wanting to ensure recovery andthus, although [a discount rate action] is the Board's prerogative,wanting to see some additional downward movement in short-term ratesto ensure that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: In the passage, Mr. Guffey expresses his uncertainty and lack of understanding about the language being used. He also presents a differing opinion about the potential for a discount rate decrease. This indicates that there is disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 977.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right, look: I think the issue shouldbe clear. The alternative language that I propose says, I think, whatyou said it says. It says that we will maintain the existing degreeof restraint unless the aggregates come in lower in some sense than wenow expect. And that doesn't give room, probably, for a discount ratecut to the extent that that's [not] consistent. If I understand youcorrectly, you're saying this is a little tighter than you would liketo see it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply clarifying their understanding of the proposed alternative language.


Passage number 978.
MR. GUFFEY. Yes, indeed it is. I'd like to see languagethat would permit us, without regard to what the aggregates do, insome period ahead when a window comes open again to move rates to asomewhat lower level, whether it be 50 basis points--. It doesn'tsound like much, but it has a psychological impact.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Guffey expressing his desire to have language that would allow for the possibility of lowering rates in the future.


Passage number 979.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You say regardless of what the aggregatesdo. You are in effect saying, if I understand you correctly, thatwhat we ought to say in this first sentence is that we will easereserve pressures a bit right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any specific contention or disagreement. It is a statement about what the speaker understands the other person to be saying.


Passage number 980.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Or leave open the possibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 981.
MR. GUFFEY. Leave open the possibility; that's correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Guffey is suggesting leaving the possibility open, indicating agreement or openness to a particular idea or option.


Passage number 982.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Leave it open on the basis of whatcriteria.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that something should be left open based on criteria, without presenting any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 983.
 How does it differ from doing it--MR. PARTEE. Well, we've left it open in Paul's language--that is, if we get weak aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is describing a possible difference in doing something without providing any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 984.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we get weak aggregates, it is leftopen, but I think really what Roger is saying is do it now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that if weak aggregates are obtained, the possibility of leaving it open is left for consideration. They also express their belief that what Roger is saying is to do it now. The passage does not present opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 985.
MR. PARTEE. I would want to communicate my position as notagreeing with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker explicitly states that they do not agree with something, indicating there is disagreement or contention.


Passage number 986.
MR. GUFFEY. It seems the only thing that we can control atthe moment is interest rates. Our biggest objective, as far as I'mconcerned, is to ensure a recovery. And if we're all hung up onwaiting for the aggregates to show us some diminution in their growth,then we've given up the only thing we can do to aid the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Guffey, expresses his belief that the only thing they can control at the moment is interest rates and that their biggest objective is to ensure a recovery. He also emphasizes that waiting for the aggregates to show a decrease in growth is not productive and suggests taking action to aid the economy.


Passage number 987.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's a clear point of view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement simply indicates that someone has a clear perspective or opinion on a particular matter. It does not suggest any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 988.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Then the implication, Roger, is thatyou wouldn't put in numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any numbers or provide any information that could indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 989.
MR. GUFFEY. I think that's correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Guffey agrees with the statement being made.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 990.
 And I'd maybe not putany language in that suggests that we'll continue this restraint until2/8-9/83we see the aggregates growing at some lower rate, because that alsowould--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, yes, I think you're forced to that.Just to be clear: I'm not arguing for or against it at this point. Ithink you have to put in some language that says we would seek toreduce--or I suppose you could live with this language if the discountrate is reduced, which isn't your decision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. One person suggests putting language that suggests a need for restraint until a certain date, while another person argues against it and suggests alternative language or conditions.


Passage number 991.
MR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 992.
 [Unintelligible] true, but it's--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think technically in the firstsentence or two it could be maintain the reserve restraint but we'd doit with a lower discount rate. We would just go ahead and reduce thediscount rate on some bright day. I think that would satisfy Roger'sposition, as I understand it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting a possible solution that they believe would satisfy Roger's position.


Passage number 993.
MR. GUFFEY. Yes, I think that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply agrees with the statement that was made previously.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 994.
MR. WALLICH. I think it would take a real collapse of thegrowth rate of the aggregates to justify reducing interest rates underpresent conditions. That could happen; we shouldn't preclude it. Butif the aggregates remain half-way strong and the economy expandsmoderately, I don't think that's the time to reduce interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents a disagreement or contention between the speaker, Mr. Wallich, and the idea of reducing interest rates. Mr. Wallich believes that a collapse in the growth rate of the aggregates might justify reducing interest rates, while also acknowledging that if the aggregates remain strong and the economy expands moderately, it would not be the time to reduce interest rates.


Passage number 995.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I wouldn't go quite as far as Roger,myself. But what we might do is to say that lesser restraint would beappropriate if justified by monetary, credit, and other conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. The speaker simply states that they do not fully agree with Roger's stance but suggests a different possibility.


Passage number 996.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In fact, what we could say is that lesserrestraint would be acceptable in the context of appreciable slowing inthe growth of the aggregates or signs of more business weakness, orwords to that effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply suggests that a lesser restraint may be acceptable given certain conditions such as slowing of growth or signs of business weakness.


Passage number 997.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think we have to be thatexplicitly honest. All we're trying to do is not lock ourselves in ornot close the door to the possibility that we might want to cut ratesin some way or other even if the monetary aggregates were notappreciably slowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing their opinion that they do not believe it is necessary to be explicitly honest. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 998.
MR. GUFFEY. I would go one step further and suggest that wedo want to cut the rates without regard to the aggregates because wehave no control over those. Our focus should be on the economy andthe recovery. I, at least, would have cut the discount rate two tothree weeks ago. But the Board didn't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 999.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The only thing I disagree with hereis that I think we can't make too sharp a break. If we get tooexplicit in disregarding the monetary aggregates, I think it's goingto cause adverse market reactions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they disagree with disregarding monetary aggregates, as they believe it may cause adverse market reactions.


Passage number 1000.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, I understand that point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Guffey simply states that he understands a certain point, without expressing any disagreement or conflicting view.


Passage number 1001.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And, therefore, I think we ought tobe a little more generalized in our language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not suggest any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests the need for more generalized language.


Passage number 1002.
MR. GRAMLEY. I certainly agree with Roger's objective thatwe want to ensure a recovery. But I would argue that 50 basis points-85-2/8-9/83on short-term interest rates is not going to do the job. If we don'thave interest rates low enough now to provide reasonable assurance ofa recovery, then let's forget about 50 basis points on short-terminterest rates and knock them down 200 basis points; I would agreewith trying to go to a 50 basis point reduction only if that were afirst step in a substantial further easing of interest rates. Andfrankly, I don't think that's necessary. The best thing we can do nowis to provide some assurance that interest rates are not going torocket upward. To provide a signal that we're going to knock themdown now and then maybe knock them up again a week from now is goingto shake markets much worse than leaving them where they are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses agreement with Roger's objective of ensuring a recovery. Then, the speaker provides their own opinion on the specific amount of interest rate reduction, suggesting that a larger reduction may be more effective. However, they acknowledge that a smaller reduction could be acceptable if it is part of a larger plan for further easing of interest rates. Overall, the passage does not demonstrate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 1003.
MR. BOEHNE. I have a lot of sympathy for what Roger issaying. I think the recovery is at a very fragile point. I don'tthink it's a fact yet, though we probably will have one. Butexpectations about what is going to happen are very important. Andwhile there may be some risks of a perverse reaction in long-term bondmarkets, I think the business community needs a bit of assurance, aray of hope, a signal, that interest rates certainly are not going togo higher. A little tilt downward at this point, including a discountrate [cut], would provide that signal. I don't think that necessarilymeans a commitment to go 200 basis points further. This recovery isat a very critical stage in terms of psychology in the businesscommunity, and the consumer community needs a little psychologicallift. I think a tilt toward ease would serve that need very nicely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Boehne, expresses sympathy for what Roger is saying and agrees that the recovery is at a fragile point. He also agrees that providing assurance and hope to the business and consumer communities through a slight decrease in interest rates would be beneficial.


Passage number 1004.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me put the question more modestly thanthat, without disregarding that question. Do we want, in effect, toforeclose a tightening in the coming weeks.SEVERAL. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

While the passage presents a question and acknowledges that there are several possible answers, it does not suggest any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 1005.
MR. PARTEE. For the next seven weeks, yes, I would.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply stating his availability for the next seven weeks.


Passage number 1006.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that the general feeling. If we knowthat much, we know quite a lot. If we want to do that, I'm inclinedto think some variant of this alternative language I suggested, whichsays that fairly plainly, is probably right. That leaves open thequestion of whether we want to go further, but it says that much atthe minimum. So, if I judge you correctly, that's agreed. Now wehave this Roger Guffey-Ed Boehne kind of approach. Let's have morediscussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1007.
MR. ROBERTS. I think that's just dead wrong, Mr. Chairman,because if we just control interest rates without consideration of theaggregates, the markets will take over in terms of expectations--Ithink it's already happening in the long market--and raise interestrates and that will be self-defeating and abort the recovery. We'dget exactly the reverse of what we want. The Board could lower thediscount rate to zero, but if it has nothing to do with market rates,it doesn't mean anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Roberts disagrees with the Chairman's assertion about controlling interest rates without considering aggregates. He argues that it would be self-defeating and abort the recovery if market rates were to increase.


Passage number 1008.
MR. PARTEE. Without being quite that strong, I would remindyou that we just had a chart show that gave us a reasonablyrespectable performance for the economy. I believe it was said thatalmost everybody here had [projected] growth rates somewhat above whatthe chart show indicated. January certainly is a strong month. Itdoesn't seem to me obvious at all that rates need to be lower to bring2/8-9/83on a recovery. It may be that they will have to be lower but itdoesn't seem obvious that they have to be. In the meantime, I agreewith Ted that the market is becoming pretty apprehensive about theseaggregates. And for us just to abandon them altogether I think willbe certainly a featured comment in the market and could give acounterproductive result.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their own opinion and agreement with another individual.


Passage number 1009.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I doubt it, but I'm confused. Just now Ithought I didn't hear any objection--I just heard one, Mr. Roberts--onnot tightening in this period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contentious or disagreement statements. It is merely expressing confusion and uncertainty about whether there was any objection to tightening in the given period.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1010.
MR. FORD. Well, I disagree with that. But I think you'reright that the consensus is there. I thought you were asking "Is thatthe consensus." And I think it is. But I personally disagree with itbecause I think we face the possibility of a very vigorous [economy].Suppose these events continue and all these things--the real thingsthat we lack such as housing starts and auto sales--start to take offcoupled with all the aggregates, however defined, continuing to growat scary rates. Then what would you do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The person saying "Well, I disagree with that" indicates that they have a differing opinion from the previous statement. They also express their personal disagreement later in the passage by saying "But I personally disagree with it."


Passage number 1011.
MR. GUFFEY. But we're only talking about between now and theend of March.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only states that they are discussing a specific timeframe, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1012.
MR. FORD. That's quite a critical period. At the risk ofembarrassing John, who may want to refute what I'm going to say, hewas just showing me some research that he likes, which seems toindicate that the traditional problem the Fed has faced in the past isoverstaying ease because we're always talking about what is happeningin the economy today when the decisions we're making will impact witha lag--in the summer, the fall, and the end of the year. So, I don'tagree with the consensus, but I think you correctly identified it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Ford, mentions that he does not agree with the consensus, suggesting that there is a difference of opinion or contention.


Passage number 1013.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me make sure I correctly identifiedit. Let me have a show of hands of all those who as we sit here rightnow making the best judgment we can--we're not talking about [forever]because if something radically different happens we can always haveanother meeting--don't want to put in an automatic tightening. Well,I guess it is the consensus; let's stop talking about that aspect. Iunderstand there may be some opposition to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is seeking confirmation and agreement from the audience. Although they mention the possibility of opposition, it is not clear if any opposition has been expressed at the moment.


Passage number 1014.
MR. FORD. That's why I didn't bring it up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Ford states a reason for not bringing something up, but there is no opposition or conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 1015.
MR. BALLES. Just to make my own point clear, in response toBill's comments: I agree that that has been the strategic mistakewe've made in the past, but I don't agree that we have alreadyoverstayed ease. I think we need a little more ease; that's where ourjudgments differ.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that there has been a strategic mistake in the past but disagrees with the idea that they have already overstayed ease. This difference in judgment does not indicate contention or disagreement, but rather a different perspective on the matter.


Passage number 1016.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. Barring another meeting andreconsideration in the event things change from the way people now seethem, it looks like we're not going to tighten on reserves. So,presumably we say that. Now we still have the question: What do wesay beyond that, if anything. We can just say that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the potential decision not to tighten on reserves and raising the question of what to say next.


Passage number 1017.
MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I'd be worried about not puttingin the aggregates at all, although in some ways it's tempting not todo so. But in not putting in any short-term targets it seems to methe discontinuity between what we're saying for the year as a whole2/8-9/83and what we would say for the two months ahead would just be far toogreat. And I suspect the market would be very concerned, upset, andworried, speculating about what we were really up to unless in someloose way at least we continue to pay some attention to growth of theaggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Balles, expresses concern about not including aggregates in their analysis. He believes that not including short-term targets would create a discontinuity between their overall goals and their immediate plans, which could cause confusion and speculation in the market. This is a personal opinion and does not indicate any disagreement or contention with others.


Passage number 1018.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've got to get to that. Let me just seewhether we can get to that faster if I am a little more explicit andsay I interpret the consensus that was just stated as being basicallythe first alternative sentence that I proposed: "For the moreimmediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degreeof restraint, expecting that would be consistent with some slowing ofthe aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply discusses the speaker's intention to clarify their interpretation of a consensus statement.


Passage number 1019.
"MR. PARTEE. "Restraint in reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 1020.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, "restraint on reserve positions" or"reserve restraint." "Restraint on reserve positions" would probablybe more accurate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presenting different options for a term and suggesting that "restraint on reserve positions" may be more accurate. However, there is no conflicting or contradictory viewpoint expressed.


Passage number 1021.
MR. PARTEE. I think that's better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker simply states their opinion without any conflicting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 1022.
 Then "expecting thatwould be consistent with--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --some slowing of the aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating an expectation or prediction.


Passage number 1023.
"VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, we may find that the slowing isonly in M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information. It simply states the possibility of finding a slowing in M2.


Passage number 1024.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement is confirming and agreeing with a previous statement or idea.


Passage number 1025.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We may very well find the slowing isnot in all the aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating that there may be a slowing, but it is not present in all the aggregates. There is no disagreement or contention expressed.


Passage number 1026.
MR. MARTIN. But I think that language. Tony, would be wellreceived in the market. Just the mention of [maintaining] restraintand the [expectation of a] slowing [in monetary growth] I think willbe well received.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Martin is expressing his opinion on how certain language and ideas might be received in the market.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1027.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Now, if we have a sentence of thatsort, a question still remains in that it says nothing about anyeasing at all under any contingencies. The second sentence Isuggested says we might do that if the aggregates are slow enough. Wehave had some expression of opinion that we ought to be doing thatanyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The author proposes two different suggestions, one stating that there should be no easing under any circumstances and the other suggesting that easing could be considered if the aggregates are slow enough. The statement "We have had some expression of opinion that we ought to be doing that anyway" implies that there are differing opinions on whether easing should be implemented regardless of the speed of the aggregates.


Passage number 1028.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Might.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "might" is not enough to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 1029.
MR. PARTEE. See if there's agreement on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states a command to see if there is agreement on something.


Passage number 1030.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just find it hard to see how to writethis unless we say we want to do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement present in the passage. The speaker is expressing their difficulty in approaching a particular task, but there is no indication of conflict or disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 1031.
 I don't know what othercriteria--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The only other way of doing it issomething like I suggested earlier: that some easing might beacceptable or appropriate in the light of monetary, credit, andeconomic conditions. So, we would be leaving open what will triggerthat and yet we would not be ignoring the monetary aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is simply presenting two different possibilities or approaches without expressing any disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 1032.
2/8-9/83MS. HORN. Mr. Chairman, it seems as we sit here today thatthe obvious thing that would create the window to allow for moreeasing would be a substantial slowing in the aggregates. So, for thatreason, I support that wording. If something unusual were to happenin the next two months, then in fact a move on the discount rate could[be taken] into consideration in this period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing support for a certain wording and discussing the possibility of taking a certain action in the future, but there is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 1033.
 But as we sit heretoday it seems to me that a slowing in the aggregates that wouldpermit--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me give you two alternatives. I thinkthe second sentence as I gave it to you does what you want to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting ideas or viewpoints. It primarily presents a statement followed by a suggestion or alternative.


Passage number 1034.
MS. HORN. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 1035.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Lesser restraint would be acceptable inthe context of appreciable slowing of growth in the aggregates." Wecould just leave it there or add something after that, such as "in thecontext of appreciable slowing of growth in the aggregates, or furtherevidence of low velocity, or further evidence of unusual demands forliquidity, or evidence of unexpected weakness in the economy." Wecould put in any of those things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is discussing the acceptability of lesser restraint in the context of appreciable slowing of growth in the aggregates. The suggestions provided after the statement are additional examples or reasons that could be considered for further support or clarification.


Passage number 1036.
MR. BLACK. I'm with Karen, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is simply stating that he agrees with Karen and is addressing the Chairman.


Passage number 1037.
MS. TEETERS. I would like to add "unexpected weakness in theeconomy" because it could be that the January numbers are a fluke. Ithink that's what we're basically aiming at anyway: to restart aneconomic recovery. And we need a window to do it with, if it turnsout that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Ms. Teeters, is expressing her opinion and suggesting the addition of "unexpected weakness in the economy" to consider the possibility that the January numbers are not representative of the overall economic situation. She believes that the ultimate goal is to restart the economic recovery and highlights the need for a suitable opportunity to do so. There is no indication of any conflicting viewpoints or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 1038.
MR. GUFFEY. That doesn't really satisfy the objective that Ihave because we would have to wait for this evidence to come forth. Iagree with Lyle that 50 basis points isn't going to make a lot ofdifference except for the psychological impact that that 50 basispoints may have in the market. And we need it now, not at the end ofMarch.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. Mr. Guffey is expressing his agreement with Lyle's statement about the minimal impact of a 50 basis point difference, except for its psychological impact in the market. They both seem to be on the same page about needing this impact now rather than waiting until the end of March.


Passage number 1039.
MR. MARTIN. It could have the same psychological impact wehad the last time we made that move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Martin about a potential action and its potential psychological impact.


Passage number 1040.
MR. GUFFEY. That's a risk. I'm just saying the risk is onthe up side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Guffey is expressing his opinion about a perceived risk, but there is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 1041.
MR. BOEHNE. The last time it was done, it was done beforethe funds rate was dropped. I think we have to ease the funds ratedown to around 8 percent before a discount rate cut.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. Mr. Boehne is simply expressing his opinion or suggestion about the funds rate and discount rate.


Passage number 1042.
MR. GUFFEY. And we can do that by our borrowing level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 1043.
MR. FORD. How can we do that. We already have it down to$200 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The statement is simply expressing a fact or a question about a certain amount.


Passage number 1044.
MR. GUFFEY. Go to less than $200 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is straightforward and does not involve any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 1045.
MR. FORD. Make it a minus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Ford is simply giving a direction or instruction to "make it a minus." There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 1046.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me approach this in baby steps. Giventhe consensus we already have on the first sentence, would members of-89-2/8-9/83that consensus object to the first part of the second sentence. Thatpart, in other words, is that we ease if we were to get furtherappreciable weakening in the aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not presenting any contention or disagreement. It is suggesting a step-by-step approach and asking if there would be any objections to a specific statement.


Passage number 1047.
MS. TEETERS. What do you mean by appreciable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The question is asking for clarification or explanation of a term or concept.


Passage number 1048.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'll get to that later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not contain any statements that suggest contention or disagreement. It simply indicates that a topic will be addressed at a later time.


Passage number 1049.
MR. PARTEE. That's a word we've used--appreciable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply includes a statement made by Mr. Partee regarding the use of the word "appreciable."


Passage number 1050.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's a word I have here at themoment anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is just providing information about the present moment.


Passage number 1051.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Which is more or less--substantial orappreciable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply presents two options and does not indicate any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 1052.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will get to the discussion of what thenumbers are and whether to put them in here in a minute. Is the senseof that agreeable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they will discuss the numbers and whether to include them in the discussion later on. The sense of the statement is agreeable as it suggests a forthcoming and organized approach to the topic.


Passage number 1053.
MR. ROBERTS. Do you mean about weakness in the aggregates orunusual liquidity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement mentioned in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification or further explanation.


Passage number 1054.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm just talking purely about weakness inthe aggregates now. I'm going to get to the other question next, butI'm just asking: Is going that far desirable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and expressing their intention to address another question later.


Passage number 1055.
MR. WALLICH. If we can find language to define theaggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement between the speakers. It is a statement by Mr. Wallich about finding language to define the aggregates.


Passage number 1056.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. So, tentatively, we go thatfar. Now we take the next step. Do we put an "or" in there which maybe "high liquidity," "low velocity," or "unexpected weakness in theeconomy". How many want that additional step. We're now gettingclose.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is discussing a decision or next step that needs to be taken and asking for opinions or preferences.


Passage number 1057.
MR. GRAMLEY. If after four or five weeks' evidence on thestate of the economy or the monetary aggregates they are too fastinstead of too slow and we decide we ought to change our policy, we'remaking decisions based on last week's numbers, not on a well-reasonedview of where the economy is going to go. So, I would stop with theslow growth of the monetary aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their belief that decisions should not be made based on the most recent data, but rather on a more comprehensive understanding of the economy's trajectory.


Passage number 1058.
MR. PARTEE. I just can't recall a directive that had areference to the economy directly in it. Steve, do you remember any.Peter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage describes a statement made by Mr. Partee, who is trying to recall a directive that mentioned the economy directly. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 1059.
MR. AXILROD. I can't in the operating paragraph.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: In the given passage, Mr. Axilrod is expressing some personal limitation or inability, rather than presenting any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 1060.
MR. PARTEE. [I can't recall] in the operating paragraphwhere weakness in the economy would bring a change in policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker cannot recall the specific details regarding weakness in the economy and a change in policy.


Passage number 1061.
MR. AXILROD. We've had weakness in bank credit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there has been weakness in bank credit.


Passage number 1062.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We never did anything so sensible as that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 1063.
-902/8-9/83MR. PARTEE. I must say the velocity reference strikes me asludicrous because we can't really say what velocity is until more timepasses.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion about the velocity reference, stating that it seems ludicrous to them. There is no indication of any opposing views or disagreement.


Passage number 1064.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Again, why can't we cover the samestuff in more general terms by saying "if monetary, credit, oreconomic conditions so justified.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement; it is a simple question asking about the possibility of covering something in more general terms.


Passage number 1065.
"MR. PARTEE. That just sounds so wide open.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee's statement "That just sounds so wide open" does not express disagreement but rather seems to reflect a personal observation or opinion.


Passage number 1066.
MR. ROBERTS. Doesn't it just say that regardless of themovement of the aggregates, you're going to do what you want to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement made by Mr. Roberts suggests that regardless of the movement of the aggregates, the speaker/person will still proceed with their own intended actions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1067.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's true also of these otherformulations with liquidity or the weakness in the economy, etc. Ifthere is a consensus for that, all I'm saying is that it ought to beworded more generally. I don't like the phrase "weakness in theeconomy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses their dislike for the phrase "weakness in the economy" and suggests that a more general wording should be used.


Passage number 1068.
"MR. ROBERTS. It seems to me it's implicit. If we have aninternational crisis or liquidity crisis we're going to deal with itad hoc.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and making an observation, but there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 1069.
MR. PARTEE. We certainly could always have a conferencecall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting or proposing the idea of having a conference call.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1070.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just ask the voting members at thispoint, and I won't try to pin down the exact wording: Who wants to gobeyond what we've just tentatively agreed to--that if the aggregatesare weak enough we ease--and add another phrase referring to theeconomy or liquidity or something. Five. How many clearly do notwant to add any other phrase. Just to make sure, we'll see how manymugwumps there are on that side. Five. Five to five and one personwho didn't express an opinion apart from myself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Five to five" indicates that there is an equal number of voting members who want to add another phrase and those who do not want to add any other phrase.


Passage number 1071.
MR. FORD. In doing this, you're still limiting it to thosein consensus with the whole thing, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification about the limitation being imposed on the topic.


Passage number 1072.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the statement "I guess that's right." It merely expresses uncertainty or a tentative agreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1073.
MR. PARTEE. But for somebody who is voting he asked for avote on whether you wanted that phrase in or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is indicated by Mr. Partee asking for a vote on whether the phrase should be included or not, suggesting that there are opposing opinions on the matter.


Passage number 1074.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I asked originally for those who are[members of the consensus].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 1075.
MR. PARTEE. Oh, I see, Paul.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses understanding or comprehension of Paul's statement.


Passage number 1076.
MR. FORD(.). Well, I'll go with the five if you need anothervote. I [don't] know who the other one is. Oh, it's you. I'll gowith the five who are concerned about easing for too long a period.Whichever direction that five is, that's mine. There you have it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Ford, is expressing agreement and willingness to support whichever group of five individuals is concerned about easing for too long.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1077.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're obviously rather evenly split onthat point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. This statement suggests that there is a disagreement or contention on a certain point, as indicated by the phrase "evenly split." This implies that there is a relatively equal division of opinion and suggests a lack of consensus or agreement.


Passage number 1078.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm not sure, if I may say so, thatwe're really achieving what Roger intended at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate contention or disagreement. It simply expresses uncertainty or doubt about whether the intended outcome is being achieved.


Passage number 1079.
-91-2/8-9/83MR. GUFFEY. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 1080.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: able to answer the question without the passage. Can you please provide the passage you're referring to?


Passage number 1081.
MR. PARTEE. I'm actively opposed to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker clearly states their opposition to something without any indication of confrontation or conflicting perspectives.


Passage number 1082.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even with the five who have expressedsome support for these other conditions--. I'm going to retract myview on this. The more I think about it, we can always have anothermeeting if there is a problem, and if we go further than saying thatthere will be less restraint if the monetary aggregates slow downappreciably, then without achieving very much on the other side we maybe inviting some risk of a market reaction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is reconsidering their view and suggesting an alternative approach.


Passage number 1083.
MR. MARTIN. I agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is evident from the statement "I agree," indicating that Mr. Martin concurs with something previously mentioned or suggested.


Passage number 1084.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think I'll reverse my vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 1085.
MR. MARTIN. We appreciate your vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Martin is expressing gratitude for someone's vote.


Passage number 1086.
MR. WALLICH. If the issue is posed "Do we look at theeconomy or do we not." we have to say we look at the economy and notjust at these aggregates. So, that's why when that issue comes up Ican't vote any other way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 1087.
MR. PARTEE. But not in the operating instructions to theDesk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 1088.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not sure it adds a lot toinclude it, knowing we can always meet again. I will tentativelyleave it off. Where we are is with the first sentence as I gave it toyou and the second sentence with the aggregates in there and nothingelse. That leaves us with the question of how and whether we quantifythis in the directive or how and whether we quantify it outside thedirective in explicit words. I think we can leave the numbers out ofthe directive, but it's a matter of choice. I don't know what numbersto put in here at this point with these very preliminary new numberswe got. We don't know whether they are going to show a different [M2]over the quarter but they show it lower in January and at this pointhigher in February, which changes the pattern anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing options and expressing uncertainty about what numbers to include or how to quantify certain information.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1089.
MR. GRAMLEY. I appreciate the difficulties of putting in anynumbers at all given the prevailing uncertainties. But to put out anoperating paragraph which says, in effect, that we have some numbersand we're going to act in accordance with them but we're not going totell you what they are, doesn't seem like a reasonable way to proceed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, is expressing his disagreement with the idea of withholding important numbers and information. He argues that it is not a reasonable approach.


Passage number 1090.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't tell them until after the periodis over anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a fact without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 1091.
MS. TEETERS. I'm not sure, Lyle, that we even have anynumbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. TEETERS is expressing uncertainty about the availability of numbers, but there is no opposing view or disagreement expressed by anyone else in the passage.


Passage number 1092.
MR. GRAMLEY. Then we ought to use different language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Gramley suggests using different language, but there is no opposing viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 1093.
MR. PARTEE. Well, it says we expect [monetary growth] to belower. If it's appreciably lower, we might ease some.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 1094.
2/8-9/83MR. WALLICH. I would not put numbers in here because it's souncertain, but I would refer to the longer-term ranges and say if theactual numbers fall significantly below most of those and we have acollapse in the aggregates then, yes, [we would ease]. But if theyare just more or less in the ballpark, I would want easing precluded.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their own perspective and expressing their preference for a certain action based on the scenario described.


Passage number 1095.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We're expecting a minimum growth ofaround 15 percent in M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It states a factual expectation of a minimum growth of around 15 percent in M2.


Passage number 1096.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, but you can't even do the M2 in relation tothe longer term because we're establishing the base for the longer-term in February and March.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is simply stating a fact or observation.


Passage number 1097.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One thing we could do is make that[relative to the] longer term, if it weren't for the distortion of M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It suggests a hypothetical situation by stating "if it weren't for the distortion of M2," but does not present any conflicting opinions or contrasting arguments.


Passage number 1098.
MR. PARTEE. We could do that; it makes sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, agrees with the suggestion and states that it makes sense.


Passage number 1099.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but it doesn't make sense withM2, which is the key aggregate we're looking at. And even the 15percent may turn out to be an underestimate in view of the wayFebruary [seems to have] started off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges a potential discrepancy between the information provided and what they are analyzing, but there is no active disagreement or argument present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1100.
MR. RICE. Is the problem with indicating numbers that M2 istoo high and you don't want to mention it. I don't think that's agood enough reason.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Rice is implying that there is a problem with not mentioning that M2 is too high, while someone else is giving a reason stating that it is not a good enough reason.


Passage number 1101.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the trouble is that we haven't thevaguest idea, I guess, what M2 is going to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty or lack of knowledge about a topic.


Passage number 1102.
 It depends upon howfast these MMDAs continue their rise during--MS. TEETERS. If we take the attitude that we don't want anyincreased restraint in the period immediately ahead and have interestrates go up, it seems to me that the real decision is on the level ofborrowing because we don't know where the growth is going to go orwhat M2 is going to do. Now, whether we want to open that up in thedirective, I don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and a lack of knowledge regarding the level of borrowing and the future growth of M2. They are discussing different possible courses of action and seeking clarification on what decision needs to be made.


Passage number 1103.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think maintaining the existing degree ofrestraint means that we keep the borrowings where they are now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that the speaker believes maintaining the current level of borrowing is the best course of action. There is no mention of opposing views or disagreement.


Passage number 1104.
MR. PARTEE. It's a question of under what conditions wouldwe ease.SPEAKER(.). I'm not sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers are unsure and discussing a question.


Passage number 1105.
MR. MORRIS. That could be specified in terms of M3, I think,but I don't know about Ml or M2 for this period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris is simply stating that he is unsure about the specifics of M1 and M2 for the given period.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1106.
MS. TEETERS. But M3 is being affected by the growth rate inM2 also.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is a disagreement or contention about the effects of the growth rate in M2 on M3.


Passage number 1107.
MR. MORRIS. But relatively little.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not include any elements of contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement by Mr. Morris without any conflicting opinions or opposing arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1108.
 We could pick--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We don't want to spell out a targetfor M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage because the statement "We could pick" suggests that there are different options or opinions on how to proceed, while the statement "We don't want to spell out a target for M3" indicates a reluctance or disagreement in revealing a specific goal or target.


Passage number 1109.
 That would be pretty--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the difficulty we're in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion about something and then stating a fact about their current situation.


Passage number 1110.
2/8-9/83MR. WALLICH. If we refer to the totality of our many targetsin a broad way so that M2 can be seen as being exempted if necessary,one gets a sense of what I think we ought to aim at amongst theaggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply presents an opinion or suggestion about what should be aimed for amongst the aggregates.


Passage number 1111.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's a great sense that theseaggregates are rising rapidly. M1 I think is. For M2 and M3 it isnot at all clear. There were very low numbers in December for both ofthose aggregates. They were very low. And liquidity was practicallynothing in December. I am just wondering whether we can get somelanguage along the lines that Henry has suggested here. But M2 is areal problem. "Lesser restraint would be acceptable in the context ofappreciable slowing in the growth of the aggregates to or below thepaths implied by the longer-term ranges" or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and seeking clarification regarding the growth of M2 and M3 aggregates, but there is no active disagreement or conflict present.


Passage number 1112.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions the position held by Vice Chairman Solomon without providing any further information or context.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1113.
 If I were reading that literally--MR. MORRIS. I think that's too [unintelligible]. What we'resaying is that we're not going to allow them, even for a short period,to fall below the long-term ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Morris, disagrees with the statement that is being made.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1114.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, no. We can't prevent them fromfalling below. We'd be delighted if they fell below. What we'd sayis that we would ease in those circumstances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The first sentence suggests that there is a disagreement or opposition to preventing something from falling below, while the second sentence expresses a desire for that thing to fall below. This contradiction indicates contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1115.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but some people when they seeour long-term targets would read that as meaning that unless M2 getsall the way down to 7 to 10 percent or something like that, we're notgoing to be easing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage expresses disagreement by stating that some people interpret the long-term targets differently and believe that easing measures will only be taken if M2 reaches a specific low percentage.


Passage number 1116.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not so sure. But we can put ina sentence on M2 to describe that. If we literally took this language"to or below the paths [implied by the] long-term ranges," we wouldsay in the policy record that we don't expect M2 to revertimmediately, given all these things, to whatever we said up above--7to 10 percent. We'd say we know that M2 growth is going to be highfor a while.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing a possible sentence that can be added to the policy record.


Passage number 1117.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, we'd have to say that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: there is disagreement in the passage. This is because the statement "Yes, we'd have to say that" implies a disagreement or differing opinion from what was previously stated or suggested.


Passage number 1118.
MR. MORRIS. I don't see how we can quantify this withoutcausing more trouble than we have already.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is expressing his uncertainty or inability to find a solution without causing further trouble.


Passage number 1119.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could say, "taking account of thedistortion of new accounts." I'm not so sure that's so bad.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not reflect contention or disagreement. It acknowledges a perspective or suggestion ('taking account of the distortion of new accounts'), and a subsequent statement expressing uncertainty about whether it is a negative situation ('I'm not so sure that's so bad').


Passage number 1120.
MR. PARTEE. That does take care of it, technically. Thatwould take care of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 1121.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Lesser restraint would be acceptable inthe context of appreciable slowing of growth in the aggregates to orbelow the paths implied by the long-term ranges, taking account of thedistortions related to the introduction of new accounts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 1122.
"MR. MORRIS. That sounds good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing approval and agreement.


Passage number 1123.
MR. FORD. What you really mean, don't you, is assuming thatthe real economy is going down at that time. It's possible that the-94-2/8-9/83nicest thing that could happen would be that that would happen whilethe economy is still going [up], meaning that velocity has turnedaround. And would you still want it in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It appears to be a conversation where Mr. Ford is seeking clarification and asking for the other person's opinion.


Passage number 1124.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, all that it says is lesser restraintwould be acceptable. I can imagine circumstances in which we wouldn'twant to do it because the economy looks so strong. I agree with that.But I don't think this binds us to ease if suddenly the economy weretaking off and these aggregates came in low for a few weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker agrees with the idea that lesser restraint would be acceptable in certain circumstances, but expresses their opinion that it does not mean they should necessarily ease the economy if certain conditions are met.


Passage number 1125.
MR. ROBERTS. Don't these sentences in lines 82 to 85 [of thedraft directive] take care of the qualification and make itunnecessary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Roberts is simply questioning whether certain sentences in the draft directive address and eliminate the need for qualification.


Passage number 1126.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I was just looking at that. If we tookthe sentence the way it's written here tentatively, I'm not sure we'dneed that. We don't need any of that bracketed material I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any direct disagreement or contention. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about the need for specific bracketed material, but there is no argument or contradiction presented.


Passage number 1127.
MR. ROBERTS. We don't need them both: that's for sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing certainty about not needing both options, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 1128.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, I think this is a substitute for thatproviso that we were talking about. I think the way you put it isacceptable, Paul.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Partee says that he agrees with the way Paul has stated something. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 1129.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that all right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage "Is that all right" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question seeking confirmation or approval.


Passage number 1130.
MR. BALLES. Could you please read that again, sir.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is politely asking the other person to repeat something.


Passage number 1131.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll read the whole thing to you. "Forthe more immediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain theexisting degree of restraint on reserve positions, expecting that willbe consistent with some slowing in the aggregates. Lesser restraintwould be acceptable in the context of appreciable slowing of growth inthe aggregates to or below the paths implied by the long-term ranges,taking account of the distortions related to the introduction of newaccounts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the Committee's intention to maintain a certain level of restraint on reserve positions and its expectation of some slowing in the aggregates. It also mentions that lesser restraint would be acceptable in the context of significant slowing in growth. There is no conflicting opinion or disagreement present.


Passage number 1132.
"VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Do you want to add at the end of thefirst sentence "slowing from their recent pace".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a simple question asking if the phrase "slowing from their recent pace" should be added at the end of the first sentence. It does not present any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 1133.
MR. AXILROD. That was meant to refer to December-to-January.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing clarification.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1134.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The trouble with "some slowing in theaggregates" is that when you look at all this through a microscopethat's certainly true of Ml, but it's not true of M2 or M3. M2adjusted and M3 raw, if you take December and January together forinstance, are already low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that "some slowing in the aggregates" is true for M1 but argues that it is not true for M2 or M3. Thus, there is disagreement or contradiction between the two statements.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1135.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But some people might not understandwhat "slowing in the aggregates" means.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "But some people might not understand what 'slowing in the aggregates' means" suggests that there is a lack of clarity or differing interpretations regarding the concept of "slowing in the aggregates."


Passage number 1136.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm wondering whether I know what itmeans now that I look at it closely. Why do we need that part.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing curiosity or doubt about their understanding of something.


Passage number 1137.
MR. AXILROD. That only refers to January, because of theproblem you raised.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Axilrod is simply clarifying the time period being referred to, based on a problem that was raised. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 1138.
 So, if that isn't clear--2/8-9/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We would have to put in January. It'sjust based upon one month there. As I look at it now, I wonderwhether we need that. "For the more immediate future the Committeeseeks to maintain the existing degree of restraint on reservepositions. Lesser restraint would be acceptable in the context ofappreciable slowing of growth in the aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of a statement and a reflection on whether additional information is necessary.


Passage number 1139.
"MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that we have tocompare that slower growth to something. If we don't, somebody mightconceivably think that we're referring to the last part of '82.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing a suggestion or concern about the need to compare the slower growth to something in order to avoid potential misunderstandings.


Passage number 1140.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But I think the second sentence conveyswhat appreciable slowing is: It's to or below the paths implied bythe long-term ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply explaining what "appreciable slowing" means.


Passage number 1141.
MR. BLACK. Oh, I thought you took that out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement of surprise or misunderstanding.


Passage number 1142.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I'm taking it out of the firstsentence for the reason that you suggest. Now that I look at it,we're not really looking for any slowing, except in Ml, from December-January. We are obviously looking for slowing in M2. Because ofthat, I guess that doesn't add anything. So let me read the twosentences over again at this point. "For the more immediate future,the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degree of restraint onreserve positions. Lesser restraint would be acceptable in thecontext of appreciable slowing of growth in the aggregates..." Thatmay be ambiguous in itself, but once we add "to or below the pathsimplied by the long-term ranges," it tells someone what we're talkingabout, it seems to me. Then "taking account of the distortionsrelated to the introduction of new accounts." Maybe we should saythere "particularly in M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their thoughts and making revisions to the language for clarity.


Passage number 1143.
"MR. AXILROD. Well, as to the strength of Ml, Mr. Chairman,I'm not sure how much is Super NOWs at the moment. I don't have anyadded data. It might be desirable to leave it more general.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their uncertainty and lack of specific data on the topic.


Passage number 1144.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right, I won't add that. Does thatcatch the flavor of what we're talking about.SPEAKER(.). Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with the statement and confirms that it captures the intended meaning of their conversation.


Passage number 1145.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Quite explicitly we're saying we'd be veryreluctant to tighten during these next seven weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any form of contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker or writer is reluctant to tighten during the next seven weeks.


Passage number 1146.
MR. PARTEE. As a matter of fact, it says we won't tighten.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 1147.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think as it stands it says we won't;that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing agreement or confirmation of a previous statement.


Passage number 1148.
MS. TEETERS. And if we have an opportunity, we'll ease.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a plan or intention to do something if given the opportunity.


Passage number 1149.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right. And not tightening means somethingaround $200 million [in borrowing].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement simply presents a fact about the potential borrowing amount but does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 1150.
MR. BLACK. Does it leave open the possibility, Mr. Chairman,that if there is an unusual strengthening in the aggregates, we wouldconsult.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is raising a question and seeking clarification from the Chairman.


Passage number 1151.
-96-2/8-9/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It leaves open the possibility ofconsulting just as, if the economy weakens or something, we'd consulton the other side. But clearly it says, barring any furtherdecisions, we will not tighten. Then I guess we leave out all thebracketed material. And then we have to fill in the blanks presumablyin that last sentence. We currently have 6 to 10 percent. Is thatwhere we want to leave it. I'm talking about the last sentence on thefederal funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing a decision and considering future possibilities.


Passage number 1152.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Oh, I see. It's hard to move itdown, I think. It's about 8-1/2 percent. If we made it 6 to 9percent, it shows that we [unintelligible] problems or we could have 7to 9 percent in an attempt to show that. It's consistent with thefirst sentence to move it down to 6 to 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing different percentage options without expressing any disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 1153.
MR. PARTEE. Yes it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage is a straightforward statement without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 1154.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It might be consistent with the firstsentence to move it to 7 to 9 percent or 7-1/2 to 9 percent orsomething.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: yes

Explanation: The statement suggests that there is room for interpretation or differing opinions on the specific percentage range that should be considered consistent with the first sentence.


Passage number 1155.
MR. GRAMLEY. Or 8-3/8 to 8-5/8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1156.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The explanation is that the speaker begins their statement with "Well," which often indicates a contrasting or opposing viewpoint. Additionally, the phrase "I don't think" suggests that there is disagreement or contention with another perspective.


Passage number 1157.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't care whether we leave italone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, the speaker expresses a lack of concern and indifference towards the situation, without suggesting any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 1158.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, unless somebody has a strongfeeling, we might as well just leave it where it was. Are there anyother comments. I guess it's clear in everybody's mind what we meanto convey by this. In fact it's pretty plain, I think, in the main.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking for comments or input, but also expressing that they believe the message is clear and doesn't need further explanation.


Passage number 1159.
MR. PARTEE. It is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: not clear what you are referring to. Please provide the passage you would like me to analyze for contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1160.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Shall I read it again just to make sure."For the more immediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain theexisting degree of restraint on reserve positions. Lesser restraintwould be acceptable in the context of appreciable slowing of growth inthe aggregates to or below the paths implied by the long-term ranges,taking account of the distortions related to the introduction of newaccounts. The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if itappears...federal funds rate...of 6 to 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "Lesser restraint would be acceptable in the context of appreciable slowing of growth in the aggregates to or below the paths implied by the long-term ranges" suggests that there is potential disagreement or differing opinions on the level of restraint that should be maintained on reserve positions.


Passage number 1161.
"MR. GRAMLEY. Is the word "introduction" the right word inthat phrase "introduction of new accounts". Maybe it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage. The speaker is questioning whether or not the word "introduction" is the appropriate term to use in the phrase "introduction of new accounts." This is a simple inquiry for clarification and does not indicate any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 1162.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is all part of the introductoryperiod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that something is part of an introductory period.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1163.
MR. PARTEE. When you refer to "aggregates" I would make that"monetary aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

There is disagreement in the passage because Mr. Partee suggests changing the term "aggregates" to "monetary aggregates," implying a different understanding or interpretation of the term.


Passage number 1164.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Monetary and credit aggregates".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The phrase "Monetary and credit aggregates" does not contain any explicit information or context that indicates contention or disagreement. It refers to the measurement and tracking of monetary variables, such as the money supply and the amount of credit in an economy, but does not itself express any conflicts or disagreements. It is a neutral term used in the field of economics.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1165.
MR. AXILROD. Well, the credit aggregates aren't slowing, Mr.Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The disagreement is indicated by the phrase "Well, the credit aggregates aren't slowing" which suggests a contrasting view or opinion.


Passage number 1166.
2/8-9/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Leave them out. Okay. We understand. Wecan vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply agrees with leaving something out and understands the decision. The mention of voting could be unrelated to any disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 1167.
MR. BERNARD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I cannot answer this question without the specific passage or context.


Passage number 1168.
Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Balles YesPresident Black YesPresident Ford NoGovernor Gramley YesPresident Horn YesGovernor Martin YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess we have nothing else to do. Isthat right, Mr. Secretary. [Secretary's note: Mr. Bernard replied ina whisper to the Chairman.] Oh my gosh, I forgot to do that earlier.We have our Managers down there [with their transactions] unconfirmed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 1169.
MR. CROSS. We've been waiting patiently for two days.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 1170.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Sternlight, proceed if possible.Somehow we made our decision before we heard from our Managers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating that they made their decision before hearing from their managers.


Passage number 1171.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Shall I proceed, then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Sternlight is simply asking for permission to continue.


Passage number 1172.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Proceed, please. You may say something soradical we may want to reverse all our decisions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is encouraging the other person to continue speaking, implying that they are open to considering a radical idea and potentially changing their decisions.


Passage number 1173.
MR. BLACK. We have to promise we're not going to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1174.
MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of "MR. STERNLIGHT." suggests a different speaker or perspective and the presence of statements in the appendix can further indicate conflicting views or arguments being presented.


Passage number 1175.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments or questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no passage provided, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 1176.
MR. GUFFEY. I just have a question for Peter: How will youinterpret the language we've just adopted here with respect to thecurrent level of restraint when borrowings have been at $110 to $150million in the last two weeks. Are we talking about a $200 millionborrowing level or are we talking about a $150 million borrowinglevel. Maybe it's a question to you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification or interpretation of a previous decision made.


Passage number 1177.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, $200 million is what we were aimingfor. As I mentioned, the last two full weeks have come out at about$150 million. This week so far it's at about $110 million, although Iwouldn't be surprised if it got up a little higher than that withWednesday's borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Sternlight is stating the amount they were hoping to achieve and providing information about the recent amounts earned in the last few weeks.


Passage number 1178.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I haven't been following this veryclosely, but I assumed we were aiming at around $200 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 1179.
MR. AXILROD. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod simply affirms that the statement is correct.


Passage number 1180.
MR. STERNLIGHT. We were aiming [for that].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. The speaker simply states their intention or goal without any conflicting opinions or opposition from others.


Passage number 1181.
2/8-9/83MR. AXILROD. Any time we've constructed a reserve path ithas been with $200 million of borrowing [consistently].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is stating a fact that whenever a reserve path was constructed, it was done with $200 million of borrowing consistently.


Passage number 1182.
MR. GUFFEY. But the current level of restraint is somethingless than that, as evidenced by the borrowing level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of fact about the current level of restraint in borrowing.


Passage number 1183.
MR. AXILROD. I would say not, President Guffey. The fundsrate has averaged between 8-1/4 and 8-1/2 percent steadily, which iswhat one would expect aiming at $200 million of borrowing. There havebeen variations around it, but they haven't been accompanied by muchvariation in the overall constellation of money markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing an explanation and stating that there have been variations in the funds rate, but it hasn't affected the overall constellation of money markets much.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1184.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And they're really aiming for reserveprovision consistent with $200 million of borrowing if their excessreserve assumptions come out correctly. And it's the excess reserveassumption that has been a bit off in recent weeks. You can't expectto hit the borrowing on the nose because of that variation and becauseof other reasons. But if the excess reserves calculation itself hasbeen off what they had been expecting, there may have been errors inthe actual calculation of the factors too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "the excess reserve assumption that has been a bit off in recent weeks" suggests that there is a disagreement or discrepancy between the expected excess reserves and the actual excess reserves calculated. This implies that there may be errors in the calculation of factors related to the excess reserves.


Passage number 1185.
 I don't know how theycontributed, but--MR. AXILROD. What I meant, Mr. Chairman, is that unless tolddifferently we would construct a nonborrowed path based on therequired reserves that are evident that week, assuming that borrowingwill satisfy $200 million of the total of excess and required. Andthat's how it will be constructed until we're told differently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply explains a plan that will be followed unless there are further instructions.


Passage number 1186.
MR. CORRIGAN. Peter, do you have a sense from looking at thelast six weeks or so what the underlying growth in reserves is--inother words, extracting from the reserve impact of all the shifts indeposits and so on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Corrigan is simply asking Peter for his understanding of the underlying growth in reserves.


Passage number 1187.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I'm not sure I'd know how to answer thatbecause the shifts have had a big impact, most recently slowing thegrowth of reserves quite a bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their uncertainty about how to answer the question and then providing information about the impact of the shifts.


Passage number 1188.
 With the shift out of the reservablebig time deposits into the MMDAs that are reservable and extractingfrom that, I'd say maybe you're looking for the underlying M2 growthor something, which--MR. CORRIGAN. A rough estimate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an explanation or suggestion regarding the topic at hand.


Passage number 1189.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I think the staff has been estimating fairlymoderate growth--in the 8 percent area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Sternlight is simply stating his belief that the staff has been estimating fairly moderate growth.


Passage number 1190.
MR. AXILROD. It depends, as Peter said, on what you thoughtanything would have been doing otherwise. Our rough estimate wassomething like 10 percentage points in January.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the estimate was around 10 percentage points in January, without any opposing viewpoints or arguments presented.


Passage number 1191.
 It had been reducedby that amount because of the CD drop--MR. CORRIGAN. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact about a reduction in something due to a CD drop.


Passage number 1192.
MR. AXILROD. --and the 1 percent out of the saving deposits.But that has some rough assumption of what it would be otherwise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact and suggesting that the assumption made about the 1 percent out of the saving deposits might not be accurate.


Passage number 1193.
MR. PARTEE. The actual figures on reserves are showing verylittle expansion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply states a fact about the expansion of reserves without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 1194.
-99-2/8-9/83MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the given passage as it appears to be a nonsensical sequence of numbers and letters. There is no clear meaning or argument present in the passage.


Passage number 1195.
 Yes, largely because of this sharp drop inrequired reserves because of shifting into the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Actual reserves figures are showing adecline in January, as I remember.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a fact about the decline in actual reserves figures in January, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 1196.
MR. AXILROD. I'd have to look it up, but I think it'sFebruary where we are going to have a decline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a statement made by Mr. Axilrod, stating his belief that there will be a decline in a certain month. No other opposing opinions or arguments are presented in the passage.


Passage number 1197.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the phrase "Any other questions." This is simply a prompt for additional inquiries and does not express any conflicting viewpoints or opinions.


Passage number 1198.
MR. BALLES. Yes. Just so we'll all know, Mr. Chairman, hasthe date of your testimony been set yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question asking for clarification about the date of a testimony.


Passage number 1199.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. February 16th.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without any text provided, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 1200.
MR. AXILROD. We have a total reserve growth of 1-1/2 percentroughly at this point for January. A sharp drop is projected forFebruary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the reserve growth rates for January and the projected drop for February.


Passage number 1201.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there are no other questions, Mr.Cross.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 1202.
MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement made by Mr. Cross.


Passage number 1203.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Before we proceed, I am reminded that Iforgot to request ratification of the domestic transactions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that the speaker forgot to request ratification of the domestic transactions. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 1204.
MS. TEETERS. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. "So moved" indicates agreement or support for an action or proposal.


Passage number 1205.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "second" does not provide enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 1206.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection the domestic actions arecompleted. Now we will go to the international [intermeetingtransactions].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention or imply any form of contention or disagreement. It simply states that domestic actions are completed and now the focus will shift to international transactions.


Passage number 1207.
MS. TEETERS. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 1208.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And we have to ratify anything we have todo on those proposed [swap] renewals if they prove necessary, as theyare likely to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention in the passage. The statement simply explains that the need for renewals is likely and that they will need to be ratified.


Passage number 1209.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. "So moved" is a phrase commonly used in formal meetings to indicate agreement or approval with a motion. It does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1210.
MS. TEETERS. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. This is shown by the presence of the word "Second" which indicates that there is a continuation or response to a previous statement or assertion.


Passage number 1211.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No objection. We will do that. I mightsay that the Mexican commercial bank loan has been delayed beyond allconscience I guess, partly by the hassling over the precise terms ofthe loan agreement, which runs to 175 pages. There are somesubstantive questions and the banks are trying to get all they can outof this agreement. Of the $5 billion of commitments that they wereseeking, the last I heard was that they had $4.8 billionapproximately, which is close enough, I think, to close the gap. Itmay not be closed in the ordinary course but somehow it'll be closed.I don't think that's essentially what is holding it up. It's gettingthe agreement on the loan agreement. It's running more than a monthafter it should have been done and I [unintelligible]. The remaining-100-2/8-9/83repayment on the swap has to be out of that money, which is why thathas been delayed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and expressing their opinion on the delay of the Mexican commercial bank loan.


Passage number 1212.
MR. FORD. Any doubt that it will jell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 1213.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there's always a doubt when it'sdelayed and, of course, the new uncertainty put in the situation iswhat happens to Mexico if there is a real oil price decrease. That isa question to which I do not know an answer. If it's small, I guesswe can paper it over a little more and get a little more moneysomeplace. If it's large, I don't know what we would do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is expressing uncertainty and speculation about the potential consequences of a decrease in oil prices for Mexico. There is no explicit contention or disagreement between different perspectives.


Passage number 1214.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In the view of the key people who arenegotiating all this, of the four remaining substantive areas beingnegotiated there is only one really difficult one. And that is thequestion of what foreign exchange assurances the central bank willgive in regard to the ultimate repayment of what will be therescheduled private debt, [unintelligible] debt. The other three areresolvable. I was surprised to find that the people who are runningthis operation feel that the $4.8 billion in commitments they have aresolid even if there were, let's say, further erosion in oil prices.Even if there were further concerns, they seem to think that they candepend on that. In the meantime, they have agreed to try to speed uptheir discussions as much as possible. But the Mexicans also sharesome of the blame in not getting the rate [unintelligible] up thereregarding this foreign exchange position.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is providing information and describing the views and perspective of the key people involved in the negotiation.


Passage number 1215.
MR. KEEHN. Tony, are they going after the other $200 millionor are the participants about where they're going to end up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Keen is simply asking Tony about the status of the remaining $200 million and if the participants have reached their expected outcome.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1216.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think that their formal posture hasto be that they're going to continue pursuing this until they get fullpari passu $5 billion. But I agree with Paul that there may be waysof handling this so that we can still go ahead and still appear tohave gotten the full $5 billion while we're still striving to get it.We're probably not going to get very much more money but I think theleading banks would probably help make up a part of that $200 milliondebt. So, there are different ways of handling it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker believes that there may be ways of handling the situation to appear to have received the full $5 billion, while still striving to obtain it. However, they also acknowledge that they are probably not going to receive much more money and suggest that leading banks may help to make up part of the $200 million debt. This suggests that they have a different viewpoint on how to handle the situation compared to others, such as Paul.


Passage number 1217.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Carefully. I think the Open MarketCommittee meeting is over unless somebody else has anything. Thereare a couple of other things I want to mention. But we're finishedwith the meeting with the date set for the next meeting, [March 29th].Let me say what is obvious. I see no excuse for any leaks whatsoeverfrom this meeting. And I see no need for anybody to talk with anybodyin the press between now and February 16th, period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement about the end of a meeting and the speaker's expectation for no leaks or conversations with the press.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 1218.
MR. FORD. Do you mean about monetary management.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. This can be seen in the response to MR. FORD's question, where there is an indication of a disagreement or debate about monetary management.


