Passage number 1.
TRANSCRIPT FEDERAL OPEN M..RKET COMMITTEE MEETING March 20, 1979 Prefatorv Note This transcript has been produced from the original raw transcript in the FOMC Secretariat's files. The Secretariat has lightly edited the original to facilitate the reader's understanding. Where one or more words were missed or garbled in the transcription, the notation "unintelligible" has been inserted. In some instances, words have been added in brackets to complete a speaker's thought or to correct an obvious transcription error or misstatement. Errors undoubtedly remain. The raw transcript was not fully edited for accuracy at the time it was produced because it was intended only as an aid to the Secretariat in preparing the record of the Committee's policy actions. The edited transcript has not been reviewed by present or past members of the Committee. Aside from the editing to facilitate the reader's understanding, the only deletions involve a very small amount of confidential information regarding foreign central banks, businesses, and persons that are identified or identifiable. Deleted passages are indicated by gaps in the text. All information deleted in this manner is exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of Information Act. Staff Statements Auuended to the Transcriut Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign Operations Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic Operations M r .  Kichline, Economist Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee March 20, 1979 MINUTES OF ACTIONS A meeting of t h e  Federal Open Market Committee w a s  held i n  t h e  o f f i c e s  of t h e  Board of Governors of t h e  Federal Reserve System i n  Washington, D .  C . ,  on Tuesday, March 2 0 ,  19'79, beginning at 9:30 a.m. PRESENT: M r .  Miller, Chairman Mr. Volcker, Vice Chairman M r .  Balles Mr. Black M r .  Coldwell M r .  Kimbrel Mr . ' Uayo Mr. P a r t e e  Mrs ~ Teeters M r  :' Wallich :il,ksrs. G u f f  ey , Morris, Roos , and Winn , A l t e r n a t e  %embers of t h e  Federal Open SIarket Coimittee Messrs. BaughnaQ, &Ed Eastburn, P r e s i d e n t s  of The Federzl Reserve Bznks of Dallas P h i l a d e l p h i a ,  r e s p e c t i v e l y  M r .  Altmann, Secretary M r .  Bernard, A s s i s t a n t  Secretary M r .  Mannion, Assistant General Counsel M r .  Axilrod, Economist Messrs. Brandt, E t t i n ,  Henry, K e i r ,  Keran, K i c h l i n e ,  Scheld, Truman, and Zeisel, Associate Economists M r .  Holmes, Manager System Open Market Account Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager f o r  Foreign - o p e r a t i o n s  3/20 179 - 2 -  M r .  S t e r n l i g h t ,  Deputy Manager f o r  Domestic Operations M r .  Coyne, Assistant t o  t h e  Board of M r .  Kalchbrenner, Associate Director, Governors Division of Research and S t a t i s t i c s ,  Board of Governors S e c r e t a r i a t ,  Board of Governors S e c r e t a r i a t ,  Board of Governors M s .  Farar, Economist, Open Market Mrs. Deck, S t a f f  A s s i s t a n t ,  Open Market Messrs. Gainor and EdcIntosh, F i r s t  Vice P r e s i d e n t s ,  Federal Reserve Banks of Minneapolis and Boston, respectively Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, and Eisenmenger, Senior V i c e  Presidents, Federal Eeserve Banks of S t .  Louis, Cleveland: and Boston, respectively Messrs. Broaddus , Burns, Danf orti;, T .  Davis, Fousek, and Mullineaux, Vice P r e s i d e n t s ,  Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, D a l l a s ,  Xinneapolis, Kansas C i t y ,  Xew York, EZC. Philadelphia, respectively Ms.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply describing the process of editing and preparing the transcript for the Federal Open Market Committee meeting.


Passage number 2.
 Clarkin, S e c u r i t i e s  Trading Officer, Federal Beserve Bank of X~ii: York Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of March 20, 1979 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. The time has arrived for our annual meeting. This is a special meeting because it completes the 12-month cycle [for Reserve Bank Presidents to serve as voting members]. Spring comes and the FOMC is reconstituted. I don't know if that is supposed to be a coincidence, but we are one day ahead of time, aren't we. Tomorrow is the first day of spring. I guess we don't need to pursue that. So, the first order of business, at least from my point of view, is to welcome the new voting members. I believe you have all been elected to your new responsibilities without too many dissents. Paul Volcker, you were re-elected. Well, thank goodness. Bob Black, Bob Mayo, Bones Kimbrel, and John Balles will serve as members, with your alternates in line. I don't think that requires action, but we do note it. The first item on the regular [agenda] is to approve the election of officers. For that purpose I will turn over the meeting to Henry Wallich to see if he has any suggestions for Chairman or Vice Chairman. I hope he has the right ones.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 3.
 MR. WALLICH. I would propose [William Miller as Chairman and Paul Volcker as Vice Chairman].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, is proposing William Miller as Chairman and Paul Volcker as Vice Chairman.


Passage number 4.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Could you elicit a second, Henry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The sentence is a simple question asking if the person can obtain or gather a second thing or piece of information from someone named Henry. There is no indication of any disagreement or opposition in the sentence.


Passage number 5.
 MR. COLDWELL. I second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Coldwell is simply stating that he seconds something without expressing any opposition or disagreement.


Passage number 6.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. I think you need to get a vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The statement is a suggestion or opinion regarding the need for a vote. There is no indication of disagreement or contention among different perspectives in the passage.


Passage number 7.
 MR. WALLICH. Would you like to approve the slate as proposed. Any objections.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if there are any objections to approving the proposed slate.


Passage number 8.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. No objections. The way you put the question the answer is "no" they wouldn't like to but "yes" they would. Now we will get down to something serious, the other officers DO you all have a list before you. No. I do. All right, I will ask the Secretary to read the list of proposed officers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It mostly consists of statements and questions related to officers and a list of proposed officers. There is no conflict or argument evident in these sentences.


Passage number 9.
 MR. ALTMA". Secretary, Murray Altmann; Assistant Secretary, Normand Bernard; General Counsel, Neil Peterson; Deputy General Counsel, James Oltman; Assistant General Counsel, Robert Mannion; Economist, Steve Axilrod; Associate Economists from the Board: Edward Ettin; George Henry; Peter Keir; James Kichline; Edwin Truman; and Joseph Zeisel. 3 / 2 0 / 7 9  -2- Associate Economists from the Banks: Harry Brandt from Atlanta: Richard Davis from New York; Michael Keran from San Francisco: James Parthemos from Richmond: and Karl Scheld from Chicago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply lists the names and positions of various individuals.


Passage number 10.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Are there any other suggestions or qualifications. All those in favor say "Aye." SEVERAL. Aye.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The phrase "All those in favor say 'Aye'" followed by the response "SEVERAL. Aye" indicates agreement and consensus among a group of people.


Passage number 11.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Opposed. S o  voted. Now, before the meeting, a number of items were sent to you that involve the continuation of various authorities [in their existing form], with the request that you indicate to us if you wished any of these to be placed on the agenda. We received no such indication and, unless I hear a contrary view, we will assume that those items have been approved. Does anybody have any problem with any of those items. Hearing none, we will proceed to item 2 on your printed agenda, which is the selection of a Federal Reserve Bank to execute transactions for the System Open Market Account. This has been and is proposed to be the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Is there any dissent from that. Hearing none, that will be approved. Next is the selection of the Manager of the System Open Market Account, the Deputy Manager for Domestic Operations, and the Deputy Manager for Foreign Operations. We are proposing for those positions Alan Holmes, Peter Sternlight, and Scott Pardee, respectively. Are those acceptable to the Committee. Hearing no dissent, we will approve those. Next is the approval of the minutes of the meeting on February 6 and of the telephone meeting on March 2, which have been circulated to you. [Secretary's note: No transcript of the telephone conference of March 2 exists in the Committee's files.] Any comments, corrections, or suggestions. Hearing none, we will report those as approved and move to foreign currency operations with a report from Scott Pardee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a series of statements and questions about various items, and in each case, there is no dissent or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 12.
 MR. PARDEE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Pardee is simply expressing his gratitude to the chairman.


Passage number 13.
 1 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Scott. I should have mentioned at the outset, and will now, that we are pleased to have you here, Tom Gainor, for Mark Willes. I hope you will join in at any time in the discussion. At this point are there any questions or comments on Scott's report. Henry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply introduces Tom Gainor as a participant in the discussion and asks if there are any questions or comments on Scott's report.


Passage number 14.
 MR. WALLICH. Scott, you mentioned the reaction that if the dollar goes down, the Fed steps in and if the dollar goes up, the Bundesbank steps in. Do you think the market views the rate as pegged in some sense. Are expectations built on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for the opinion or viewpoint of someone named Scott.


Passage number 15.
 MR. PARDEE. I don't think there is any sense that the market feels we have fixed rates. There is a sense in the market that at current levels there is a great deal of resistance. I haven't heard anybody saying "pegged" as such. They just notice that if the rate 3 / 2 0 / 1 9  -3- [moves] 50 points, there is considerable resistance--quite often not by the central bank--and shortly thereafter the central bank might be in. But I don’t hear anybody complaining that we are pegging at the moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and observations about the market's perception of fixed rates, but there is no indication of a debate or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 16.
 MR. WALLICH. Do you think they perceive this as a conflict among the national policies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. The speaker is asking for the perception of others, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflicting views presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 17.
 MR. PARDEE. Some people feel there is, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that some people feel there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 18.
 MR. WALLICH. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude or acknowledgment.


Passage number 19.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Any other comments or questions. Thank you, Scott. We need a vote to ratify the transactions since the previous meeting. I understand [reports] have been circulated or are available. Is there any question. If there is no dissent, we will record the ratification of those transactions and move on to the domestic open market operations and a report from Peter Sternlight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 20.
 MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There isn't enough information to accurately determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage provided.


Passage number 21.
 I CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Peter. Any questions or comments. Yes, Chuck. M R .  PARTEE. Peter, the funds rate did average 10.21 percent in the week of March 14, according to the Bluebook. So do you think the market now perceives that as just an erroneously high number and is thinking of a 10 percent rate as again being the level--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 22.
 MR. STERNLIGHT. I would say that the thinking is back to 10 percent to slightly higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply providing an opinion or assessment of the situation.


Passage number 23.
 MR. PARTEE. Right where it was before. You [at the Desk] have overcome this entirely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Right where it was before" indicates agreement or confirmation, and the phrase "You have overcome this entirely" suggests that the person at the Desk has successfully resolved an issue or problem.


Passage number 24.
 MR. STERNLIGHT. I think we have, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Sternlight simply states that they have something, without any opposing views or arguments presented.


Passage number 25.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Any other comments. We also need to ratify the transactions on the domestic side since the last meeting. The reports have been circulated. Any questions or comments. Hearing no dissent, we will record them as approved. Now, in December the procedure we followed worked extremely well and I thought we might try it again today. In the intervening meeting we had the more complicated issue of setting long-run ranges: today we are dealing [only] with the directive. I am going to suggest that we try the system where we ask Jim Kichline to make his report on the economic situation and then get comments on policy from Steve Axilrod. Then we’ll do a go-around to get the comments from each of you on your views of the economy and your feelings as to the policy implications. I’m looking not necessarily for quantitative but qualitative views on where monetary policy should be going in the intermeeting period. Then after the break we can get down to the specifics of the directive. I think that worked extremely well before and we will try it again if you are agreeable. So, we will start off with Jim’s report.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting a process for the meeting and is seeking agreement from the others present.


Passage number 26.
 3/20/79 -4- MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply providing information about a statement made by Mr. Kichline. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 27.
] CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much, Jim. Are there questions of Jim before we turn to Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply acknowledges Jim and asks if there are any questions before turning to Steve.


Passage number 28.
 MR. PARTEE. May I ask just one, M r .  Chairman. Jim, you mentioned the decline in contract awards. I presume you mean nonresidential.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification.


Passage number 29.
 MR. KICHLINE. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple statement confirming that something is correct. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 30.
 MR. PARTEE. Is it considerable and what kind is it. Is it in some [particular] kind of building. There is an offsetting development in the strength of durable goods orders. That's why I wanted to pursue it a bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question followed by an explanation of the speaker's interest in pursuing the topic further.


Passage number 31.
 MR. KICHLINE. Yes. It's quite widespread. As you know, the series is highly erratic; it sometimes shows 50 percent increases or 40 percent declines. We had a 3 percent decline in December and a further 3 percent decline in January. And the fourth quarter in total in current dollars was only up 4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While the passage describes various statistics and fluctuations, there is no indication of contention or disagreement. The statement simply presents information about the series and the percentages.


Passage number 32.
 So in real terms it-- MR. PARTEE. It's drifting off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply shows a statement being interrupted.


Passage number 33.
 MR. KICHLINE. --has been drifting down. In general we have no [firm] idea of whether or not this reflects temporary developments, but it is something that we are paying attention to. We are quite cautious about the [outlook in the] general structures area which, as you know, had been coming along.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and caution about the current situation without any contradicting information or opposing views being presented.


Passage number 34.
 MR. PARTEE. It is in the structures area, not in electric generating or something like that in the nonbuilding area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply clarifying that the subject being discussed is related to the structures area, rather than electric generating or another nonbuilding area.


Passage number 35.
 MR. KICHLINE. No, it's in industrial structures. It's not the shopping centers. CKAIRMAN MILLER. Other questions. Let's turn to Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speakers are simply discussing different aspects or categories of structures.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 36.
 Nor do I believe these data are very consistent with MR. BALLES. Thanks a lot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage is expressing disagreement by stating that the data is not consistent with MR. BALLES.


Passage number 37.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you for your decisiveness. Are there questions of Steve, besides what did he say. Dave.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 38.
 3 / 2 0 / 1 9  -7- MR. EASTBURN. I think I understood. I’m not sure I agree. Steve, we did calculations similar to the ones you did, although not as sophisticated. trying to find what these other sources of funds might add to the aggregates--the money market funds, the RPs, and the ATS. We added them back in different ways and just didn’t find enough money there to add to the actual figures for either M1 or M2 to make that look as if it could be the full explanation. Then the question is: What is left. My inclination is to look at what happens to money as an indicator of what is happening to the real economy. If one looks at the shortfall in that respect, I think one might come to a different weighting of these policy conclusions than you did. My own conclusion, even after all these adjustments one might want to make, is that the weak money supply is telling us that the economy is going to be weaker in the future, and that that would call for a different policy prescription.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. 

The speaker, Mr. Eastburn, states that he is not sure he agrees with the calculations and conclusions made by Steve, indicating disagreement. He mentions that they performed similar calculations but did not find enough money from other sources to explain the shortfall in M1 and M2, suggesting a difference in their interpretations of the data.

Furthermore, Mr. Eastburn presents his own conclusion, asserting that the weak money supply implies a weaker future economy and thus calls for a different policy prescription. This contrasts with Steve's implied policy conclusions based on his calculations. Therefore, there is a clear disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 39.
 MR. AXILROD. President Eastburn, that may or may not be. The point that I would like to make on these measurement problems is that in 1975 and 1976, as an example, when we added back in 1-1/2 to 2 percentage points because we included the business saving accounts and all that in evaluating the money supply, I think that was wrong. I believe that understated what was happening because when the public decides that the existing stock of deposits is too large--that they’re going to take deposits and put them somewhere else--there’s no reason to think that that money necessarily is going to go into very close substitutes. It could just as well go into Treasury securities and items like that. So I think adding up the very liquid assets will tend to underestimate the demand shift. At the same time, I wouldn’t say that the residuals in equations are the perfect measure. But in ’75 and ’76, Dave, I think they were a convincing argument that the demand shift was greater than we would have gotten by simply adding up the money substitutes. And to a degree I think they’re probably telling us something close to the same thing in the first quarter. Of course, even so, we may not get to so rapid a rate of growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and explaining their reasoning behind it. They mention that adding up the very liquid assets may underestimate the demand shift, but they also acknowledge that the residuals in equations are not a perfect measure. Overall, there is no conflict or disagreement being presented.


Passage number 40.
 MR. EASTBURN. Could I follow up with one more question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Eastburn would like to ask one more question without any opposing viewpoints or conflict.


Passage number 41.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Certainly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The word "certainly" in this context suggests agreement or confirmation rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 42.
 MR. EASTBURN. The other part of my question is: How much validity is there to the idea that what is happening to money is supply induced and not demand induced.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question asking for an evaluation of the validity of a particular idea.


Passage number 43.
 MR. AXILROD. Well, it’s very difficult to give an answer to that, President Eastburn, because we don’t control the supply of money and we make no effort to control it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply explains that they cannot give an answer because they do not control the supply of money and make no effort to control it.


Passage number 44.
 MR. EASTBURN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the question to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 45.
 Supply in the real economy [sense or] just weakness in the-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. May I interrupt this dialogue to give you a flash. We always like to have some drama in these meetings. So if you turn to page 8 in part I of your Greenbook, I have data that have just flown in. The second column on page 8 shows the [nominal] GNP number at 15.0 percent for the fourth quarter of 1978; that has just been revised by the Commerce Department to 15.6 percent. If you go across the columns to real GNP in the fourth column, it shows 6.4 percent, which was the last estimate we had; that has been revised to 3120179 -8- 6.9 percent. And the fixed weight business deflator was maintained at the 8.0 percent shown. If you go down one line to the data for the first quarter of 1979, we have the first estimate of the Commerce Department for quarter one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is simply relaying updated data from the Commerce Department.


Passage number 46.
 MR. PARTEE. It‘s a projection really.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that it is a projection.


Passage number 47.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. A projection, excuse me. It‘s not an estimate but a projection, for whatever it’s worth. As you can see, the staff has 12.2 percent for nominal GNP; the Commerce Department is saying 10.6 percent. If you go across to the fourth column, the staff is now saying 3.0 percent [for real GNP]; the Commerce Department projection is 1.4 percent. If you go across to the deflator, the staff has 9.6 percent and Commerce is now saying 10.0 percent. Now you can pursue your question, Dave. I didn’t want you to get trapped, you see. M R .  EASTBURN. I wouldn‘t have been if you hadn‘t given the figures . M R .  AXILROD. President Eastburn, the only way I think I can answer is to say that, as you know, the System does no more than accommodate to whatever amount of money the public wants to hold at today’s interest rates. So in that sense we could always have more money [growth] if the System were to provide reserves more aggressively and let interest rates go down in the short run. That‘s the way I would answer. [As for] whether it’s a demand or a supply phenomenon, it‘s very difficult to disassociate the two.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily a discussion of projections and different numerical figures.


Passage number 48.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. I have John Balles next [on my list] and then Larry Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states the order in which the individuals, John Balles and Larry Roos, appear on a list without any indication of disagreement or conflict.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 49.
 MR. BALLES. I’ll just pick up for a minute on the comment that Dave made. We’ve looked at these same numbers, Steve, and frankly, we come out more on Dave’s side than yours. We have here an array of the different Ms going up to M7. And in a nutshell what the facts seem to say is that they’ve all been decelerating since last fall, though to varying degrees, of course. Even if we look at the latest monthly growth numbers on MI, which includes all these money market funds, RPs, commercial paper, and so forth, the percentage growth now is less than half--or at least it’s no bigger than half-- what it was last fall. And in some cases growth is about a third as big as it was last fall. So I don’t see a simple tradeoff between, say, M1 and M2 and something in M7. The bottom line is that this is a very difficult and slippery area, as you well know, and judgments can differ looking at a set of facts. From my standpoint, I suspect that you may be overestimating the shift in the demand for money. I’m not at all sure it’s going on to the degree that would seem to be implied by your analysis, and I say that with all due respect. Judgments can differ on these things. The alternative explanation is that we’ve simply been very stingy in the provision of reserves. I think some combination of those two might explain where we’re coming out. But as I say, if one looks at the actual components of what goes into the so-called substitutes for money, it’s true that money market funds have surged, but the RPs have not. They haven’t grown proportionately any more than they did in 1974. And the sum of those two has not grown proportionately any more 3/20/79 -9- than it did in 1974, based on our look at the data. S o ,  I have to register some skepticism, to put it mildly, on the extent of the shift in the demand for money. It remains a judgment rather than a fact, as far as I’m concerned.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Balles disagrees with Steve's analysis on the shift in the demand for money and expresses skepticism about the extent of the shift. He states that he comes out more on Dave's side, suggesting disagreement among the speakers.


Passage number 50.
 MR. AXILROD. I have no quarrel with that, President Balles. In terms of dimension, I would feel very confident that a minus 2 percent M1 in the first quarter is plus 1 percent, because I add the 3 percentage points for ATS. I feel reasonably confident that it’s probably as much as plus 3 percentage points: and I have diminishing confidence as I go above 3 up to I percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, expresses agreement with President Balles and discusses his own confidence levels in the numbers being discussed.


Passage number 51.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Larry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 52.
 MR. ROOS. My questioning was going to parallel somewhat what John Balles said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that their questioning was going to be similar to what John Balles said.


Passage number 53.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Bob.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage is simply stating the name "Bob" without providing any further information or context that would suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 54.
 MR. MAYO.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 55.
 To follow up on this, I keep forgetting Steve, MS still doesn‘t include money market funds or RPs, does it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not convey any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question seeking clarification about the inclusion of money market funds or RPs by Microsoft (MS).


Passage number 56.
 MR. AXILROD. Yes it does.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the given passage. The response "Yes it does" seems to be a simple affirmation or agreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 57.
 MR. MAYO. Both.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. Explanation: The presence of the word "both" suggests that there are two different perspectives being presented or two parties involved in the discussion.


Passage number 58.
 MR. AXILROD. Well, it ought to include them, netting out the CDs the money market funds hold. I’m not convinced that we’ve got it all measured exactly right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Axilrod is expressing his uncertainty or lack of conviction about the accuracy of a measurement, but there is no obvious disagreement or conflict present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 59.
 MR. BALLES. Your footnotes and documents say that it includes both, Steve. Am I wrong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. This is evident from Mr. Balles questioning whether he is wrong, indicating a disagreement or contradiction between what he believes and what the footnotes and documents state.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 60.
 MR. PARTEE. Yes, netting out their certificates, and they mainly hold CDs. Of course, that’s double counting not to net out the CDs .
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage because Mr. Partee believes that it is necessary to "net out" the CDs, while the speaker he is responding to does not appear to agree with this statement.


Passage number 61.
 MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without actual text or context.


Passage number 62.
 Right, they should net them out CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, why don‘t we do a go-around before our break. As I said, I’d ask you to give your own ideas of how the economy is going and what you think the policy implications are. I forgot where we started last time so we‘ll just start with Paul and go around that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speakers are simply discussing a plan or suggestion for their meeting and how they will proceed in sharing their thoughts and ideas.


Passage number 63.
 MR. BLACK. How far do you want to take this, Mr. Chairman-- up to the point of giving specifications.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is simply asking for clarification from the chairman about the extent of what they are discussing.


Passage number 64.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. NO, at this point, it‘s the qualitative direction you think [on policy] rather than specifications. Then after the break we’ll come to those.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply explaining that, at this moment, the focus is on the qualitative direction of policy rather than specific details. There is no conflicting or contradictory information present.


Passage number 65.
 MR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, as the passage does not provide any details or statements that could indicate contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 66.
 Right, short of specifications VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if I look far enough ahead, Mr. Chairman, meaning through the year, I think the odds are better than 5 0 / 5 0  that we‘re going to run into a recession by [year-end], and I’ve thought that for some time. I think the odds are being increased by 3 / 2 0 / . 9  -10- the oil situation and by what's going on in inflation generally. Having said that, I don't think we can change that much by any modest adjustments in monetary policy. I believe a real easing in monetary policy is likely to make things worse. My reasoning is that in the short run--and I'm mainly impressed by the evidence of the last six weeks or so--1 think we're much more up against capacity [constraints] and growing shortages, caused in part by those GNP figures you just read and the continuous upward revisions in those figures for the fourth quarter. I don't see that the economy has any real margin to grow here without seriously aggravating our inflationary problem. I think the growth we had late last year is already aggravating our inflationary problem. And I believe an attempt to [induce] very fast growth here would increase the odds not only of a recession but a more serious recession as we go along. One doesn't have to speculate to see that inflation is a lot worse. In my view we'll be lucky if that Commerce figure stays at 10 percent for the first quarter when the final number comes out. Commodity prices are rising; through the latest information we have them rising at alarming rates. I suspect the oil price increase that the staff has projected in a very uncertain situation is, if anything, low; and it might be substantially low. Essentially, I think we're in retreat on the inflation side; if there's not a complete rout, it's close to it. And in my view that poses the major danger to the stability of the economy as we proceed. It's an obvious danger for international stability despite the welcome respite we've had in the last three or four months. That remains a major problem not only in terms of economic stability but in the dimensions beyond that if the dollar stability should give way not just to an erosion but the panicky situation we had earlier. So, without getting into any more details, there's no doubt in my mind that even if we didn't look at the aggregates at all, this is the time for some firming rather than the reverse. I think we are at a critical point in the inflation program, with the tide against us. ~f we don't show any response at all, we are giving an unfortunate signal in my judgment. I believe those concerned about inflation would find no response during this period almost inexplicable in terms of what we say regarding our worries about inflation. I do think there is some risk of a boomlet. I don't think it would go very far in real terms because I doubt the economy has the capacity to meet it. But it could add to those inflationary pressures, lead to excess ordering, and potentially to excess inventory building that would only make a recession worse if indeed we are going to have a recession later this year or in early [19801. So, without getting into the real complications caused by the money supply figures, but noting that I pretty much share M r .  Axilrod's conclusions in that respect, it seems to me that the real factors point in the direction I've indicated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker believes that the economy is at risk of a recession due to the oil situation and inflation, but does not believe that monetary policy can effectively change the situation. They argue that easing monetary policy would actually worsen the situation. Additionally, they express concern about the inflationary pressures and the potential for a boomlet, while suggesting that some form of monetary firming is necessary to address inflation concerns.


Passage number 67.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Chuck.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 68.
 MR. PARTEE. Mr. Chairman, last week I appeared before the House Subcommittee on Monetary Affairs to discuss monetary policy in the context of our Humphrey-Hawkins report, but the discussion soon turned to current monetary policy. Steve and I did our best to defend current monetary policy before the Subcommittee. The reason I mention this is that I'm obliged to report to you that the Chairman of the 3 / 2 0 / 7 9  -11- Subcommittee, Parren Mitchell, wants the FOMC to know that he is concerned. He says he’s concerned not as an economist because he isn’t an economist, not as a monetarist because he doesn’t understand the arcane area of monetarism, but as an historian because he has noted that every time there is substantial and sustained weakness in the money supply, a recession follows. He wonders why the current situation would differ from previous situations. Now, I must say that I‘m not a monetarist either, but I do have some sympathy with Chairman Mitchell’s view of this. It does seem to me that we’ve had a sustained period of weakness in the money supply. It has been five months, October through February. Perhaps that’s marginal; it may need another couple of months to be truly sustained, but it’s getting pretty close to a sustained weakness now. I think it is also true that the weakness in money supply growth is substantial. If one makes the adjustment for ATS and NOW accounts, which I think is appropriate, one gets about a 1-1/2 percent average rate of increase in the narrow money supply over this five month period, compared with the 8 percent rate of increase recorded for a good many of the preceding months. That is a significant step down in the rate of expansion. I don‘t really believe much in taking these developments such as money market funds and money market certificates and RPs and that kind of thing as an explanation because they have occurred in the past. That‘s simply the reflection of what happens when interest rates are high; the rate of return on cash money is zero and people try to find substitutes. It’s the process of finding substitutes, as I said on the phone the other day, that we’re really describing when we look at this. Turning to the economic situation, I, too, think there are indications that we are in the last stage of a boom. Consumer spending has flattened; it has declined in real terms since the first of the year. There’s a little push in car sales, but that‘s simply a matter of clearing out the small cars because of the prospect that gas prices will certainly be higher and gas may be in short supply. Housing has clearly turned down. I don‘t think there’s any way one can read the decline of the last two months as being an entirely weather-related phenomenon because those developments are too widespread. There are too many other indications of weakness developing in that area, and we’ve just taken an action that will assure that the big lenders are not going to have as much money as they did before to put into the mortgage market. I don’t think capital spending is going anywhere. I’m quite impressed by the decline in contracts; I think all we’ve had is a little bubble in new orders for capital equipment that isn’t going to last very long and can, after all, be reversed by cancellations. One should always remember about those new orders that a great many of them are subject to cancellation; many orders were cancelled after there was a bubble in ‘74 and then the recession of ‘75. So, that can happen. It is conceivable that we will have a period of rapid business inventory accumulation and we may have some scare buying of materials; that seems to have been going on, but I don’t think it will last very long. So, I would have to say, looking at the real economy as well as the monetary numbers, that I now believe a recession is very likely--a recession which at this point the Federal Reserve will have done nothing about. We will have made no effort to block it in any way. We will have sat here again, seeing very weak monetary 3 / 2 0 / 1 9  -12- aggregates as a precedent to the recession phase. I believe we're in considerable danger of that happening. You often ask us to give our views on [economic] growth over the policy period [relative to the staff's views], which are at the bottom of page 8 [of the Summary and Outlook part of the Greenbook]. I don't think we're going to have 1.7 percent real growth this year. It could possibly be a bit above zero, but not very much. I don't think we're going to have 8.7 percent inflation. I think the staff has finally managed to predict a number that is higher than the one we will realize. That's partly because of my weaker scenario, but partly because I'm also very convinced that businesses are raising prices in anticipation of wage and price controls. And whether or not wage and price controls occur, these firms have taken their action and there will be a moderation in those markups in the period to come. And, of course, I don't expect the unemployment rate to be 6.3 percent at the end of the year: I think it will be 7 percent or above. So, that's the situation as I see it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, agrees with Chairman Mitchell's concern about the weakness in the money supply and the potential for a recession. However, he disagrees with the staff's predictions for economic growth, inflation, and unemployment rates.


Passage number 69.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Chuck. Nancy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 70.
 MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, I've looked over the numbers and I've looked over the projections and I also think we're in the final quarters of the boom. I had the staff put together for me a variety of indicators in the last three quarters before a peak. One thing that stands out is that they're never the same. There is very little similarity between the various peaks that we've had. We seem to do better [predicting] troughs and recoveries than we do with [the end of] expansions. I think we're headed toward a recession. As I look at the data and the projections, I think the disintermediation and its impact on housing are finally taking place. However, I won't feel comfortable until I see a March housing starts number [in trying to determine] where we really are in that area. The other elements of the economy still appear to be relatively well balanced. With the possibility that we could dip into a recession and the high costs of that in a variety of areas, I would take the position that we ought to wait another month until we have some better data. The first quarterly estimate by the Commerce Department is notoriously bad. It can bounce from here to over yonder in a month's time: in another month's time we'll have some more real numbers on the economy and that would be an appropriate time to move. I don't think we need additional restraint at the present time. For heavens sakes, our policies are finally beginning to work. Now is the time to sit back and let them work and not make it seem as if we're panicking about what's going on in the economy currently, which I think some people are doing. Also, I doubt that most of the spot prices are going to hold; some of them have been pushed up and are now beginning to recede somewhat. So, my recommendation is no change in policy at the present time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Teeters, expresses disagreement with the idea of making policy changes at the present time. She argues that the economy is still relatively well balanced and that it would be better to wait until more real data on the economy is available before making any decisions. She also disagrees with the notion that some people are panicking about the current state of the economy.


Passage number 71.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Nancy. Bob.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement as it is simply expressing gratitude.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 72.
 MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I come out somewhat less optimistic than the staff. Like many, we've been impressed by the strength we've had in the economy. It has been much greater up until now, as far as the statistics show, than we had expected. But I'm becoming increasingly concerned by the appearance of scattered signs that we frequently do see before a major downturn. The Redbook mentioned a number of these, [including] a lengthening of delivery times, high capacity utilization, tight supplies in the market for skilled labor, 3 / 2 0 / 1 9  -13- and the inventory figures. The last inventory figure, though partly explainable, coupled with an apparently heavy shift toward short-term borrowing on the part of businesses is certainly the sort of thing one might expect. And I'm especially concerned about the probability that in view of the petroleum situation we'll have some spawning of a general shortage psychology, which will lead to inventory buildups and probably heavy demands for short-term credit. And that will make it pretty difficult to keep M1 under control without pushing interest rates up rather high. Coupling this with the latest price data and the impending labor negotiations, I have to rate the possibility of stagflation or worse as pretty high. So my figures would come out lower than the staff's, somewhere in the neighborhood of what Chuck Partee said. Turning to the policy question, I think we have a difficult choice this morning. The weakness in the aggregates has persisted for about five months and this weakness has been a source of increasing concern to many of us, both within and [outside] the System. It seems to me that one could make a pretty good case for some easing this morning. But on the other side of the coin, there are three reasons why maybe we ought not take any action this morning. One, of course, is that we really don't know what those aggregates are saying. We, like so many others--John Balles and Dave Eastburn as well as Steve Axilrod--have tried to see what we could do by adding back in the things that might have been reducing the aggregates. And some of the arguments that people have made don't seem to us to hold water. But I don't think we can rule out the possibility, indeed the probability, that there has been a downward shift in the demand for money. If so, that's an important reason for not doing anything at this particular time. The second point is that historically we often have had a burst in the aggregates in April because of faulty seasonal adjustments, and I don't think we can rule that out. We could also have a temporary spurt in economic activity. And finally, the improvement in the dollar in the foreign exchange markets has been so fragile that I think any reversal of policy now could certainly jeopardize that. That gets me to the point where we work on [the specifics of] policy, and I won't say anything about that until after the break.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Black, expresses disagreement with the staff's optimism about the economy. He presents his concerns about signs of a major downturn and a possible shortage psychology, leading to stagflation or worse. He also discusses the difficult choice of whether to take any action or not based on the weakness in the aggregates and the uncertainty surrounding them.


Passage number 73.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Bob. Willis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 74.
 MR. WINN. M r .  Chairman, a sobering exercise at a time like this is to go back to the first quarter of last year and use our models or any other approach and ask oneself what conditions would produce a negative rate of growth in money supply in the first quarter of this year. We get astronomical interest rates and a lot of other things that we really haven't seen. So then we ask ourselves, given that everybody is expecting weakness at this time--and that's certainly the news--where do we find it. Again, if we follow our models, they may not work out quite this way. Having spent the winter falling into potholes, I take a pothole approach to economic forecasting. One of the potholes, of course, is in the energy area, with tremendous problems with respect to refining capacity. I really don't see how we can get out of this on any short-term basis. What this means for the consumer is that he may find he can't buy, beg, or steal gasoline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing potential negative growth in the money supply and the potential impact on consumers due to problems with energy and refining capacity.


Passage number 75.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. The latter they can always do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. "The latter they can always do" is a simple statement and does not express any conflicting opinions or ideas.


Passage number 76.
 3 / 2 0 / 1 9  -14 MR. WINN. Okay. Then we divert more of our oil supplies to producing electricity; with the shutdown of the atomic plants in this area, I don‘t quite know what this means. Another pothole I would call to your attention is the fact that we focus pretty much on the domestic scene in terms of our analysis. Now, the international situation looks a little better at the moment, but as I travel around and see the diversions of some of these economies into the military side, I get concerned about what this means down the road. If a country puts that much of its [economic resources] into the military, the tendency is to use it in one form or another. How this will turn out, I don’t know, but we certainly can see trouble in Yemen and lots of other places that aren‘t in the headlines at the moment. The third point is the confidence factor on the international side and the tremendous flows that occur. And I look at confidence in another area--at many of our so-called monetary mechanisms. Take the credit unions and look at their loan/deposit ratios and their lack of cash; yet they‘re in the share draft business. What does it mean if customers really step up their demands for [withdrawing] their money from some of these [institutions] or want to transfer it. So, I would project the potential for weakness that everybody’s talking about, and then I’m raising the question of whether there are other possible developments. The only real weakness I can find at the moment in the District is the coal situation, but in other areas such as cement there is strength. A number of the raw materials producers are at capacity. Steel is running flat out. There’s just isn’t any [more capacity]. If we get demand for steel in excess of [the current level], we will really be faced with a blow-up the other way. Now, it may not occur. M R .  MORRIS. Did you say the demand for coal is weak.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing concern and raising questions about various aspects of the domestic and international situation.


Passage number 77.
 MR. WINN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only mentions "MR. WINN."


Passage number 78.
 Yes, weak CHAIRMAN MILLER. That’s the one place where it‘s quite weak.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "That’s the one place where it‘s quite weak" indicates a weakness or flaw in something, but there is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 79.
 MR. WINN. I would say I end up confused in my outlook; I think the uncertainty level is really quite high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses their own confusion and uncertainty about their outlook.


Passage number 80.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Willis. So far it has been a very cheerful report. Now we come to Dave. M R .  EASTBURN. Mr. Chairman, before I start, could I ask you a question. Is there anything that you would care to say about the discussions going on in the Administration currently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply mentions that Dave, referred to as Mr. Eastburn, wants to ask a question before he starts discussing something related to the Administration.


Passage number 81.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. I don’t know that there’s anything I am able to say. The President is giving very careful consideration to making some decisions about energy. He hopes to do so by the end of the month and then announce them. I think he is perhaps trying to bite off an awfully large number of issues. I don‘t know whether he’ll end up doing that. Of course, the core one is whether he will do something about decontrol or not. But there‘s a whole series of other things. He has not made any decision so far; it’s a question of options. On the economic side, I think the main concern is whether the wage and price standards program can hang together. There is good compliance by the major corporations, but there’s a feeling that medium and small corporations are ignoring it. They are going to put 3/20/79 -15- some effort, I think. to [change] that. They’re also doing some technical things. They’re sweating it out as to whether they can get to fall into compliance, but it has been extremely difficult.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply provides information about the President's consideration of energy decisions and the concerns regarding the wage and price standards program.


Passage number 82.
 MR. EASTBURN. I was impressed by the Vice President‘s comment, I believe over the weekend, in which he mentioned monetary policy and continued restraint on the monetary front as being important.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is mentioning being impressed by the Vice President's comment about the importance of monetary policy and continued restraint on the monetary front.


Passage number 83.
 I wondered if the Administration might be starting to put us in the forefront of-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. I think the Administration is frustrated. There’s nothing much they can do in the fiscal area now that would have much impact [in 19791. The deficit for this year is going to be less in any case, mainly because inflation is higher and, therefore, revenue flows will be higher. And there has been some shortfall of spending so that the deficit is now projected to be $33 billion [in fiscal 19791. I wouldn‘t be surprised to see it near $30 billion. And yet if they begin to cut back their $29 billion deficit projected for next year, that’s the short-term problem. So I think they look with great anxiety over to 20th Street and Constitution Avenue to see whether we can contribute to a solution. I don’t think they have any particular views on what, if anything, we can do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the Administration's frustration and their desire to see if the author and their colleagues can contribute to a solution.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 84.
 MR. EASTBURN. Well, my view could be summarized by reporting on a meeting that we had last week with some business people and [other contacts]. The discussion around the table was very optimistic about current conditions, almost uniformly so, until I took a [poll] asking who thought there would be a recession this year. And about three-fourths of the hands went up. And that’s where I come out. I agree very much with the analysis Chuck gave. I think the staff’s projections are too optimistic. I‘m also skeptical about the Bluebook projection that the money supply will bounce back in the next month or so. I think that the slow growth of money is telling us something about the real economy and that that has implications for policy. I would dearly hope that we could hold the funds rate where it is in the next month but I would like to have policy tilted so that if the aggregates continue to be weak, we could edge that rate down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Eastburn expresses skepticism about the staff's projections and disagrees with the Bluebook projection. He also suggests that policy should be tilted towards potentially lowering the funds rate if the aggregates continue to be weak.


Passage number 85.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much. Bones.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply expresses gratitude.


Passage number 86.
 MR. KIMBREL. M r .  Chairman, I, too, share the feeling that some business weakness, but not anything major, is likely early next year. I recognize that no two periods are exactly parallel, but history suggests that some things we experienced in ‘73 and ‘74 are coming back. Certainly, we are seeing a lot of anxiety about the prices of oil and food. We‘re seeing capacity constraint difficulties that have already been [mentioned]. There is the feeling that inventory building cannot be very far behind and some concern that the labor growth we have seen may be related as much as anything else to additional people entering the labor force [in an effort] to offset [the effects of] inflation. Indeed, [inflation] is the number one concern that we continue to hear about and it’s taking its toll. We would be reluctant to put much emphasis at the moment on movements in the aggregates because they are confusing, both to us and to the market as a matter of fact. It would appear that the markets are expecting some slight firming. I feel that our failure to do that might very well raise some unnecessary and unneeded questions at the 3/20/79 -16- moment. It would seem that foreign exchange markets also would probably welcome a touch of firmness. Finally, while our projections are pretty close to most of the Board staff's projections, I want to make [clear my1 feeling that the staff probably has not projected a rate of price increases as high as we think it will be; we expect that to be more like 9 percent or probably above 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is sharing their own perspective and thoughts, but there is no opposing viewpoint mentioned or argued against.


Passage number 87.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Bones. Larry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 88.
 MR. ROOS. Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: no

Explanation: The given passage does not present any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 89.
 Chairman, my position is essentially reflected on this button that I'm wearing which reads-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. I must need glasses, I guess. All my life I've never had glasses but I can't quite make that out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply describes the speaker's inability to read the writing on a button they are wearing.


Passage number 90.
 MR. ROOS. Well, I stole a page out of the MIT buttons and this reads "MB 10-5 + 1Q = R." Translating that, it says that when the monetary base decreases from 10 percent to 5 percent and remains that way for one more quarter, there is a very real probability of a recession. Inasmuch as we're flooding the Midwest with these buttons, I'll be glad to present this to you, sir, at the end of the meeting because it is historic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the meaning of a button they have designed and expressing their intention to present it to someone at the end of the meeting.


Passage number 91.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. MB 10-5. I could read that as more bunk for 10 minutes instead of 5.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply suggests an alternative interpretation or way of reading the text, without indicating any disagreement with its content.


Passage number 92.
 MR. ROOS. In spite of that, I'll proceed. As we analyze the behavior of money, and of course we do place a great deal of weight on the behavior of money, we observe that from December of 1977 through October of 1978, the monetary base grew at about a 10 percent rate. Since October of last year to the present there has been an abrupt decline in that rate to an average of about 6-l/2 percent, with it being close to 5 percent recently. Growth in bank reserves, which we think is important, has declined to a negative figure since October-- less than zero as compared to a 10.2 percent rate of increase from December 1977 through October of last year. Mr. Chairman, in spite of the confusion that some of my colleagues have expressed, if we look back in history, most of the postwar recessions that have occurred--with the exception of [the one precipated by] unusual circumstances with the oil situation in '73 and '74--have been preceded by an abrupt reduction in the rate of money growth that has persisted for two or more quarters. For example, what happened prior to the recession in 1970 was that from mid-1968 through the end of 1968 money was growing at about a 9 percent rate. Early in 1969, monetary policymakers permitted that rate to fall to about a 3 percent rate; it persisted at 3 percent for a couple of quarters and there was a recession. Look at graphs. Whenever this phenomenon--an abrupt drop in the rate of money growth--has occurred and has persisted, there has been a recession. So based on that analysis, which is not one to be taken lightly, I think if we're going to err, we should err at this time in the direction of moving toward slightly expanded growth in the monetary aggregates rather than anything of a restrictive nature. We should certainly watch this very carefully this month and next month because if [the weakness] persists, we're going to be in trouble. I would just add in closing that there is an old saying that politics makes strange bedfollows, and I'm glad to be in bed with my strange bedfellow Governor Partee on this issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 93.
 3 / 2 0 / 7 9  -11- CHAIRMAN MILLER. It's an historic occasion. Thank you, Larry. Roger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage contains a date and a statement expressing gratitude.


Passage number 94.
 MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think I'm also falling into bed with some people that normally I would not have associated with in the past. We have done some of the same work that Steve has described this morning and a couple of conclusions are apparent to me at least. One is that M1 is totally unreadable now and, as a result, I don't think we should put a great deal of weight on it. But by the same token, the impact on M2 is not nearly as great. It has been rather readable. In any event, if one looks at all of the aggregates, it's fairly clear that there has been a substantial deceleration in their growth. And given the environment, most people, including myself, would look for recession some time later this year or early [19801. It seems appropriate that we be careful not to worsen that [prospect] in the sense of doing any further tightening at this time. If we're going to move at all over the upcoming month, then I would prefer to skew our ranges and targets in such a way that we would, indeed, move [the funds rate] down a bit. Whatever we do today is not going to have an impact on bringing inflation down further, it seems to me. We have rather strong constraints in place now as we have had starting last May. To do anything further at this point would not have an impact on inflation for some period out but would ensure a recession. As a result, I would prefer, for this month at least, to hold about where we are but to adopt a policy that will permit us to move back a little if indeed the aggregates continue [to growl at a low rate through the month of March.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and analysis of the situation, without explicitly stating any conflicting views or engaging in any arguments with others.


Passage number 95.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Roger. Bob.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply shows gratitude and acknowledgment towards Roger.


Passage number 96.
 MR. MAYO. Mr. Chairman, I still see considerable economic strength. Though the signs are increasing that we may now have some of the characteristics of the last stages of the boom, I don't think they are as strong as they have been at comparable times in the past. But I still would not be surprised at all if we have a couple of quarters of zero [GNP] growth at the tail end of this year and early 1980. I don't get terribly distraught about that prospect because I think it is a function of a monetary policy that, despite all our picking at it, has been a fairly successful one over the last year or so given the circumstances we had to deal with. We are in a trap. I think we all recognize that; if we don't, we should. The business of [being accused of] overstaying our [policy of] restraint is still true; that will be true inevitably each time we come to this pattern, regardless of what we do. And I say that advisedly because part of our job description is to be a convenient whipping boy. I don't say that with any bitterness; I think this is part of the function of the Federal Reserve System. We are handy [as a scapecoatl. We can portray an image that is very greatly oversimplified in the public mind--to the extent that they pay attention to us at all--and I am willing to suffer with that. Even our best efforts at economic education seem unable to put a dent in that. So I think we are in for some problems later this year, but I don't feel any sense of panic about that. To the extent that we have an influence, and we certainly do, I think we are part of the creation of the leveling out--1 hate to use the word recession. I won't be like Fred Kahn and make it a banana much less a kumquat, which I 3 / 2 0 / 7 9  -18- gather has succeeded the banana. We have some concern, and properly so, about a very low level of economic activity. But I view it as something that we can build on, not something to be afraid of. I find Steve's analysis very good. Sure, he is in a position, given his job description, to have to overly quantify some things that are extremely difficult to quantify in order to be as helpful as he can. But I think the tenor of his remarks is basically sound, and I interpret [his remarks as supportive of] my own feelings that it is too early for any easing. I would prefer to stay where we are and lean a bit toward--and really just a little--more pressure because I don't think it would do any harm. On the international side, although I'm not as pessimistic as Paul is, I think the basic tenor of his remarks is correct: We still do have a very serious problem in maintaining the value of the dollar. The improvement that we are seeing now, the "stability" in the value of the dollar, I think is going to continue partly for a very negative reason--that there is more concern about the stability of the Deutschemark, the yen, and the Swiss franc. That is damning with faint praise. But I think this will help us stabilize the dollar, even though it seems to some people that we're all going down together. We are still looked upon as a leader in terms of [unintelligible] government action. To overstate it or simplify it, we are seen as the Rock of Gibraltar. I would prefer to see us stand up and take the rap, since we're going to get it anyway, and keep the pressure on a bit longer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges some potential economic problems and expresses their own opinions and preferences, but there is no direct contradiction or argument with anyone else.


Passage number 97.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Bob. Tom.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude from one person (presumably the speaker) to another person named Bob. The mention of Tom does not indicate any contention either.


Passage number 98.
 MR. GAINOR. Mr. Chairman, the Ninth District economy has been very strong and continues strong. Our District's unemployment rate is lower than that for the country, at 4.4 percent versus 5.8 percent. Our help wanted advertising is at a record high in the Twin Cities area. Farm income in our District is up sharply. The inflation rate in the Twin Cities was 11-1/2 percent for the last year, considerably higher than for the country. The only negative factor in our otherwise positive picture is housing starts; they are down. And at least in Minnesota we're not willing to say that that isn't weather-related this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents various statistics and observations about the Ninth District economy without conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 99.
 MR. PARTEE. I wouldn't think you'd build anything in that weather .
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is expressing his personal opinion that he wouldn't expect anyone to build anything in bad weather.


Passage number 100.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. They built two houses.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the statement "They built two houses."


Passage number 101.
 MR. GAINOR. On the national level, we continue to be very concerned about inflation. Of course we're uncertain, as everyone is, about the impact of the oil shortage, and we don't fully understand the current state of the monetary aggregates. So in view of the uncertainty about oil, housing, and the aggregates, we would favor holding the line for this month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses concern about inflation and uncertainty about the impact of the oil shortage and the current state of monetary aggregates. They state that, due to this uncertainty, they would prefer to hold the line for this month. This is a personal opinion on how to approach the situation, without conflicting with any other opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 102.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Tom.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The phrase "Thank you, Tom" is a simple expression of gratitude directed towards Tom.


Passage number 103.
 John MR. BALLES. I hope Chuck has a king size bed because I would like to crawl into it too. There is no sense in reviewing in detail the way I come out because essentially I'm in agreement with Chuck's 3 / 2 0 / 1 9  -19- analysis; we were apparently reading the same tea leaves. If that analysis is right, then the strategic problem for us now is how to get a soft landing. We can't stuff the genie back into the bottle as far as inflation is concerned. We shouldn't expect instant results from the tightening that we've engaged in since last November 1. We all know about lags in policy and, unfortunately, they seem to be longer on the price side than on the real economy side. So we're going through that usual agonizing period when the bad news comes now in terms of the damping the economy and the good news comes later-- perhaps as much as a year later--when monetary restraint begins to show through on the price front. The real danger at the moment, therefore, is overstaying restraint. I fully understood and concurred in the moves we made on November 1; in effect, since that time we've been targeting interest rates. It was done almost under crisis conditions because of the potential for international economic and financial disruption at a time when the dollar was going down like a rock. But we've done that and now we've seen some extremely slow monetary growth, even after adjustment for ATS and NOW accounts and so forth. And given the fact that the staff forecast for money has been way over the mark for 5 months in a row now--and as Steve well knows I'm not being critical because this is a very slippery business--I will bet you a drink or dinner, Steve, that the actual March numbers will be about as weak. I suspect they will be down several percentage points from your present forecast, as they have been in October through February. So I am getting an increasingly uneasy feeling about overstaying restraint and I would begin to hedge our bets by a slight tilt toward a lower funds rate, trying to get money growth back up a little closer to what we declare to be our 12-month objective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, John, explicitly states that he is in agreement with Chuck's analysis and expresses concern about overstaying monetary restraint. There is no indication of disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 104.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much, John. Ernie.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply expresses gratitude towards someone named John.


Passage number 105.
 MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, I suppose I'm as confused as anyone else. A nice warm bed is always attractive but-- M R .  PARTEE. I didn't know it was so warm.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is shown by the lack of contrasting or conflicting statements between Mr. Baughman and Mr. Partee.


Passage number 106.
 MR. BAUGHMAN. --that particular bed is rather crowded right now anyway. We have worked the numbers, as presumably everyone else has, and come to fairly inconclusive conclusions. By inquiring around I have attempted to get some impression of the activity in mutual fund accounts because, as you know, one can draw checks on most of them but the minimum size, though it varies, is very often $500. And it doesn't take a very large number of $500 transactions to equal the number of checks over $500. Now, the very small proportion of total checks in the system over $500 does account for a very high proportion of the total volume of expenditures handled through the check mechanism. So if there were some fairly persuasive evidence that we were getting a significant number of transactions through these money market funds--and after all it is expenditures not balances that move the economic machine--then there might be some basis for feeling a little less distressed about the indicated slow growth in [bank] balances. I take some comfort also in the indicated resurgence in demand for bank credit; I hadn't been inclined to downplay it to the extent that Steve has in his analysis this morning, although there may be justification for that. I hear generally from bankers that they 3 / 2 0 / 1 9  -20- see quite a strengthening of demand for credit from their customers and across a broad array of types of activities. Just an incidental point: There’s a good deal of resentment in the western part of our District with respect to the very large amounts of emergency credit the government is injecting into agriculture [because] the evidence is that fair amounts of these funds are being diverted into conspicuous consumption on the part of the borrowers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Baughman, is discussing various observations and opinions about the activity in mutual fund accounts and the demand for bank credit, but there is no clear disagreement or conflict presented.


Passage number 107.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. I didn‘t know anything was conspicuous in Texas .
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states that the speaker did not know about something being conspicuous in Texas. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 108.
 MR. PARTEE. We should have had Ernie here to view those large tractors.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion or suggestion that it would have been beneficial to have Ernie present to view the large tractors.


Passage number 109.
 MR. BAUGHMAN. I can see them all back home. It is interesting that we have had a fairly persistent decline in the number of rotary rigs in operation. The decline has been significantly more in Texas and to some extent in Louisiana than in the country as a whole. And this [is occurring] in an environment of obviously short supply of the items they would drill for. I also hear more reports at the present time than I have heard at any time previously relative to “shut in” supplies. As I say, this is a somewhat puzzling situation. I have raised questions with people engaged in this business as to why. The explanation given is almost universally weak prices and excess supplies of natural gas within the Texas market, When one asks, given the gestation period of bringing a well into production and given the trend in supplies and prospective demands for oil and gas, why a temporary price weakness in a given location should result in a significant reduction in the amount of drilling activity, [the shutdowns] seem to make a lot of sense to the people I‘ve talked to, although I’ve had difficulty fitting it together in my own mind. The weakness in housing in Texas at the present time I think is a phenomenon of usury ceilings. I would raise a question as to whether the national figures have been looked at state-by-state in connection with the usury ceilings to see whether that might be a significant factor--that such states might account for enough of the [weakness in] total housing starts that it would be important. AS I say, I think it is the dominant element in the picture in Texas, particularly for single-family housing at the present time. the demand is there; we’ve seen no indication of resistance to interest rates. It’s simply that with the legal ceilings and the legal question about points as well as the difficult aspects of points in the financing process that lenders have stopped making commitments on one-family dwellings. Of course, the fact that the legislature is in session and is considering this matter [of the usury ceiling] may be contributing to the shut-off of commitments at the present time as compared with lenders making more intensive efforts to try to work around the ceiling if that were not the case. I believe I’ve raised questions with everyone I’ve come into contact with who would seem to be in a position to know whether in the current circumstances there is something in the international arrangements which might be an explanation for the high volume of expenditures in this country from what appears to be a falling or a low volume of balances. Again, [that effort] has not been very productive. I 3/20/79 -21- haven't uncovered anything there but I'll have to admit it still seems to me that something may well be there which we have not discovered or documented.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging that they have been unable to find explanations for certain phenomena, but there is no evident disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 110.
 It seems to me-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. We're running a little low on time and I wonder if you could just conclude.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their own personal observation and requesting a conclusion due to time constraints.


Passage number 111.
 MR. BAUGHMAN. It seems to me, although based on historical experience it would be a very high risk position, that we should maintain the position we have had in recent months with respect to monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Baughman, is expressing his opinion about maintaining the current position on monetary policy.


Passage number 112.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much. Frank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The statement is simply expressing gratitude.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 113.
 MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I think we're facing an emerging conflict between the domestic and international requirements of monetary policy. quite clearly, we're moving into a period where they are going to be in conflict, because I think we're approaching a cyclical peak in the economy some time around midyear for the reasons cited by Chuck Partee. I would simply add one more point: In the month of January, when we had no increase in industrial production, we had a whopping increase in inventories, which suggests that final demand was extremely weak. Now, this picture of an approaching cyclical peak is not conclusive and, of course, it won't be conclusive until the peak is three or four months behind us. And that is why monetary policy has always lagged in the past. If we're waiting f o r  conclusive evidence, we'll inevitably lag again. But if we change policy now in the face of inconclusive evidence, it means that we have to be prepared to shift again if it appears that the economy is somehow getting a second wind, which I think is unlikely but possible. In my view, we don't know much about the demand for money; we used to think we did a few years back. But we do know something about the supply of money. And one thing we know is that we're not going to get much of a supply if bank reserves don't grow, and they haven't grown for the past six months. If it's our objective to avoid a recession, I think we have to move today; I don't think we can wait for another month. One thing I've found around this table is that one can always make an impressive case for waiting for another month. But the evidence suggests to me that the time to move is now. I think the issue is whether we seriously are concerned about avoiding a recession or not. Paul, I think, is resigned to a recession; I think the international constraint may be more of a factor in his thinking than he let on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Morris argues for taking action now to avoid a recession, while suggesting that others, such as Paul, may be more resigned to a recession and influenced by international constraints. This difference in opinion and perspective indicates disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 114.
 In the past year they've been nicely in harmony but, VICE C H A I W  VOLCKER. Inflation is a factor in my thinking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement or contention in the passage. The phrase "Inflation is a factor in my thinking" in contrast to the statement that "they've been nicely in harmony" suggests a difference in opinion or stance regarding the impact of inflation.


Passage number 115.
 MR. MORRIS. But the issue is whether we will be better off in 1980 with a 7 percent unemployment rate or an 8 percent unemployment rate. I'm inclined to believe that in the long run we will be better off with a 7 percent unemployment rate simply because that is likely to be more conducive to the maintenance of the kind of conservative fiscal policies that are now being talked about in the Congress. I'm a little concerned--as I was about Nancy's idea of waiting a month--about John Balles's phrase "slight tilt," which implies a move to 9-7/8 percent or something like that [on the funds rate]. It seems to me that if we're going to move, we're going to get some flack no matter how much we move. We're going to get just as much flack moving to 9-7/8 as we would to 9-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 116.
 3 / 2 0 / 7 9  -22- MR. BALLES. My slight [tilt] was to 9-3/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a statement made by Mr. Balles.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 117.
 MR. MORRIS. I think we ought to move at least to 9-1/2 percent and we ought to move now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Morris, is advocating for a specific course of action (moving to at least 9-1/2 percent) and expressing a sense of urgency (we ought to move now). This statement could potentially create contention or disagreement among others who may have differing opinions on the appropriate interest rate or timing for action.


Passage number 118.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Frank. Phil.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply expresses gratitude towards Frank.


Passage number 119.
 MR. COLDWELL. Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only includes the introductory statement of Mr. Coldwell's name and does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 120.
 Chairman, I’ve listened to a lot of wisdom around this table and-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. Do you agree with any of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 121.
 MR. COLDWELL. Yes, a good share of what has been said on both sides. I thought after the first two speakers that we had a very well defined two-camp arrangement. The subsequent speakers have blurred it somewhat. I look at this by trying to nail down, at least in my mind, a couple of points. First. looking at the economy, I think we do have [some strength] in labor markets, new orders, capital spending, business inventories, and loans. There is perhaps some weakness showing up in personal income--although I‘m not quite ready to concede that--and in housing and industrial production. But the primary weakness in this economy right now is that it’s [experiencing] an inflationary surge and there’s concern about oil prices and uncertainty on the international political scene. My interpretation of all this leads me to feel that we are near capacity in effective labor and in several industries, so I don’t really expect industrial production to be able to grow very fast unless we find some way to push a magic button and improve our productivity. On inflation, I think the surge is in food, raw materials, and energy. I give very little [weight] to the aggregates these days because they are totally confusing; I think we’re utilizing some stock we built up in the latter part of last year. Whether they will take off under the new set of rules I don’t know. From a policy standpoint, I think we have to balance some of the risks. Are we willing to risk a further surge in inflation, carrying it up beyond the 10 percent the Commerce Department is talking about in the first quarter and perhaps even up to a figure in the 15 percent area. I would view that [development] as perhaps one of the most debilitating to our entire economy of anything [that could happen]. The other risk, of course, is a potential recession. And the balancing of these risks is what I think the Open Market Committee’s decision is all about today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement of the speaker's analysis and interpretation of the current state of the economy, without any direct conflict with other viewpoints.


Passage number 122.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thanks. Did you indicate which direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement asking if the direction was indicated.


Passage number 123.
 MR. COLDWELL. I did not, Mr. Chairman. I‘ll wait until after the [break].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Coldwell simply states that he did not have any further comments and that he will wait until after the break to speak.


Passage number 124.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Phil. Henry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude towards Phil.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 125.
 MR. WALLJCH. I think we’re in imminent danger of building into the economy a higher rate of inflation and of putting ourselves into a position, with or without a subsequent recession, of having to work that off and starting from a higher level with less chance [of success] than we had the last time around. It’s not true that we can’t work off inflation; we did it after the experience of ’74 and ’ 1 5 ,  But we’ve done very poorly of late and our surprises have always been that we’ve found more boominess in the economy and more inflation than we expected up through the last forecast which shaded the 3 / 2 0 / 1 9  -23- boominess a little. So, I see our main risk on the side of inflation. And I fear that we’re in some danger of validating the increase in the price of oil and accepting that as inevitable. I think we ought not to do that; I’d accommodate this kind of outside shock only partly. It seems clear that the economy is much closer to capacity than we had thought. That is, I think, accountable for a good part of the pressures we’re getting. Whether or not a recession is in the works is probably something that is beyond the power of monetary policy now to remedy. I think we have more chances of doing something about inflation than doing something about a recession. If there is a recession, it is likely to be a moderate and short one. I have that reaction because of the fact that it’s so widely advertised and, in the face of that, business behavior has been to step up plant and equipment expenditures. It seems to me they’re looking beyond the valley; they can’t possibly be planning to put much [capacity] in place before some kind of a slowdown occurs. Meanwhile, the inflation pressure is threatening the President’s wage and price program and if that collapses, we‘ve lost one further instrument. It threatens the dollar and if something happens to [weaken] the dollar, we will have more inflation. All this suggests to me that the dangers are more on the side of inflation than on the side of the real sector. I don’t want to minimize those real sector risks; I think they are real. I might add that people who are concerned about excessive boominess and excessive inflation are not just a small minority. I’m surprised how much support one sees around the country, even in the Congress and even among economists whom we have listened to and not usually found on the restrictive side--and even, if I may say so, amony some people in the Administration. So if we are talking about beds, there are some prospects for unusual bedfellows here. A s  for the aggregates, I have much sympathy for Steve‘s analysis. I think it is reasonably persuasive except perhaps the magnitude. something like a proxy for the aggregates, realizing that it’s not a very good measure of total credit. S o  that brings me to what I should say about policy. I think if we fail to do something that recognizes the threat of greater inflation, we will really add to that inflation. A demonstration [of our anti-inflationary resolve] is needed. At a minimum, I would not relax the funds rate for that reason. I’m very reluctant to push it up because I can see that six months from now we might regret having done that if the economy has weakened. I think some demonstration--an action on reserve requirements or the discount rate--might be more [appropriate], within a broader program than this Committee would ordinarily deal with. On the funds rate, I would like to hear the rest of the discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention and disagreement in this passage. The speaker is arguing for a stronger stance against inflation, while acknowledging the possibility of a recession. They believe that the main risk is inflation and that the dangers are more on the side of inflation than on the side of the real sector. They also mention that there is support for their viewpoint from various sources, including Congress and some people in the Administration. However, they also express reluctance to push up interest rates in case the economy weakens.


Passage number 126.
 I would look at bank credit at the present time as CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much, Henry. Well, this has been very helpful. I think the best thing to do is to take a break for a few minutes and come back as near to 11:30 a.m. as we can and see if we can wind this up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of gratitude and a plan for taking a break.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 127.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN MILLER. Let me make a couple of observations. One is that in the course of these four years of business expansion, we’ve had all the elements of a long expansion. And we’ve had some new territory to explore since we‘ve had only one other period in our lifetimes when there has been high inflation during peacetime in the 3120179 -24- United States. We‘ve had it in the whole decade but it’s higher than even the ridiculous rates of 6 percent we had in the ‘ I 3  to ’75 timeframe. We don’t have much in our models to help us understand those periods. There were peculiarities in that period related first to the aftermath of mandatory controls and then the oil boycott, so we can’t crank that into our model and assume that that was an experience or a base from which all future periods of like rates will track. In this particular cycle we’ve had an usual experience where we have alarmed the public about inflation in order to get policy changes and they reacted by finding out that inflation is a danger, which makes our policy direction more difficult. Nonetheless, without alerting them, we couldn’t get the policy changes. And one of the things that consumers did in the face of this was to engage in preferring goods to money and, therefore, there was anticipatory buying which worked against our efforts to cool the economy. And businesses, having been burned so badly in 1973-74, have behaved extremely cautiously during this period. Their investments in either capital or inventories have been cautious. On a net investment basis, after replacement, we are not back to where we were at the prior peak. [Business firms] are actually investing less today than they were at the peak of the last cycle on a net basis. So there has been nothing exuberant about business behavior. They‘ve been quite prudent, I think. We now have recently [unintelligible]. And the question before the house is: Does this mean that businesses also have begun to cave in to the inflation psychology and have begun to opt for goods over money. And will this create a speculative boom that [produces] another peak of sustained inflation, which then will result in a bigger bust. Well, the data appear to be confusing. To the extent that any business decisions currently represent capital commitments, I would say that we should have little concern. Number one, the actual expenditures will be spread over a time [period] that we all predict to be soft economically at any case. In terms of material actually bought and paid for and labor actually employed, it will come at a time when there’s not excessive economic activity. To the extent that it works on the supply side and deals with increasing capacity and modernization and reduces unit costs and contributes to productivity, we should all be applauding and encouraging it. To the extent that it represents inventory accumulation, on the other hand, it could be dangerous because it could result in excess stocks, leading later to cutbacks in production, thereby exacerbating the slowdown and tipping the economy into unnecessary recession. So one has to analyze that. Now, to the degree that stocks are being replenished because of [final sales] in the fourth quarter being stronger than expected, that‘s part of the solution. To the extent that stocks are being accumulated because of the fear that there may be a trucker’s strike or a rubber strike, one has to admit that that’s not speculative behavior but a prudent hedge which has an impact on the economy later but does not represent a shift. To the extent that the accumulation represents a fear that the energy situation is a problem in terms of availability and cost--[if that fear] is rippling through the world again and feedstocks and petro-based products of all types and materials related to that are being bid up--if that is either hoarding or a hedge or a speculation, we have a problem. And to what degree that’s all happening [I don‘t think] any of us can judge. 3 / 2 0 / 7 9  -25- In any case, what we do today is unlikely in my opinion to have much impact on the real behavior of the economy for the next two months. Therefore, what we should be doing today is thinking about what our policy direction should be as the year progresses, thereby being more consistent with our longer-tern view that the monetary aggregates affect the economy over time. We could send up red flags or white flags or yellow flags and people are probably going to behave pretty much based on these other factors. situation is probably more overwhelming right now than anything else. S o  with all that, I would ask you to turn first to page 7 of the Bluebook and thumb through to page 13. Look first at the staff’s suggested alternatives for our directive for the period. Then look at page 13 where we can see [the projected outcomes relative to our long- run ranges1 if, for example, we took alternative B and were within the growth ranges contemplated for the aggregates for the next 2 months under alternative B. If we were pursuing M1 in the 4 to 9 percent range and we hit the top of it, we would get growth back up to just within our long-term range. We’d still be below on M 2 ,  at the top of our range on M3, and we would be just touching the bottom of our [Ml] growth range; on bank credit we’d be at the upper bracket. The Bluebook also continues to present to you the rates of growth for monetary aggregates that would be required to get back to the [upper limit], the midpoint, or the [lower limit] of our own target ranges over a period of time. Those I believe are shown on page 10. How they view the energy With all of that, my thought would be that the right posture now is one of seeking to [guide] the aggregates back toward our ranges, but not doing so with undue acceleration or signals of undue concern by moving too rapidly. I would be more patient for the reason that I think the economy is going to pursue its own course right now. Nor do I think we ought to start to send any particular signals of unusual tightening or monetary restraint because that wouldn’t do much in the short term and in the long term it would work against our desire, if we believe in our own ranges and the objective of getting back inside the ranges. For that reason I would be inclined to take a moderate course of more or less even keeling where we are; I‘d [put] our objectives for M1 and M2 in the 4 to 8 or 4 to 9 percent area [unintelligible]. Those are just my personal observations. I would appreciate having inputs from each of you. I might say that on the thrust of policy the score card reads as follows: John Balles, slight tilt toward a lower funds rate; Bob Black, no action now; Phil Coldwell will tell us later; Bones Kimbrel, some firming; Bob Mayo, hold the current position, although I gather from what Bob said that a trifle more restraint would be acceptable; Chuck Partee, what he said was that it‘s time to do something and reading between the lines I think he’d like to ease.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement or contention in the passage. Different individuals have different opinions on the appropriate policy direction and actions to take. For example, John Balles suggests a lower funds rate, while Bones Kimbrel suggests some firming. This shows that there is disagreement among the individuals on how to proceed.


Passage number 128.
 Nancy Teeters, no change in policy; Paul Volcker, some firming; Henry Wallich, hold is what he actually said, but to demonstrate in some other ways that we are continuing our concern about inflation, which we obviously are; Ernie Baughman, maintain policy; Dave Eastburn, maintain the funds rate but tilt policy to ease; Roger Guffey, if anything, move in the direction of ease; Frank Morris, 9-112 percent today-- MR. MORRIS. Tomorrow would be all right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The different individuals mentioned are expressing their own individual views on what policy should be maintained or implemented, but there is no direct contradiction or disagreement between them.


Passage number 129.
 3/20/79 -26- CHAIRMAN MILLER. Larry Roos, err on the side of moving toward ease; Willis Winn. I’m not sure what you came down on, Willis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It merely mentions Larry Roos' preference for moving towards ease and expresses uncertainty about Willis Winn's stance.


Passage number 130.
 MR. WINN. Hold steady.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply giving an instruction to hold steady.


Passage number 131.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. And Tom Gainor, hold the line. So that’s the rundown. Now let’s see what you’d really like to do. John Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply addressing Tom Gainor and informing him of the situation before asking for his input or preference.


Passage number 132.
 MR. BALLES. Well, in my tilt toward less restraint--1 certainly wouldn’t call it ease--on the specifications I would land somewhere between alternative A and alternative B. Specifically, on M1, the 4 to 9 percent range would be acceptable to me. On M2, I would make the range 5 to 9 percent based on my view that we shouldn’t let M2 fall further below the lower end of our 12-month range. That’s why the 3-1/2 percent in the Bluebook bothers me. And on the funds rate, I would like to see a range of 9-1/4 to 10-1/4 percent with an immediate move to 9-3/4 percent. One reason in particular for tilting toward a lower funds rate at this time is the point I referred to in my earlier remarks about the consistent over-forecasting by several percentage points on both M1 and M2 that has been going on for five months now. If that over-forecast continued in March, which is my full expectation, we’re going to see some more very low numbers in the growth of the monetary aggregates in the month of March. That would make a full six months and that begins to worry me. We really have a dilemma in the sense that the announcement effects could be counterproductive both with respect to the value of the dollar and the public‘s perception of what we’re up to. But realizing that there are lags in the impact of policy, as I continue to stress, and given my expectation of a recession by the middle of the year, I think it’s now time to begin to unwind this posture we’ve been in since November.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is the personal viewpoint and recommendation of Mr. Balles.


Passage number 133.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, John. Bob Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 134.
 MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I guess it’s most accurate to say that I want a foot in each bed. I’m worried about both inflation and recession. I‘m worried about what a recession might do in speeding up inflation later by causing us to throw in all our chips. So I think we have to be sensitive to both concerns in reaching a policy decision and I believe we ought to let the behavior of the aggregates guide what we do in the weeks just ahead. We [at the Richmond Federal Reserve Bank] tend to do that more than perhaps most people around the table. I believe we could do this pretty well with alternative B coupled with an aggregates directive. As I read this, that would give us a midpoint [on M11 of 6-1/2 percent and would trigger some action to lower the federal funds rate if the aggregate came in at 5-1/2 percent or lower. Growth at that rate would mean--if we look at this on a 3-month moving average basis, which is the way we like to do it-- no further deviation of M1 from the path that we’ve set from the fourth quarter of last year to the fourth quarter of this year; it would continue to be about as much below the path as it has been. For a change, I‘m less concerned on the up side and wouldn’t be bothered if we hit a 9 or 9-l/2 percent rate of growth in M1. I suppose what I said is tantamount to saying I want an aggregates directive on the bottom and a money market directive on the top. The M2 range in alternative B would suit me fine, but I have even less faith in that than in M1 because I think the tightening of money has depressed M2 more. The money market funds have been coming mostly out of M2, I 3/20/79 -27- think, rather than M1. So far as the federal funds range is concerned, I would prefer to see that stay at 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black simply explains his concerns about both inflation and recession and suggests a policy decision based on the behavior of the aggregates. There are no conflicting viewpoints or arguments presented.


Passage number 135.
 MR. PARTEE. That's " B .
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee, presumably without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 136.
 "  MR. BLACK. That would be "B." I'd buy those specifications.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage indicated by the phrase "That would be 'B.'" It suggests that Mr. Black does not agree with the previous statement or option and prefers the option mentioned as "B."


Passage number 137.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you. Phil Coldwell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude.


Passage number 138.
 MR. COLDWELL. Mr. Chairman, I would prefer to do some of what Bob is suggesting, but with a tilt to it. I took your specifications to a degree: for M1, 4 to 8 percent; for M2, 3 to 7 percent; and for federal funds, 10 to 10-1/2 percent, with a midpoint of 10-1/4 percent. A zone to play with between 10-1/8 and 10-3/8 percent will enable the Desk to move around a bit. And if the aggregates come in extremely weak again, I would expect consultation by the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. Mr. Coldwell is stating his preference and suggesting a slight variation to what Bob is suggesting, but there is no direct disagreement or argument.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 139.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Phil. Bones.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the use of "Thank you, Phil" followed by "Bones" which suggests a contrasting or opposing statement.


Passage number 140.
 MR. KIMBREL. Mr. Chairman, I think Governor Coldwell has just spoken my piece. I would favor exactly the numbers [he proposed1 of 4 to 8, 3 to 7, and 10 to 10-1/2 percent. I would not like to see the funds rate drop below 10 percent; I think that clearly would be misunderstood. In my view the danger is on the side of inflation. And with our visibility in the markets, both domestic and international, any failure to recognize this danger of inflation could indeed cause us problems. I would like to see us with alternative B and those numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Kimbrel, is expressing agreement with Governor Coldwell's proposed numbers and shares the same concerns about inflation.


Passage number 141.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much. Bob Mayo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude.


Passage number 142.
 MR. MAYO. It so happens that I've also jotted down 10 to 10-1/2 percent on federal funds. I would treat it asymmetrically, rather than jump immediately to 10-1/4 percent. But if the market urge tended to push it toward 10-1/4 percent, I wouldn't resist it. For M1 4 to 8 percent is fine and 4 to 8 percent is all right for M2, although I don't feel strongly about that versus the 3-1/2 to I-1/2 percent. I would do a money market directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different interest rates and their potential effects on the market. They mention their own preference for certain rates, but also acknowledge that they would not resist if the market pushed for a different rate.


Passage number 143.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Bob. Chuck Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contentious or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude by one person to another.


Passage number 144.
 MR. PARTEE. Well, if I had the nerve, I would suggest what Frank Morris did because I think that is what's really required if we're to have any chance of avoiding a recession. And [even] that might not do it, but it's a start. But I do think there is more of a signal hazard in the current rate of inflation than that policy would make appropriate. I believe that we have lost a lot of ground with reference to the projections that we gave to the Congress just six weeks ago and we don't have a sliding base or anything of that kind any more. So I would hate to see us lose any ground relative to those presumed growth rates in the aggregates, unless we could say to Congress that we're doing that because the business outlook is really very much stronger than we expected, and that's not the case. If anything, it's very much weaker than we anticipated or than we said was consistent with our policy. I think it's important to look at the aggregates and I would go to an aggregates directive. I could live with 4 to 8 percent [for Ml]. If you look at [the chart on1 page 13, 3 / 2 0 / 7 9  -28- 4 percent picks the growth up just a bit and 8 percent would get us to about the lower limit, so I could live with 4 to 8 percent in the spirit of compromise. I would like to raise M2 to 4 to 8 percent also because I think it’s very difficult to interpret what may happen in terms of the distribution of money market certificates between banks and thrifts when there is no differential and that is going to tend to favor the banks over the thrifts. Therefore, I would lift that range just slightly in order to allow for that contingency. So 4 to 8 percent on both M1 and M2 I think would be satisfactory. On the funds rate range, I would like to tilt it downward a bit, though not as much as John Balles would. I can‘t visualize within those aggregate ranges any reason at all for taking the funds rate over 10-1/4 percent. So I think 10-1/4 percent ought to be the top and 9-1/2 percent ought to be the bottom. And I would treat [the range1 asymmetrically; that is, I’d leave the funds rate at 10 percent or a tad above where it is now until the aggregates begin to move. If they begin to show weakness within their ranges--toward the lower end of the ranges or below--1 would then move the funds rate down. I think the time has come to do that, if in fact we have another month where the aggregates are quite weak. Now, the staff is predicting that they won’t be: and if the staff is right, there wouldn’t be any easing. But if the staff is wrong, there would be an easing. So my preference would be 9-1/2 to 10-1/4 percent with a midpoint of 10 percent from the standpoint of current Desk operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is expressing his own opinions and preferences but there is no direct disagreement with any other person or viewpoint mentioned.


Passage number 145.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Chuck. Nancy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is thanking someone named Chuck and addressing him as Nancy, but there is no disagreement or conflict present.


Passage number 146.
 MS. TEETERS. Well, I can live with a 4 to 8 percent range on M1. And I don’t think 4 to 8 percent on M2 would make too much difference; I happen to agree with Phil that if things begin to come apart, we will need to have a meeting. I would like simply to stay where we are and would recommend a federal funds range of 9-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent. If there’s any question on economic developments, the funds rate should be shaded down. I notice that we seem always to end up at the top of whatever our range is in the actual operations of the market, and I would like to see the funds rate on the low side of 10 percent, but certainly not above 10 percent at the present time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and making a recommendation, but there is no argument or conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 147.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Nancy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 148.
 Paul VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I do think we need to make some move in recognition of what has been happening on the inflation front. And I think it’s good for the stability of the economy in the long run, as I said earlier. In terms of getting back into the longer-range targets, these figures on page 10 don’t look particularly frightening to me in terms of what it would take to get back [into the ranges] by the third quarter. It seems fairly natural; it’s only a 6 percent rate of growth in M1. I’m not sure we wouldn‘t get that, or maybe even exceed it, in the ordinary course of events. I don’t know. I don‘t think that target itself, though written in our records, is written in heaven, given all the uncertainties that we had when we set it. But it doesn’t look to me as if we’re out of sight of it completely when I look at what it takes to come back. I also think we‘re in a much better position in terms of any easing move that we might want to make as time wears on. If these concerns about a recession, which I share to some degree, are true, we’re going to want to be easing at some point; we‘re going to have to. I would rather 3/20/19 -29- make a small gesture now toward some firming and have a little more credibility when the case for easing is clear without upsetting the whole psychology of our basic anti-inflation program. I think we’d be a little better off. Looking at it in terms of the funds rate, I would be happiest going to 10-1/2 percent, which is a fairly small move when it becomes visible. I could live with the figures that Mr. Coldwell or Mr. Kimbrel cited certainly, which would involve a very modest move to 10-1/4 percent and putting the range at 10 to 10-1/2 percent. I’ve been sitting here thinking about whether the money market or aggregates approach is better. With that kind of range and with some modest initial move, I could live with the aggregates approach easily enough, although I was originally thinking of a money market [directive]. Any of the ranges that have been mentioned for the aggregates seem a little on the high side to me except for the M2 range of 3 to I percent, which doesn’t bother me at all. For M1, 8 percent on the high side does worry me and I’d rather go with something like 2 to I percent and make sure we stay at 10-1/4 percent [on the funds rate] or move slightly higher if M1 actually gets up to the I percent area. I recognize that we have the telephone conference alternative at all times too, so the exact level of the aggregates isn’t quite as important to me as the movement on the funds rate. I’d like to make some gesture there immediately.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It is primarily an individual expressing their thoughts and preferences on monetary policy.


Passage number 149.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Paul. Henry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude to Paul.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 150.
 MR. WALLICH. Well, I question the meaning of the aggregates. I think we have to add something to them, both for ATS and for shift in the demand curve, so I believe they are much higher than they look on paper. I would, therefore, take the C alternative, 3-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for M1 and 3 to I percent for M2. And somewhere in the directive I would make reference to the view that the aggregates are being interfered with by technological developments due to ATS and other factors, which I think should also be reflected in our one-year targets. There‘s no sense running after those if we have good reason to believe that something has happened to the demand for money that makes a given amount of money go further than we thought it would. On the funds rate, I would like to push it up just a little to 10-1/4 percent and go to a range of 10 to 10-1/2 percent. But I do think the inflationary environment calls for some other kind of action, so I would say that the Board should move on reserve requirements or the discount rate or some combination of these in a moderate way. AS far as the nature of the directive is concerned, I’d like to have a money market directive with the range of 10 to 10-1/2 percent and, as I said, move to the midpoint of 10-1/4 percent with reasonable promptness.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich is questioning the meaning of the aggregates and advocating for higher targets for M1 and M2. He also suggests taking action on reserve requirements or the discount rate, whereas there may be differing opinions on what action should be taken.


Passage number 151.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Henry. Ernie.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude towards Henry.


Passage number 152.
 MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, alternative B as presented in the Bluebook is an acceptable prescription for me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Baughman, is expressing his agreement with alternative B as presented in the Bluebook.


Passage number 153.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Ernie. Dave.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 154.
 MR. EASTBURN. I would keep the funds rate where it is and I would use the bottom of the alternative A range [for Mll as the guide. I’d accept any growth in the aggregates above that bottom. And if the 3120179 -30- aggregates started to break through that bottom, I would have a telephone conference call.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is giving their own opinion and suggesting a course of action, but there is no conflict or disagreement with any other party mentioned.


Passage number 155.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Dave.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Thank you, Dave" expresses gratitude or appreciation towards someone named Dave, but it does not involve any conflict or differing opinions.


Passage number 156.
 Roger MR. GUFFEY. I would prefer ranges for both M1 and M2 of 4 to 8 percent--paying little attention to M1 but more to M2. in which I have somewhat more confidence--with a funds range of 9-314 to 10-114 percent, centering on 10 percent, which may or may not be a perceptible move downward. That is 10 or 15 basis points that perhaps the market would read. And I would favor going to 10 percent immediately.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their preference for specific ranges and interest rates, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 157.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Roger. Frank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 158.
 MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, as I said earlier, I would move to 9-l/2 percent on the funds rate. When that has been recognized in the marketplace, I think the Chairman ought to hold a press conference and explain this unprecedented development of the Fed moving the funds rate down before we're actually in a recession.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making a suggestion and expressing their opinion about what the Chairman of the Fed should do.


Passage number 159.
 MR. PARTEE. We don't know that for sure. We might actually be in one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply acknowledges uncertainty about the situation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 160.
 MR. MORRIS. We might actually be in it, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The use of the word "might" suggests uncertainty or disagreement about whether they are actually in it.


Passage number 161.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't actually know there's going to be one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating that there is uncertainty or lack of knowledge about something, rather than expressing any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 162.
 MR. MORRIS. But it would be an unprecedented move and I think we would have to explain to the market that with a 10 percent funds rate, we've had no increase in bank reserves in six months and, therefore, no increase in the money supply. We need to explain that although our concern about inflation has not diminished, we also have concerns about the economy and want to keep it on a slow growth path rather than send it into a recession. We should note that if our concerns about the economy should change--if it turns out that the current trend toward a softening in the economy tends to be a short- term phenomenon--we will be quite prepared to move the funds rate back up to 10 percent. At least we'd have a head start on the job that I think we're going to have to do later on anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage suggests that there is agreement among the speakers about the current course of action and the reasoning behind it.


Passage number 163.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Frank. Larry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude.


Passage number 164.
 MR. ROOS. If our concern, Mr. Chairman, is to avoid or at least minimize the recession, and if our concern is about continuing to undershoot the growth ranges for the aggregates we had projected, I think there's no way we should tolerate a range that could possibly entail M1 growth at a rate as slow as 4-114 or 4-112 percent. So I would recommend raising the lower end of alternative A, if you will, to 6 percent so that under no circumstances could M1 growth continue at 4 to 4-112 percent. The M2 range is satisfactory as shown and in order to have the greatest opportunity of avoiding a continued undershoot of the aggregates, I think we should widen the fed funds range and allow the possibility that the rate could be reduced significantly. If the signal problem is difficult, let's make the range 9-1/4 to 10-114 percent. I think we should have an aggregates directive and an understanding that the Desk should keep an eagle eye 3 / 2 0 / 7 9  -31- on these aggregates and not permit them to sag by concentrating on maintaining the funds rate near the upper end of its target range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 165.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Larry. Willis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is thanking Larry, indicating gratitude or appreciation, but there is no indication or expression of disagreement or argument.


Passage number 166.
 MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, I'd take generally alternative B with a 4 to 8 percent range on both the M1 and M2 ranges and an aggregates directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indications of contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement or opinion by Mr. Winn regarding his preference for alternative B and the specific ranges for M1 and M2.


Passage number 167.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you. Tom.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a polite expression of gratitude addressed to someone named Tom.


Passage number 168.
 MR. GAINOR. Mr. Chairman, we would favor alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement stated in the passage. The speaker simply states their preference for alternative B.


Passage number 169.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay. As usual we have complete unanimity. For M1, 4 to 8 percent seems to be the most popular range, with six [members]. And we have for M2 four who said 4 to 8 and four who said 3 to 7; we had one for 3-1/2 to 7-112 and one for 5 to 9. For the funds rate, 5 people want 10 to 10-1/2 percent--six, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the different ranges chosen by different members without any indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 170.
 MR. PARTEE. Of the voting members.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention among the voting members.


Passage number 171.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. I'm talking just about the voting members. Well, I have Phil Coldwell, Bones Kimbrel, Bob Mayo, Paul Volcker and Henry Wallich. That's five. I miscounted, excuse me. ME1. COLDWELL. The 10-1/2 percent is at least a ceiling on all the ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply listing the names of the voting members and acknowledging a mistake in their count.


Passage number 172.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes, nobody was over 10-112 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement about nobody being over 10-112 percent is a factual statement that does not involve any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 173.
 MR. COLDWELL. There was variation on the bottom, though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the presence of variation on the bottom without any conflicting or contradictory statements.


Passage number 174.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes, one of us, Nancy, had a 10-112 percent top limit but that was with a 9-112 percent bottom. Chuck had 9-112 to 10-1/4, Bob Black had 9-3/4 to 10-112, and John Balles had 9-1/4 to 10-1/4. But on the low side we had five with a lower limit of 10, two at 9-1/2, and one each at 9-3/4 and 9-1/4 percent. I haven't said anything yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply stating the different top and bottom limits that each person had.


Passage number 175.
 MR. BLACK. It averages Out to 9-314.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a numerical average without any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints being presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 176.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes. It looks to me as if we could cut this on a 4 to 8 percent on M1. I don't know quite what to make of M2, but 3-1/2 to 7-112 percent looks to be a mid-range [preference] And the compromise area might be 10 to 10-1/4 percent on fed funds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage mentions different percentages for cutting M1 and M2, suggesting a potential disagreement or contention on the appropriate course of action.


Passage number 177.
 MR. PARTEE. And then just have a money market directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply making a statement.


Passage number 178.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes, and just have a money market directive--stay or more less where we are. That's what would seem [to be closest to a consensusl. How many would favor that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking for a consensus on a particular decision or course of action.


Passage number 179.
 MR. BALLES. A question first, Mr. Chairman: What is your reading on the consensus view for the midpoint of the federal funds range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage presents a question being asked by Mr. Balles and there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 180.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. As I look at this, I'd say the consensus is to stay at about the prevailing rate, which is 10 percent plus. Five 3 / 2 0 / 7 9  -32- were for the prevailing rate. One--that was you--was for a lower rate. And Phil and Bones were for just a slight firming--I would say something a little over 10, maybe 10-1/8 percent. Some wanted higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. 

Explanation: The passage states that there are different opinions on what the interest rate should be. Some individuals support the prevailing rate, one person (referred to as "you") supports a lower rate, and Phil and Bones support a slightly higher rate. This indicates that there is disagreement or contention regarding the optimal interest rate.


Passage number 181.
 MR. PARTEE. It is just four weeks until the next meeting, is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the timeline of the next meeting.


Passage number 182.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. That's correct. Well, let's try that one in a quick straw vote: On MI, 4 to 8; on M2, 3-1/2 to 7-1/2; on the fed funds rate, continue in a 10 percent plus mode. It has really been about 10-1/8 percent, hasn't it. So let's say around 10 or 10-1/8 percent, in that range. Paul, how would you feel about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing different values and asking for input on them.


Passage number 183.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. I can buy the ranges for the aggregates but the one for the funds rate I can't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a limitation or inability to purchase a certain range for the funds rate.


Passage number 184.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. You can't buy the funds range, all right. But you can buy the aggregates. John.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any form of contention or disagreement. It simply states that while one cannot buy the funds range, they do have the option to buy the aggregates. The mention of John does not introduce any conflicting views either.


Passage number 185.
 MR. BALLES. If we're talking about preferences, it's a little too tighz for me. I would say no.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 186.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. The aggregates bother you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement without any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 187.
 MR. BALLES. The aggregates directive is what I'd like and I failed to mention that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Balles is simply stating that he would prefer the aggregates directive and expressing that he forgot to mention this earlier. There is no opposing or conflicting viewpoint expressed.


Passage number 188.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. I mean do the aggregates numbers that were suggested concern you also.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 189.
 MR. BALLES. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The presence of the word "Yes" indicates that there is contention or disagreement in the passage. However, without further context, it is not possible to determine the specific source or nature of the contention.


Passage number 190.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay. Bob Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only consists of one word, which does not convey any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 191.
 MR. BLACK. I would go along with it, Mr. Chairman. I would like to point out that with the 4 to 8 percent M1 range and a money market [directive], we would not do anything until we got a rate as low as 4 percent on M1. I'd rather see that [trigger] a little higher, but I can live with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black expresses his agreement with the proposal and acknowledges his personal preference for a higher trigger, but indicates that he can accept the proposed rate.


Passage number 192.
 If one looks at those charts, that's not-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. It shows a tick up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states an observation about the charts.


Passage number 193.
 MR. BLACK. It's a tick up, but I'd go with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing their preference or agreement with a certain option.


Passage number 194.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Phil.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 195.
 MR. COLDWELL. No, I think the ceiling on the funds rate is too low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states Mr. Coldwell's opinion about the ceiling on the funds rate being too low.


Passage number 196.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Bones.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "Bones" does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 197.
 MR. KIMBREL. I find it a little difficult too, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kimbrel simply states that he finds something difficult.


Passage number 198.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Which part of it didn't you like.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply asks for clarification or further explanation about a specific part that someone did not like.


Passage number 199.
 MR. KIMBREL. The funds range is just entirely too narrow. I think the aggregates ranges are fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses their opinion that the funds range is too narrow, but there is no indication of disagreement or contention with others in the passage.


Passage number 200.
 3/20/19 -33- CHAIRMAN MILLER. Bob Mayo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply states a date and mentions the name "Bob Mayo" without any conflicting or contradictory information.


Passage number 201.
 MR. MAYO. I’d prefer the 10-112 percent upper limit. I don’t care that much about the 9-112 versus 9-314 percent [on the bottom].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses a personal preference for the 10-112 percent upper limit and indicates that they are not concerned about the difference in the bottom percentage options. There is no contention or disagreement evident in this statement.


Passage number 202.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Chuck.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It cannot be determined whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual passage provided. Please provide the passage for further analysis.


Passage number 203.
 MR. PARTEE. Well, I would buy it for four weeks, but I find it too tight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their personal opinion about finding something "too tight" but does not engage in any argument or disagreement with others.


Passage number 204.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Nancy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unfortunately, the given passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It is necessary to have more context or content in order to make a definitive assessment.


Passage number 205.
 MS. TEETERS. I could buy it. I think we should stay just where we are at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not reveal any contention or disagreement. Ms. Teeters expresses her agreement with staying in the current situation.


Passage number 206.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Henry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation:
The passage is not provided, so it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement in it.


Passage number 207.
 MR. WALLICH. No, I can live with the aggregates, but I’d like to see the funds rate a little higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Wallich is expressing his personal preference to see the funds rate a little higher, but there is no indication of a disagreement or argument.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 208.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. It looks as if we’re going to have a very close vote today because we have those who think this is too tight and those who think it’s too loose. We have three who indicated they could accept it and five who indicated they couldn’t. Of those, John, you would prefer it to be less restrictive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The statement "we have three who indicated they could accept it and five who indicated they couldn't" suggests a disagreement among the group about whether the proposed vote is too tight or too loose. Additionally, John's preference for it to be less restrictive further confirms the presence of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 209.
 MR. BALLES. Let me say something here because I realize we have to have a compromise between those who feel the current proposal is too easy and those who feel it’s too tight. The one thing that could be changed so I could go along with it would be to move from a money market directive to an aggregates directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Balles, acknowledges the need for a compromise between two differing views and suggests a potential change that could satisfy both sides.


Passage number 210.
 At least that would-- MR. PARTEE. With a quarter point range on the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The mention of "a quarter point range on the funds rate" is a continuation of the previous statement.


Passage number 211.
 MR. BALLES.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage is not provided, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 212.
 Well-- MR. BLACK. It changes the trigger point. M R .  MAYO. Yes, but not much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both individuals are acknowledging that there is a change in the trigger point, with Mr. Black emphasizing that the change is not significant.


Passage number 213.
 MR. PARTEE. What would we do in the case of a tie.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply asking for information or clarification.


Passage number 214.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. The Chairman decides, obviously.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "The Chairman decides, obviously" is a straightforward statement without any indication of contention or disagreement. It presents a fact without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 215.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement conveyed in the passage, as it only mentions the position or title of someone (Vice Chairman Volcker) without providing any further information or context that could suggest disagreement or contention.


Passage number 216.
 A plurality-- MS. TEETERS. Maybe the thing to do is to stay with 9-3/4 and 10-112 percent with the understanding that we can consult. That would get both ends of the spectrum.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. Ms. Teeters suggests a possible solution and suggests consulting for further input, indicating a cooperative approach.


Passage number 217.
 MR. PARTEE. You mean just continue the present fed funds range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 218.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. But you said widen the range. 3/20/79 -34- M S .  TEETERS. No, [retain] the one we've been operating with, the 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 percent, which gets both ends of the spectrm.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 219.
 MR. BALLES. Yes, that would make a lot of sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement expressed by Mr. Balles is in agreement with the preceding information and suggests that the proposed idea is logical.


Passage number 220.
 MR. PARTEE. I think so, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage indicates agreement.


Passage number 221.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. All right, let's try 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 percent. Is that where we are now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting a range of percentages without any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints being expressed.


Passage number 222.
 MS. TEETERS. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is "Yes." The use of the phrase "Yes" suggests that there is contention or disagreement in the passage. However, without the actual passage, it is not possible to provide a detailed explanation.


Passage number 223.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. What was our directive last time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 224.
 MR. ALTMA". We didn't have a range. We had "maintaining" the prevailing rate provided the aggregates stayed within their ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply mentions that they didn't have a range and instead had a policy of maintaining the prevailing rate as long as the aggregates stayed within their ranges.


Passage number 225.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. That's what I thought.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their agreement with something, indicating that their thoughts align with the previous statement or idea.


Passage number 226.
 MR. PARTEE. Oh, really. I thought we had a range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing surprise but is not arguing or contradicting the previous statement.


Passage number 227.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. No, we had no range. It's one of the few times when we had no range at all. However, let's try it with a 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 percent range now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a fact about the lack of range and proposing a different range to try.


Passage number 228.
 MR. BLACK. Is this with a money market directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is simply asking a question.


Passage number 229.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. From what 1 hear, let's try this on an aggregates directive first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is proposing a plan of action.


Passage number 230.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And that means no change in the prevailing federal funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward statement about the prevailing federal funds rate and does not include any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 231.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. That means we stay where we are, the prevailing rate. We have 4 to 8 percent for M1, 3-l/2 to 7-1/2 percent for M2, 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 percent for the funds range and we stay around 10 percent plus--10 to 10-1/8 is the maneuvering room--and an aggregates directive. Let's try it again. Paul.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage is providing specific percentages and ranges for various measures, without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 232.
 Vice Chairman Volcker President Balles President Black Governor Coldwell President Kimbrel President Mayo Governor Partee Governor Teeters Governor Wallich NO Yes Yes NO NO Yes Yes yes NO CHAIRMAN MILLER. I would vote for that, which means we would have a 6 to 4 vote. Okay, let's take a final vote. Secretary, would you read what it is we're proposing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. All the individuals mentioned have expressed agreement with the proposal.


Passage number 233.
 MR. ALTMA". The M1 range is 4 to 8 percent and the M2 range is 3-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent; the funds range is 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 percent, with the initial objective at the prevailing rate of 10 to 10-1/8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The information provided simply states the different ranges for M1, M2, and funds, without any conflicting opinions or contradictory statements.


Passage number 234.
 3 / 2 0 / 7 9  -35- MR. COLDWELL. And a money market directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply mentions a date and the name "Mr. Coldwell" along with a money market directive.


Passage number 235.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. A n  aggregates directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contentions or disagreements.


Passage number 236.
 MR. ALTMANN . Chairman Miller Vice Chairman Volcke President Balles President Black Governor Coldwell President Kimbrel President Mayo Governor Partee Governor Teeters Goveror Wallich Yes Yes Yes No NO Yes Yes Yes NO .
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the given passage, there is no indication of contention or disagreement. The responses provided are quite consistent, with only two "No" responses.


Passage number 237.
r NO CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay, we have a vote. There's some other business for the meeting, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 238.
 MR. ALTMA". Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: There is contention or disagreement in the passage because "MR. ALTMA" suggests that someone is addressing or referring to Mr. Altma, indicating the presence of a potential conflict or disagreement. However, without further context, it is not possible to determine the specific nature of the contention or disagreement.


Passage number 239.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. The next item is the consideration of the Manager's recommendation with respect to foreign currency operations. Alan Holmes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 240.
 MR. HOLMES. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

There is disagreement in the passage because Mr. Holmes's statement in the appendix suggests that there is a contradiction or opposing viewpoint to be addressed.


Passage number 241.
] CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much, Alan. Any questions or comments. Henry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple expression of gratitude and an inquiry for any questions or comments. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 242.
 MR. WALLICH. Alan, do you have the feeling that the Germans would want us to use Treasury funds raised in their market to repay swaps rather than go to a second renewal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 243.
 MR. HOLMES. Yes, I think the Germans would like it and the Treasury would not; so there's a bit of an impasse there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Holmes believes that the Germans would like something, while the Treasury would not. This difference in opinion creates an impasse or deadlock between the two parties.


Passage number 244.
 MR. WALLICH. Yes, I wouldn't either. I think the Treasury is right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both parties seem to agree on the matter being discussed.


Passage number 245.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Any other questions or comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any specific questions or comments for contention or disagreement.


Passage number 246.
 MR. PARTEE. What would be the effect of that anyway, Henry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without more context.


Passage number 247.
 MR. WALLICH. Well, we use up the easily disposable money where nobody can say "no" when we want to use it and we put ourselves in their hands.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. Mr. Wallich is discussing a strategy or approach of using easily disposable money.


Passage number 248.
 And they can restrain us-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. We can draw on the swap but we have to get their concurrence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker or subject can draw on the swap, but they need the concurrence or agreement of someone else.


Passage number 249.
 MR. PARTEE. I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not contain any conflicting or contradictory statements. It simply states that Mr. Partee sees something, without indicating any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 250.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. It cuts down our flexibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The phrase "It cuts down our flexibility" implies that there is a reduction in flexibility, which suggests a form of disagreement or dissatisfaction. However, without further context, it is difficult to determine the specific nature or parties involved in the contention.


Passage number 251.
 MR. PARTEE. I agree with you. It's undesirable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Both speakers, Mr. Party and the unidentified person, are in agreement and express the sentiment that something is undesirable.


Passage number 252.
 MR. WALLICH.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but the information provided is not sufficient to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 253.
 Particularly in light of the 3 / 2 0 / 7 9  - 3 6 -  CHAIRMAN MILLER. Other questions or comments to Alan. Next, we have distributed a memorandum from Peter Sternlight and Bob Mannion on the Lending of Securities. Unless there are any comments or dissents, we could approve that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating that a memorandum has been distributed and asking if there are any comments or dissents.


Passage number 254.
 MR. COLDWELL. May I raise a question, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement. Mr. Coldwell is simply asking to raise a question, which does not imply disagreement with the chairman or any other person mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 255.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage, but it is not mentioned in the question what specific sentence or part of the passage is referring to.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 256.
 MR. COLDWELL. In view of the rising volume in the lending area it seems to me that we ought to be raising our interest rates on this, perhaps to a 2 to 10 percent range instead of the current range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is a disagreement or contention about whether to raise interest rates in the lending area. The speaker, Mr. Coldwell, is proposing an increase in interest rates, while the current range suggests that there might be opposition or differing opinions on the matter.


Passage number 257.
 MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, we have a differential now, Governor, and I think it's one that generally induces the dealers to look elsewhere before they come to us, although as you mentioned there has been an increase this past year. I think that is largely just because of general shortages of collateral in the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating some facts and observations without presenting any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 258.
 MR. PARTEE. What is that differential customarily, Peter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about the customary differential.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 259.
 MR. STERNLIGHT. We are charging about double what they would have to pay elsewhere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage includes the phrase "We are charging about double what they would have to pay elsewhere," indicating a difference or disagreement in pricing between Mr. Sternlight's business and other potential options.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 260.
 MR. PARTEE. About double.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage does not provide enough context to determine the specific topic of contention or disagreement, but the statement "About double" suggests that there is a difference of opinion or conflicting information being discussed.


Passage number 261.
 MR. HOLMES. And with an escalating scale if they don't pay off [on time]; that's the point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Holmes, presumably discussing a point or idea without contradiction or opposition.


Passage number 262.
 MR. COLDWELL(.). My only point is that we are starting to see an enlargement of this and I would raise questions as to the desirability of our providing more and more [of these securities loans]. I think we can provide a little more disincentive to borrow by raising that rate slightly. Two percent is not a large change. M R .  WALLICH. I'd like to support this, because it seems to me it would induce greater effort on the part of the market to find collateral in advance and be prepared [to meet obligations]. It would also be helpful should the float become very large again, so we're not a cheap lender of last resort anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Both speakers agree that the rate should be raised slightly to provide more disincentive to borrowing and to induce greater effort on the part of the market.


Passage number 263.
 MR. HOLMES. Well, we're not a lender of last resort, Governor Wallich; as you know, we will lend only in the case of a failure to a dealer. They just can't come and borrow from us for any purpose. M R .  WALLICH.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Holmes, is simply clarifying the lending policy of his organization. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument being presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 264.
 Yes, I see your point MR. COLDWELL. But they do come and borrow. The question is the degree to which they push to try to cover [their shorts1 before they come to us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "But they do come and borrow" indicates that the speaker is acknowledging Mr. Coldwell's point but disagreeing with it to some extent. They are suggesting that although borrowers do come, there is still a question about how aggressively they try to cover their shorts before seeking assistance.


Passage number 265.
 A little more price disincentive might-- MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, the difference between 3/4 percent and 1-1/2 percent is already a substantial incentive for dealers to try to find collateral anywhere. I think over this past year, with the growth in the use of the repurchase agreement by banks, there has just 3 / 2 0 / 1 9  -37- been that much less collateral in the market. I don't think that's a lasting situation; at least I hope it's not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses the potential impact of price disincentive on dealers and the availability of collateral in the market.


Passage number 266.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know that this is a religious issue. I can see charging a little more but it's perhaps a peculiarly bad time, given the unfortunate profitability situation of government securities dealers for some time now. I wonder whether we couldn't go along as we are now without throwing a rock in the bucket.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 267.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Do you want to review this in six months instead of a year. Why don't we put it on the agenda for a 6-month review and approve it the way it is instead of waiting for the full year. And we will see how it goes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply proposes reviewing something in six months instead of a year and suggests putting it on the agenda for a 6-month review. There is no indication of any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 268.
 MR. COLDWELL. I would like to have a little study done on the question of what [a rate change] would perhaps do. M R .  PARTEE. Quantify the idea of raising the margin, and see what the effect would be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Coldwell expresses his desire for a study to be conducted on the potential effects of a rate change, and Mr. Partee agrees with the idea and suggests quantifying the concept of raising the margin to further understand its impact.


Passage number 269.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay, on that basis, may we have your approval. Thank you very much. The next item is a review of the Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations. Has that been distributed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement regarding the next item on the agenda.


Passage number 270.
 MR. ALTMANN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage given. The passage only mentions Mr. Altmann and does not indicate any conflicting views or opposing ideas.


Passage number 271.
 Yes, it's attached to the-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. Is there any change. Is there any dissent from approving it. Hearing none, we will approve it. Item 14 of the agenda involves a, b, c, and d--the review of the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations, the Foreign Currency Directive, the Procedural Instructions with Respect to Foreign Currency Operations, and the Special Authorization. No changes are proposed in "a" and "d" and minor changes are proposed in "b." Are there any questions about those.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is describing a unanimous approval of an agenda item and the proposed changes to certain documents. There is no mention of any opposition or differing opinions.


Passage number 272.
 MR. COLDWELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage based solely on the information provided. Additional context or content from the passage is needed.


Passage number 273.
 We have reached the alternate procedural 1 imi t s- - CHAIRMAN MILLER. That's "c" and we will come to that in just a second. Any problems on agenda items 14a, b, and d. There are minor changes in "b." But the changes involve taking out the word "proposed," which used to be before the words "IMF article IV." That's because it's no longer proposed; it's now effective. That's a big change. I hope you all will go along with that. On those three documents are there any problems. May we approve them. Yes, Bob.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing procedural changes and asking if there are any issues or problems with certain agenda items.


Passage number 274.
 MR. MAYO. I have just one slight worry, though I'm not going to oppose approval.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions having a worry but explicitly states that they are not opposing approval, indicating agreement.


Passage number 275.
 In "a" I have no objection to the $300 million on any day, but I think this is-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. No, we are not there yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply expresses agreement regarding the $300 million while suggesting that there is more to discuss or consider.


Passage number 276.
 MR. MAYO. Oh, we are not on '"a".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 277.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Isn't that "c". Have you changed them on me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 278.
 3/20/79 -38- MR. COLDWELL. It's attachment A; that is the '"A" [he's referring to], Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement or reference without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 279.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. All right, then let's take the one that has several proposed changes, the Procedural Instructions with respect to Foreign Currency Operations, and deal with that. Then we'll pick up the others, which don't have changes, other than the minor one that I mentioned. Alan, do you or Steve want to comment on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting to discuss a specific document first before moving on to others. They ask Alan or Steve if they have any comments on the matter.


Passage number 280.
 MR. HOLMES. Well, I think the memo that we put out ought to be self explanatory. I am not one who particularly likes daily limits on operations, but I can see why members of the Committee would like them, and I think those that are being proposed are ones we can live with for the time being. If we do run into problems operating under them, we will certainly come back to the Subcommittee and to the Committee. I don't foresee any problems at the moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion but agrees with the proposed limits and is willing to live with them. They also mention the possibility of revisiting the issue if problems arise.


Passage number 281.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Steve, any comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking for Steve's comment, which doesn't indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 282.
 MR. AXILROD. NO, I have nothing to add.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they have nothing to add, without expressing any contradictory views or opinions.


Passage number 283.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Are you all familiar with what is being proposed. We went without limits for a while except the $8 billion limit on the total position. What's being proposed now is that we limit the changes between meetings. Would you review it for me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple request for the audience to review a proposal.


Passage number 284.
 MR. ALTMANN. Under the procedural instructions, paragraph 1A says that the Manager shall clear with the Subcommittee, or with the Chairman if the Chairman believes that consultation with the Subcommittee is not feasible in the time available, any operation that would result in a change in the System's overall open position in foreign currencies exceeding $100 million on any day or $300 million since the most recent meeting. The proposal would be to increase those two limits--to raise the daily figure from $100 to $300 million and to raise the figure for the change since the most recent regular meeting from $300 million to $1 billion. In paragraph 1B. which has to do with changes in the net position in a single currency, the daily limit would be raised from $100 million to $150 million and from $150 million to $300 million when the operation is associated with repayment of swap drawings, and the intermeeting limit would be dropped. Paragraph 2 has to do with operations going beyond those limits, which would have to go to the Committee for approval. It says that the Manager shall clear with the Committee or with the Subcommittee if the Subcommittee believes consultation with the full Committee is not feasible in the time available and so forth "any operation that would result in a change in the System's overall open position in foreign currencies exceeding' the limit. The old limit was $500 million and the proposed alternative is $1-1/2 billion. That's for the change since the most recent regular meeting. Anything beyond that would have to go to the full Committee. Those are the proposed changes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting proposed changes to the limits for operations involving the System's overall open position in foreign currencies.


Passage number 285.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. I think you all have had a chance to review [this memo]. Are there questions now. Bob, you had a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that everyone has had a chance to review a memo and asks if there are any questions, specifically addressing Bob.


Passage number 286.
 3 / 2 0 / 7 9  -39- MR. MAYO. Yes, my only question is on paragraph l A ,  Mr. Chairman. The $300 million on any one day doesn't bother me; I'm a little uneasy about the $1 billion since the most recent meeting. This is a very volatile [market] and I guess my question is, Alan: Do you really need that much room on the cumulative amount.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Mayo, is expressing his concerns and asking a question to clarify a point.


Passage number 287.
 MR. PARTEE. Without contacting the Subcommittee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any clear indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 288.
 MR. MAYO. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no explicit mention of any disagreement or contention in this passage.


Passage number 289.
 MR. HOLMES. I would think, Mr. Chairman, that if we have an opportunity to pay a billion dollars in Deutschemark debt between Committee meetings, we ought to go ahead and do it. Now, if we are intervening heavily on the other side, obviously, we are going to be reporting this [intervention] regularly to the Subcommittee and to the Committee generally. But I would like that larger leeway for the time being because our main effort now will be directed at repaying debt, and I think we ought to do that as rapidly as we can.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is a statement expressing the opinion and recommendation of Mr. Holmes regarding the repayment of debt. There is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 290.
 MR. COLDWELL. That's not the question, though, Alan. The question is: Is it the Manager's prerogative to carry this up to a full $1 billion without consultation even with the Subcommittee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Coldwell is clarifying the question being asked, but there is no disagreement expressed.


Passage number 291.
 MR. HOLMES. Well, as you know, we report daily to the Subcommittee on what we have done. We are not without surveillance on any of this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states a fact about their reporting process.


Passage number 292.
 MR. WALLICH.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage (MR. WALLICH) does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 293.
 If I may add to this-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes, Henry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "If I may add to this" suggests that the speaker wants to provide additional information or perspective, but does not indicate any contention or disagreement with the previous statement.


Passage number 294.
 MR. WALLICH. Mr. Chairman, there is pretty close contact [between the Manager and the Subcommittee]. I would certainly expect, if operations of that order of magnitude or anything remotely resembling that were in prospect, that prior conversations would have taken place.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their expectation of prior conversations taking place in a hypothetical situation.


Passage number 295.
 So-- MR. PARTEE. Then why not make it subject to prior approval, if there have been prior conversations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply asking why the action mentioned has not been subject to prior approval.


Passage number 296.
 MR. WALLICH. Because the Subcommittee is sometimes hard to get together.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 297.
 MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 298.
 In that case, the Chairman-- MR. COLDWELL. The Chairman can act [for] the Subcommittee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is simply stating that the Chairman has the power to act on behalf of the Subcommittee. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 299.
 MR. HOLMES. That's what it says.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage simply states a statement made by Mr. Holmes without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 300.
 MR. WALLICH. We can do that. I think that reduces the flexibility somewhat. The Chairman, too, may not be easily accessible so I don't see a great deal of risk here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Wallich is expressing his opinion about the reduced flexibility, but there is no explicit disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 301.
 MR. PARTEE. If the Chairman is not accessible, does somebody substitute for the Chairman. SPEAKER(.).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question about whether someone substitutes for the Chairman if he is not accessible.


Passage number 302.
 Yes 3 / 2 0 / 1 9  -40- MR. WALLICH.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 303.
 I guess that's the Vice Chairman VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you can't, [then] you get the Subcommittee or the Vice Chairman. You could have the Chairman not there and the rest of the Subcommittee [available], couldn't you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a series of questions about the availability of the Subcommittee or Vice Chairman in certain scenarios.


Passage number 304.
 MR. ALTMA". We've had one occasion when the Chairman of the Committee was not available and, as a matter of the fact, the Vice Chairman of the Committee was not available. And we went to the Vice Chairman of the Board who is able to act as Chairman of the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a sequence of events and the individuals who were available to fill a certain role.


Passage number 305.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The provided passage only states the title "VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" and does not contain any information or indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 306.
 But in the first instance if the Chairman wasn't there and the rest of the Subcommittee were available-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. Are you all clear on what we are talking about now. There could be no more than $300 million in one day, right. And we are talking about a cumulation of $1 billion between meetings. We couldn't run this up [to $1 billion] in one day, Phil, because at $300 million a day we would need three full days, or more precisely 3 and 1/3 days, of maximum operation to get there. So it would have to be getting up there and we watch it every day. I think the Committee would really be doing something wrong if we were not [aware] because we are in touch with this not [only] by the day but by the hour often.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the process and potential limitations of reaching a cumulative amount of $1 billion between meetings.


Passage number 307.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only mentions Vice Chairman Volcker without providing any specific information about his actions or opinions, so there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 308.
 If $300 million is right for the daily limit, and I think they need something like that flexibility by the day, it's hard to see that three days of operations [could occur1 without formally figuring the-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. We will do whatever the Committee wants. We can cut this back to $500 million or whatever you think, but I don't think it represents a serious problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their willingness to accommodate the Committee's decision on the amount, stating that they can cut it back to $500 million or whatever they think is appropriate.


Passage number 309.
 MR. MAYO. Well, I don't either, Mr. Chairman. I just wanted to hear this sort of discussion. It has helped me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Mayo simply states that he does not have any disagreement and that he wanted to hear the discussion.


Passage number 310.
 MR. PARTEE. I think it's procedurally poor. M R .  COLDWELL. I think it is, too, but it's even worse on the next page. I don't think it's desirable for the Subcommittee to authorize an open position above $1 billion. The full Committee ought to look at an open position change above $1 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: Both speakers agree that the procedural aspect in question is poor, but they also share the belief that it is even worse on the next page. Additionally, they both agree that it is not desirable for the Subcommittee to authorize an open position above $1 billion and that the full Committee should be involved in such changes. There is no disagreement or contention present in this passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 311.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. I just have to disagree because we have had to suspend these rules when we got into difficulty. Now you want to put them in so we can suspend them again if we get into difficulty. The only way we could operate on the day we did $1 billion dollars in one day was to have some authority to do so. So on that day we did suspend the rules. You're kidding yourself about your procedures because when we got into the real heat of battle you had to give us complete authority. Now you are saying while we don't have the heat of battle put the limit down tight; and when we have the hear of battle and the real danger comes and the authority could be abused, we'll take it off completely. That's poor procedure in my view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker disagrees with the idea of putting strict limits on rules during normal times and then suspending them during difficult or dangerous situations. They believe that this approach is poor procedure and points out a previous instance where rules were suspended to handle a large transaction.


Passage number 312.
 MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't disagree with $1-112 billion, Mr. Chairman, but I think the Subcommittee ought to be formally involved before we get to $1 billion, maybe at $600 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker explicitly states that they do not disagree with the mentioned amount of money ($1-112 billion). However, they suggest that the subcommittee should be involved at an earlier stage, possibly when the budget reaches $600 million. There is no contention or disagreement here, just a differing opinion on timing.


Passage number 313.
 3 / 2 0 / 1 9  -41- CHAIRMAN MILLER. Do you want to cut it to $750 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There doesn't appear to be any contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply asks a question about whether someone wants to reduce a certain amount of money to $750 million.


Passage number 314.
 MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage does not provide sufficient information about any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 315.
 Say $600 million, or 2 days-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay, two days or $600 million is fine. Does that suit everybody. M R .  HOLMES. We can live with almost anything, but if we run into trouble, we’ll come back. The thing that frightens me the most, Mr. Chairman, is that if we get a sudden huge capital conversion and the Germans come in and offer us, say, $350 million, I would much prefer to be able to say yes right then and there--and [not] say I have to wait and consult first--because [the $350 million] might not be there when I get back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 316.
 MR. AXILROD. Well, Alan, when it goes up to $ 3 0 0  or $400 million after one day’s operation, it would be possible to go to the Subcommittee and get prior approval.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a scenario and suggesting a course of action.


Passage number 317.
 MR. HOLMES. I think we can do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 318.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. I think that’s all right. We keep some leeway. We can operate that way. With that amendment, to $600 million, may we have your approval. Any other questions or comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 319.
 I don‘t want to cut this short, but hearing none-- MR. COLDWELL. I will not vote for the $1-1/2 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they do not want to cut the conversation short because they have not heard any objections or opposing opinions.


Passage number 320.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Does anyone else feel negatively about that. Certainly, if we get back into really active trading again, it could run that [much].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is seeking the opinion or agreement of others, but there is no inherent disagreement or contention. It is simply asking if anyone else feels negatively about the possibility of returning to active trading.


Passage number 321.
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I, for one, would feel that they need the leeway because it‘s just too cumbersome to get the Committee together when caught in the heat of battle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It expresses an individual's opinion on the need for leeway in a specific context.


Passage number 322.
 We can’t get into that kind of-- CHAIRMAN MILLER. Are there any other questions on that. All those in favor say “aye.” SEVERAL. Aye.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they cannot discuss a certain topic and then asks if there are any other questions before proceeding. The subsequent response of "Aye" from several people indicates agreement or approval but does not represent disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 323.
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Opposed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is indicated by the word "opposed," which suggests a conflicting perspective or stance.


Passage number 324.
 MR. COLDWELL. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Coldwell, is simply stating their opinion.


