Passage number 1.
Meeting of Federal Open Market CommitteeAugust 14, 1979A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee washeld in the offices of the Board of Governors of the FederalReserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, August 14,1979, beginning at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT:Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. BallesMr. BlackMr. ColdwellMr. KimbrelMr. MayoMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. SchultzMrs. TeetersMr. WallichMessrs. Guffey, Morris, Roos, Timlen, and Winn,Alternate Members of the Federal Open MarketCommitteeMessrs. Baughman, Eastburn, and Willes, Presidentsof the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas,Philadelphia, and Minneapolis, respectivelyMr. Altmann, SecretaryMr. Bernard 1/, Assistant SecretaryMr. Oltman 1/, Deputy General CounselMr. Mannion 1/, Assistant General CounselMr. Axilrod 1/, EconomistMr. Holmes 1/, Adviser for Market OperationsMessrs. Brandt 1/, R. Davis 1/, Keir 1/,Scheld 1/, Truman 1/, and Zeisel 1/,Associate Economists1/ Entered the meeting prior to the vote to approve the Minutesof Actions.8/14/79Mr. Sternlight 1/, Manager for DomesticOperations, System Open Market AccountMr. Pardee 1/, Manager for Foreign Opera-tions, System Open Market AccountMr. Coyne 1/, Assistant to the Board ofGovernorsMessrs. Farnsworth 1/2/ and Siegman 1/,Associate Directors, Division ofFederal Reserve Bank Examinations andBudgets and Division of InternationalFinance,respectively, Board of GovernorsMr. Prell 1/, Associate Research DivisionOfficer, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Robinson 1/2/, Manager, FinancialExaminations, Division of FederalReserve Bank Examinations and Budgets,Board of GovernorsMs. Farar 1/, Economist, Open MarketSecretariat, Board of GovernorsMrs. Deck 1/, Staff Assistant, Open MarketSecretariat, Board of GovernorsMr. Smoot 1/, First Vice President, FederalReserve Bank of PhiladelphiaMessrs. Burns 1/ and J. Davis 1/, SeniorVice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banksof Dallas and Cleveland, respectivelyMessrs. Broaddus 1/, Danforth 1/, T. Davis 1/,and Fieleke 1/, Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of Richmond, Minneapolis,Kansas City, add Boston, respectivelyMr. Burger 1/, Assistant Vice President,Federal Reserve Bank of St. LouisMr. Levin 1/, Manager, Securities Department,Federal Reserve Bank of New York1/ Entered the meeting prior to the vote to approve the Minutesof Actions.2/ Left the meeting following the vote to accept the Report ofExaminations of System Open Market Account.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply lists the individuals present at a meeting.


Passage number 2.
-2 -Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofAugust 14, 1979CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I might say for the benefit of those whohave just come in that we had a little executive session to do someimportant business, the first item of which was to elect a Chairman.I'm not sure whether it's entirely appropriate that I announce myelection, but it proceeded.I should also say that this is the first time the new ViceChairman of the Board has been privileged to attend an Open MarketCommittee meeting. We hope it's a privilege, anyway. You can makethat judgment some time later, Fred, but I know I am delighted to haveyou here. Fred has made the point to me several times that as aPrinceton graduate he's well qualified. I know from personalexperience that that doesn't carry you very far, Fred. You're goingto have to stand on other grounds, but you have many other groundsupon which to stand--business experience, entrepreneurial experience,banking experience, and some political experience. We like toconsider ourselves apolitical in one sense, but I have found that inanother sense a little political talent and understanding never hurtsin these positions. So from all sides we are delighted to have youjoin us. I look forward to working with you and I'm sure the othersdo as well.[In our executive session] we did make some other personnelchanges which I ask everybody in this room to hold in confidence untilthey can be completed. After I don't know how many years of valiantservice--13 or 14 years I guess--in one of the most harassing jobsthat I can conceive of, Alan Holmes [will have a new role.] He servedfirst as Manager of Open Market Operations on the domestic side andthen took over on both [the domestic and foreign] sides during someturbulent years, leading the System into a more active posture on theforeign exchange side and seeing that accomplished. We thought thetime had appropriately come to take advantage of Mr. Holmes' servicesas an Adviser so he's still on board. We're still going to benefitfrom his services for many years to come, I hope, both in the FederalReserve Bank of New York and in connection with the Open MarketCommittee--but without direct line responsibility.The other part of that process is that we have two gentlemenin Peter Sternlight and Scott Pardee ready to take over the full lineof responsibilities on the domestic and foreign sides. So theCommittee has acted to make Peter the Manager on the domestic side,Scott the Manager on the foreign side, and Alan Holmes Adviser forMarket Operations, looking over the shoulders on all sides in aconstructive way. I think it can be a very effective team in aslightly different alignment, and I'll be delighted to get this inplace. But it is all subject, as I'm sure you know, to concurrentaction by the board of directors of the New York Bank by whom theseesteemed gentlemen are appointed to their official positions. And thedirectors don't meet until this Thursday so these changes cannot beput in place until Thursday. I hope they can be put in place then.I'm sure Mr. Timlen can manage that assignment but there won't be anypublic announcement until the directors act, so I hope you willrespect that. And I do welcome all three of you to new assignments.8/14/79With that I think we can proceed to the minutes [of the Julymeeting]. Do we have a motion. Without objection the minutes areapproved.We have a Report of Examination, which I believe has beendistributed to you. I am informed that Mr. Farnsworth is ready toanswer any questions you may have. Are there any questions about theexamination. Mr. Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This passage is simply providing information about personnel changes and discussing the approval of meeting minutes and a report of examination.


Passage number 3.
MR. WALLICH. Is it possible to figure out the unrealizedgain or loss on the account, and have you tried to do so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply asks a question about the possibility of calculating an unrealized gain or loss on the account and if it has been attempted. It does not present any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 4.
MR. FARNSWORTH. Governor Wallich, I have with me today DaveRobinson who is the Manager of the audit team, and I'll turn thequestion over to him.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the presence of Mr. Farnsworth, Governor Wallich, and Dave Robinson, without any indication of conflict or differing opinions.


Passage number 5.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Which account are you talking about, thedomestic or the foreign.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply asking for clarification on which account is being referred to, without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 6.
MR. WALLICH. Domestic. On the foreign side I take it thatthe rule of [FASB 88] requires us to revalue these assets continuouslybut I don't believe there is a similar rule for the domestic assets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, is simply stating his understanding of the rules related to the revaluation of assets.


Passage number 7.
MR. ROBINSON. Governor, I don't believe we made any attemptto do that. In our efforts we only made an attempt to verify thebalances as they were reflected on the records of the Bank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Robinson is simply stating that they did not make an attempt to verify the balances other than what was reflected on the bank records.


Passage number 8.
MR. WALLICH. Do you see the possibility of doing that. Arethere technical difficulties.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 9.
MR. PARTEE. Why would you want to do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is a simple question without any conflicting statements or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 10.
MR. WALLICH.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage as the mention of "MR. WALLICH" is provided in isolation. More context is needed to assess if there is contention or disagreement related to Mr. Wallich.


Passage number 11.
 Well, I'd like to know--MR. PARTEE. Whether it's below water. But we're not goingto liquidate the account.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker wants to know if something is below water, but there is no opposition or disagreement present.


Passage number 12.
MR. WALLICH. --where we stand. For one thing it would behelpful if we find that we're taking a loss on foreign exchangetransactions to remember that the loss may be offset [by gains on thedomestic side].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is proposing that if there is a loss on foreign exchange transactions, it can potentially be offset by gains on the domestic side.


Passage number 13.
MR. PARTEE. That's the reason.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a reason without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 14.
MR. MAYO. What's the average length of the System portfolioat this time. Do you have that, Peter--or someone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a question about the average length of the System portfolio, there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 15.
MR. STERNLIGHT. It's in the area of 4 to 6 years--somethinglike that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement given by Mr. Sternlight is a straightforward answer to a question or statement that is not inherently controversial or conflicting.


Passage number 16.
MR. PARTEE. Oh, really that long.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 17.
MR. MAYO. I had no idea it was that long. That adds alittle maybe to the reason for Henry's question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Mayo is simply expressing surprise and adding a possible reason for Henry's question.


Passage number 18.
MR. PARTEE. It's probably completely under water then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply provides a statement or opinion without any conflicting or opposing ideas being presented.


Passage number 19.
MR. MAYO. I would have thought it was more like 2 years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement made by Mr. Mayo is an opinion or personal belief, rather than a statement that contradicts or challenges any previous information or argument.


Passage number 20.
-2-8/14/79MR. BLACK. It shatters his hopes of having an offset,though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 21.
MR. COLDWELL. Well, my impression of this examination, Mr.Chairman, was that the books balance and that all the tests they'vemade indicate that the books are being kept in adequate fashion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 22.
MR. FARNSWORTH. That is correct. We also did a sample ofthe transactions of the Federal Open Market Trading Desk andascertained whether the directive was being carried out. All thosecases in the random sample indicated that it was.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that a sample of transactions was conducted to determine whether the directive was being carried out, and all the cases in the random sample indicated that it was. There is no contention or disagreement presented in this statement.


Passage number 23.
MR. COLDWELL. It was a random sample, I trust.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Coldwell expresses trust in the random sample.


Passage number 24.
MR. FARNSWORTH. A random sample, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 25.
MR. COLDWELL. I have no problems with this. I move weapprove it.SPEAKER(.). Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Coldwell and the Speaker agree on approving the matter.


Passage number 26.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, so ordered. Foreigncurrency operations. Mr. Pardee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 27.
MR. PARDEE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual statement in the appendix.


Passage number 28.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any questions or comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: cannot be answered at this time as there is no passage provided.


Passage number 29.
MR. WALLICH. Scott, do you think the market would respondfavorably if there were to be a package that included new Carterbonds. Is that a valuable feature to them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It is a question asking for Scott's opinion on the potential market response to including new Carterbonds in a package.


Passage number 30.
MR. PARDEE. To some people in the market it would behelpful, yes. Others would not pay too much attention to it,particularly since it's something that had been announced before aspart of the November 1st package. But a package usually has somethingfor everybody and there are some who would think that the Carter bondswould be important.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It presents different perspectives and opinions without any conflicting views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 31.
MR. WALLICH. Do you think they'd respond one way or anotherto forward operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. It can be inferred from the phrasing "Do you think they'd respond one way or another" that there is a disagreement or uncertainty over how they would respond to forward operations.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 32.
MR. PARDEE. It depends on what's coming along with it. Theforward market operations right now alone, without any other change,would be seen as a tactical exercise. It's in some ways weaker thanspot operations and may be seen as a fallback position on the part ofthe authorities. Forward operations combined with other activitycould add, but I personally would prefer to continue doing spotoperations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Pardee, expresses that forward market operations alone would be seen as a tactical exercise and weaker than spot operations. However, he also acknowledges that forward operations combined with other activity could be beneficial, but personally prefers to continue doing spot operations. This shows a difference in opinion or a conflict regarding the potential effectiveness of forward market operations.


Passage number 33.
MR. COLDWELL. Scott, what is your reaction to thisdiscussion that seems to be going on in a number of quarters about acompetitive interest rate "war" between various countries in theworld, including the United States.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Coldwell simply asks for Scott's reaction to the discussion about a competitive interest rate "war" between various countries in the world.


Passage number 34.
MR. PARDEE. Well, I don't know; war is a very strong term.But clearly, as I indicated in my [remarks]--and we've felt this for8/14/79several months--the response of the central banks and the authoritiesin Europe is that with higher rates of inflation coming about from theoil price increase and from stronger domestic economies, they haveraised their interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Pardee about the response of central banks and authorities in Europe to higher rates of inflation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 35.
 The ones within the EMS have aparticular problem in that it's harder now for the governments to cometo an agreement on changing their exchange rates within the Europeanmonetary system; they have to get the agreement of the agriculturalministers as well as the finance ministers. And so particularly theGermans have raised their interest rates over the course of the yearin response to these inflationary pressures and expansion of bankcredit demand. Others have found they've had to raise their rates todefend their currencies in the exchange market and to fend off theirown inflationary pressures--some a bit against their will, I think.And from the United Kingdom side we had a decision on the part of thenew Administration there, the Thatcher government, to raise interestrates by a full 2 percentage points back in May, which has set a newcourse for sterling. And that has occurred. I wouldn't call it a warbut other countries have been raising interest rates. There have beenseveral rounds of interest rate hikes, and it's a different atmospherethan we've had in earlier years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The mention of different countries raising their interest rates and the phrase "I wouldn't call it a war but other countries have been raising interest rates" suggests that there is disagreement among the countries involved in the European monetary system.


Passage number 36.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think there's much substance tothat now, Phil, but I think it's a useful question to ask oneselfabout what might happen later in the year. When I look at all theseinterest rate changes abroad, there's a pretty straightforwardjustification in terms of their own domestic situations--with risinginflation and strong economies. One begins to ask what happens totheir economies later this year or into 1980, partly because of theoil price increases. I think there is some danger but I don't thinkwe can really be critical of what's happened so far.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is presenting a viewpoint and discussing potential future scenarios without any conflicting ideas or arguments.


Passage number 37.
MR. COLDWELL. Well, I wasn't implying criticism.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Coldwell explicitly states that he wasn't implying criticism, indicating that there is no disagreement present.


Passage number 38.
 I was justquestioning the market reaction to this type of--MR. PARDEE. There is a feeling that there is a war going on.I think it's overstated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents two statements without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 39.
MR. PARTEE. The British [action] is a change in policy, andto some degree it looks like the Canadians might be included in that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the British have made a change in policy and suggests that Canadians may be affected by it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 40.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The British is a change in policy but it'soften stimulated by the exchange rate. In fact, they don't like theexchange rate consequences, as near as I can read it. Larry Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The author states that the British dislike the exchange rate consequences, while also acknowledging that a change in policy is often stimulated by the exchange rate. This presents a conflicting viewpoint on the matter.


Passage number 41.
MR. ROOS. Scott, in your report you alluded to someapprehension or nervousness in the market in relation to this meetingtoday. Is that nervousness that we may tighten monetary policy orthat we may continue to vacillate. What did you mean by that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a question seeking clarification.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 42.
MR. PARDEE. If you talk to different people, they would giveyou a different [answer regarding the] nature of the apprehension. Igave you a list of the things that people are bearish about withrespect to the rest of [our country's] economic policy and there'sstill some hope that the Federal Reserve is here and doing its job.[As for] what job that is, you talk to different people and you getdifferent reactions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is a contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that different people have different opinions about the nature of the apprehension and the job of the Federal Reserve, indicating a lack of consensus or agreement.


Passage number 43.
8/14/79MR. ROOS. But the bearishness is essentially a concern aboutexpanding inflation. Is that what you mean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Roos is explaining that the bearishness is mainly due to concerns about expanding inflation. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 44.
MR. PARDEE. No, no. These guys are making bets--and that'swhat they're doing--on whether interest rates are going to be higherafter the meeting or not. And how much higher is part of the bet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 45.
MR. ROOS. Doesn't their major concern pertain to theirinflationary expectations for the United States. If we came to gripsor appeared to come to grips with inflation along the lines of the newChairman's statements, wouldn't that have a constructive effect on thevalue of the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is posing a hypothetical question and expressing a belief that addressing inflation in line with the new Chairman's statements could positively impact the value of the dollar.


Passage number 46.
MR. PARDEE. Certainly, if there was a feeling that theactions of the Committee would lead to a reduction in inflation. Butagain, I'm very cautious about what people are doing on the Friday andMonday before an FOMC meeting. They're just aligning themselves to bein a particular position to anticipate some action which if it comes,they will make money and if it doesn't come, then they won't. But Iwould not want to overinterpret what these day-to-day swings [mean].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing caution about interpreting day-to-day market swings and the actions taken by individuals before an FOMC meeting.


Passage number 47.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. John Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 48.
MR. BALLES. I'll approach it from a different way and makeit a little more specific. Would you care to speculate, Scott, onwhat good it might do vis-a-vis market expectations and psychology ifwe were to snug up a bit more on both the discount rate and thefederal funds rate--in a range of 1/4 point to possibly 1/2 point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The phrase "snug up a bit more on both the discount rate and the federal funds rate" suggests a potential disagreement or contention regarding the appropriate approach to monetary policy. The speaker is asking for speculation on the possible impact of tightening monetary policy, which implies that there may be differing opinions on the matter.


Passage number 49.
MR. PARDEE. Well, it would help with those who areinterested in responding to that sort of thing. But as I say, there'sa deeper root of concern about the dollar. As long as the FederalReserve is doing what people think the Federal Reserve should do--andagain these are people in financial markets and they are more inclinedto look to interest rates as a guiding light--then they will be alittle more relaxed. But they're also worried about the question ofleadership and economic policy more broadly. So we might buyourselves some more time--which is what we bought [with] ourintervention in late July and the interest rate hike that took placethen. That bought us some time. But part of our problem last Fridaywas that people were calling in and saying all right we know whatyou've done and we know what the Federal Reserve is trying to do--youhave a new Chairman and all that--but another bad price figure justcame out. How long are these price figures going to continue. Solong as the United States continues to have a higher rate of inflationthan Germany, Switzerland, and some of these other countries, it willhelp [if our rates go up]; it will buy time. But it won't solve thebasic problem of confidence in the dollar, which has been troubling usthroughout this past year or so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing various concerns and factors influencing confidence in the dollar, without expressing any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 50.
MR. COLDWELL. Scott, has the market changed its attitude atall about intervention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is addressing Scott and simply asking him if the market's attitude has changed regarding intervention.


Passage number 51.
MR. PARDEE. Well, I don't know which attitude you mean.Again, they expect us to be there. If we aren't, then everybody willbe very disappointed and we'd have a real problem on our hands. So wehave to show up when the problems do emerge.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker believes they need to be present when problems arise to avoid disappointment and potential issues.


Passage number 52.
8/14/79MR. COLDWELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only includes a date and a name, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 53.
 My impression though is that they're notwilling to challenge us--MR. PARDEE. Oh, yes they are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. 

The phrase "My impression though is that they're not willing to challenge us" suggests that the speaker believes the other party is not willing to challenge them. However, Mr. Pardee's response of "Oh, yes they are" indicates that he disagrees with this impression and believes that they are indeed willing to challenge them.


Passage number 54.
MR. COLDWELL. --on the total of intervention. In otherwords, they're not willing to push us into saying okay we'll put $10billion into this package.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is a reluctance to allocate $10 billion to a specific package.


Passage number 55.
MR. PARDEE. Well, that's part of the package idea. Thereare those who are touting a package, who call in and say you guys needa package and one of the elements is the fact that $30 billion won'tdo it. As for the November 1st package, for all we know you've spentit all already. It's that sort of thing. So then you get in the ideathat Henry raised of Carter bonds and hikes in interest rates; thelist is just as long as one's arm depending, again, on which personyou're talking to. And they're still prepared a little to challengeus in the market but not quite so much. What we did in late Julyreally stopped a number of the players. And our operation last Fridayquieted a few others. But it's temporary; they'll be back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain explicit contention or disagreement. It mainly presents various opinions and perspectives on the issue without direct conflict.


Passage number 56.
MR. BLACK. Most of what I wanted to ask, Mr. Chairman, hasbeen asked. But, Scott, in retrospect do you think we would have beensignificantly better off so far as the dollar is concerned if we hadmoved the discount rate one point instead of a half point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is simply asking for Scott's opinion on whether moving the discount rate one point instead of a half point would have been more beneficial for the dollar.


Passage number 57.
MR. PARDEE. I don't know. I'm trying to interpret a widerange of things without trying to interpose my own views, so I'm notsure. In view of what was going on at that time, I think what wasgiven was a signal of concern by the Federal Reserve, and that's whatthe market wanted. That's what it got, and anything more than asignal is--. It could have changed a number of people's attitudestemporarily, but as I say the market is looking at a lot of otherbroader problems. A half point as against one point is not soimportant as the fact that the half point was done.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply sharing their interpretation and understanding of the situation without offering any opposing viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 58.
MR. WALLICH. Is it possible at the present time to put aranking on the various factors that the market weighs in looking atthe exchange rate. In other words, in the current account there'simprovement; inflation, no improvement; interest rates, adeterioration. What weights should one assign to these.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The mention of "improvement" in the current account but "no improvement" in inflation, and "deterioration" in interest rates suggests that there are conflicting factors that need to be weighed or considered. This implies a disagreement or different opinions on how to rank or assign weights to these factors.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 59.
MR. PARDEE. Well, I just had a lecture from a chartist soI'm not sure what weights to apply myself these days. I thinkbasically we come back to the fact that [market participants] arelooking for fundamental improvement. This is what the market islooking for. This is what the corporate treasurers are waiting for.At this stage they are very pessimistic that there will be fundamentalimprovement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker mentions that market participants and corporate treasurers are pessimistic about the possibility of fundamental improvement. This suggests disagreement or differing opinions on the matter.


Passage number 60.
 So in the meantime we end up with this--MR. WALLICH. Would an improvement in the current account,which seems very likely, make up for failure to improve on inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that an improvement in the current account, although likely, may not compensate for the failure to improve inflation.


Passage number 61.
MR. PARDEE. With some it would help. It will change thebalance in the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Pardee suggesting that some individuals could be helped by a change in the market balance.


Passage number 62.
MR. HOLMES. Henry, I'd say that clearly inflation would benumber one on their minds. If we had some good price statistics, that8/14/79would help a great deal. Second, I think is merchandise trade; third,current account; and fourth, interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion on the order of importance of certain issues.


Passage number 63.
MR. TIMLEN. But don't those weights change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 64.
 Those are theweights today, but the--MR. HOLMES. Sure they do. But right now I think those wouldbe the important things in that order, roughly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion on what they consider to be important things in a specific order.


Passage number 65.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to ratify the transactions, if youare willing to ratify the transactions. Without objection, they areratified. Maybe we can take up this Mexican swap issue. Scott hasdistributed a memorandum. We had some material last month and therewas a preliminary discussion. Is there anything you want to say,Scott.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply mentioning the need to ratify transactions and suggesting the discussion of a Mexican swap issue. They also invite Scott to share if he has anything to say about it.


Passage number 66.
MR. PARDEE. Well, simply that it's the Manager's job to makea recommendation and I personally favor this. But [let me cite] thekinds of arguments that the Mexicans raise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that the speaker personally favors the Manager's recommendation and goes on to mention the arguments raised by the Mexicans.


Passage number 67.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me supplement that a bit.8/14/79inclined but I want to hearSo I would be favorablywhat other people have to say. Phil.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their desire to hear what other people have to say.


Passage number 68.
MR. COLDWELL. Mr. Chairman, I've done quite a bit ofthinking about this since we had a discussion on this the last time.At that time I took a position that it was a costless operation in thesense of just raising the swap line, but since then I've had somesecond thoughts. Yes, it's costless in the sense that we could raisethe level of the swap, but it's not costless in a precedential sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Coldwell, initially believed that raising the swap line would be a costless operation but has now changed his position after having some second thoughts. There is no mention of anyone else disagreeing or arguing with his viewpoint.


Passage number 69.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.I agree with that wholly in substance andI think it's as simple as that. Sowhile I agree with you fully in substance--and as I say I think theywould, too, as a theoretical matter--in practice I do not feel that wecan press them because I think their argument on the other side is8/14/79rather impregnable.This is anincrease of $360 million, you said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker clearly states agreement with the substance of the argument, but expresses hesitation or doubt in practical implementation due to the strength of the opposing argument.


Passage number 70.
MR. PARDEE. From $360 million to $700 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is stating a range of numbers without any indication of disagreement or contention. It is simply providing information.


Passage number 71.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So it's an increase of $340 million; [Iwondered] whether a more modest increase might do the job.I came to thepersonal conclusion that fiddling around on the amount--cutting it inhalf or something and ending up with $850 million or whatever--justdidn't amount to enough to quibble about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is expressing their personal conclusion about the increase in dollars, but there is no tension or opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 72.
 I think you have a verystrong substantive point, but it just runs against the practicalitiesMR. BAUGHMAN. If approved, when it is announced would weannounce that it was in response to a request from the Bank of Mexico.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges a strong point but points out the potential practical challenges.


Passage number 73.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think these things are probablyroutinely announced deadpan--by saying there's an increase period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a personal opinion or belief expressed by the speaker.


Passage number 74.
MR. TRUMAN. Mr. Chairman, that's what we had thought.Something would go into the Policy Record. In the past, there hasusually been a sentence of explanation. I would think, without havingheard the Committee's discussion, that it would say something about atthe request of the Bank of Mexico and in light of expanding financialrelations--that side of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating past practice and a hypothetical situation without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 75.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have worried about the precedent [issue]that Phil raised, too. I think that is a negative; it is a questionof weighing that. Scott may want to speak to this, but we have theprecedent of a swap with Mexico; and Mexico is a big trading partnerright next door. I think it is adequately distinguishable from anyother Latin American [country].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that they share the same worry as Phil and then presents their own perspective on the issue. They also mention that Scott may have a different viewpoint, but it is not mentioned whether they are in disagreement.


Passage number 76.
MR. PARTEE. We have a $2 billion [swap line] with Canada.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of fact about a $2 billion swap line with Canada. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 77.
MR. EASTBURN. I share Phil's concern about the precedentI am somewhat concerned, however, aboutwhat would happen--the matter having come this far--if we were not toapprove it. Would there be adverse [consequences].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not describe any disagreement or contention. Mr. Eastburn is expressing his concern and considering the possible consequences of not approving something.


Passage number 78.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.Scott, do you want to respond to boththe precedent point and this one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply asks Scott to respond to two separate points, but it does not indicate any disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 79.
MR. PARDEE. No, [what you said] is fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response "No, [what you said] is fine" indicates agreement and acceptance of what was previously mentioned.


Passage number 80.
-9-8/14/79MR. MAYO. I'd like to move approval, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 81.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have a second. I'm just goingforward here with an orderly procedure. Henry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for confirmation or agreement before proceeding with an orderly procedure.


Passage number 82.
MR. WALLICH. I would like to associate myself with theprecedent concern. The State Department has always thought that theFederal Reserve might be a source of credit in one situation oranother. They have a low level project going to that effect on how wecould lend to LDCs. And it will not be completely easy next time,[when] relations with a large LDC need improving, to say we don't wantto participate. It may be that the discussion with Mexico has gonetoo far and we would do more damage by saying no. But we should beaware that the government--not this particular Administration--in thepast repeatedly has pointed to the Federal Reserve as a source ofcredit in an emergency situation. When the State Department makes alist, the Federal Reserve is normally featured in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is expressing agreement with the precedent concern and discussing the possibility of the Federal Reserve being a source of credit in certain situations.


Passage number 83.
MR. EASTBURN. Paul, could I ask one more question. Arethere any implications if we were to have a less than unanimous voteon this. Is this made public, Murray.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about potential implications of a non-unanimous vote.


Passage number 84.
MR. ALTMANN. Yes. It's a change in the Authorization forForeign Currency Operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is straightforward and does not involve any conflicting views or opposing arguments.


Passage number 85.
MR. EASTBURN. Votes are made public.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a fact - that votes are made public - without presenting any argument or disagreement.


Passage number 86.
MR. ALTMANN. It can be held until the Policy Record [isreleased], which will be three days after the next meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of fact.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 87.
MR. EASTBURN. But the votes are made public.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The reference to Mr. Eastburn suggests that there is a conversation or debate taking place, indicating a potential disagreement or difference of opinion.


Passage number 88.
MR. ALTMANN. Yes, it's a change in the foreign currencyauthorization.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It only states that there has been a change in the foreign currency authorization.


Passage number 89.
MR. MAYO. But it wouldn't just say that the Committeeapproved this. It would say [the vote was] 9 to 3, or whatever itmight be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply describes how the information about the committee's approval would be presented.


Passage number 90.
MR. ALTMANN. Well, we have never done it that way. We'vealways listed the votes by name.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement from Mr. Altmann stating that they have always listed the votes by name, without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments being presented.


Passage number 91.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On every one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 92.
MR. ALTMANN. On every change in the [authorizations anddirectives].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It only states that Mr. Altmann is talking about changes in authorizations and directives, without presenting conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 93.
MR. COLDWELL. Paul, could I ask one more question. I'm alittle bothered, Scott, about the last sentence in your memo. Thatsentence indicates that the State Department and Treasury officialsinvolved in the discussions expressed the view that while they wouldnot urge the Federal Reserve to agree to the increase for the sake offurthering such action by the System, on balance it would be helpful.Does that capture the flavor of your discussions--that they reallydon't see this as something that is of any urgency.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no evidence of contention or disagreement in this passage. The question is simply asking for clarification on a specific statement in a memo.


Passage number 94.
MR. PARDEE. Paul was the one who held the discussions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of fact and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 95.
 Iwas interpreting his---10-8/14/79CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I held the discussions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The sentence simply states that the speaker was interpreting something and held discussions.


Passage number 96.
MR. COLDWELL. But there's no urgency.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is no urgency.


Passage number 97.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, on balance, yes, they'd like us todo it. I think that's clear. They have these other negotiationsgoing forward and they think this would be constructive. That isclearly [their view]. How important it is in connection with thoseother issues is another question, which I can't really evaluate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents different viewpoints without expressing disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 98.
MR. COLDWELL. Would we gain or loose anything of substanceby having the Treasury provide a statement of support.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a simple question asking for the potential benefits or drawbacks of a specific action. There are no conflicting opinions or arguments presented.


Passage number 99.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would think our problem is the reverse.I'm just speaking personally. There's no question that they like theidea, but I don't want to get either State or Treasury too involved insaying anything about it for the very reasons that Henry and to someextent you were suggesting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 100.
MR. COLDWELL. Yes, that's why I asked do we gain or lose.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Coldwell is asking a question indicating that there is some disagreement or uncertainty about whether there is a gain or loss in a certain situation.


Passage number 101.
MR. MAYO. It seems to me, Paul, that this last sentence is adelightful art form that preserves our independence, while achievingan objective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Mayo simply expresses his opinion that the last sentence is a delightful art form that achieves an objective while preserving independence.


Passage number 102.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's precisely what we're trying to dohere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 103.
MR. TRUMAN. Mr. Chairman, just to clarify one point. Undernormal procedures we would make an announcement of the increase rightaway, or within a couple of days, once it is worked out with theMexicans. That announcement would say nothing about the vote. Thevote would come out in the Policy Record, which would be published inmid-September. I might say that's right before the [two] Presidentsmeet. The vote would come out then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply clarifying the process of making an announcement about an increase and mentioning the timing of the vote.


Passage number 104.
MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the attitude of thegroup would differ if the economic outlook for Mexico worsened ratherthan brightened--if the oil reserves proved to be a little less thannow [thought].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply posing a hypothetical scenario and questioning the potential change in attitude based on a different economic outlook for Mexico.


Passage number 105.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we have to look at that because Ido believe it gives them a leg up. All I can say is that I havelooked at that and I think this is manageable in that context. Thatisn't to say that I cannot imagine a situation where Mexico would drawpart of the line sometime but I don't think there's any immediateprospect of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage expresses the author's opinion and reasoning, but there is no indication of disagreement or contention with another viewpoint.


Passage number 106.
8/14/79MR. WALLICH. If I may, I would say that if Mexico got intotrouble, we should be ready to help them and for a larger amount thanthis swap. I say that not only for the reasons that have alwaysexisted but because banks are now more deeply involved. But I wouldprefer to see that done on its merits rather than on a previousdecision to improve relations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a personal preference to help Mexico in case of trouble, but they suggest that any assistance should be based on the merits of the situation rather than a previous decision to improve relations.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 107.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You say on its merits. Speaking formyself, that is in my mind. I came to the conclusion that you've cometo and I think that is not irrelevant in considering this. If wenever had any intention or would basically be unsympathetic towardMexico ever using the line, I think it would be a mistake to approvethis. But if we do contemplate that in an uncertain world it's notimpossible that we would accede to their use of the line sometime inthe future, we can go ahead and do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. 

The speaker presents two contrasting viewpoints - one suggesting that it would be a mistake to approve something if there is no intention or sympathy towards Mexico using the line, and the other suggesting that if there is a possibility of Mexico using the line in the future, it can be approved. This indicates disagreement or a difference in perspectives.


Passage number 108.
MR. COLDWELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information or statements about Mr. Coldwell's opinion or actions that could indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 109.
 If this discussion got out, I suspect we'd getapplications from such countries asMR. PARDEE. May I speak to this question of precedent.We've had discussions with these other central banks over the yearsand told them "no," and we can tell them no again. Mexico is adifferent country from these others. We do have criteria in the filesfrom 1967 and we published in the Federal Reserve Bulletin at thattime the criteria for swap partners. Now, we're a long way from 1967,but those criteria have protected us a lot from the possibility--incases where discussions were getting started on a very informal basis--that the discussions would get much further. But I think we'reprotected on the economics as well as the convertibility of currency[and] our relations with the central banks. We have a very goodrelationship with the central bank in Mexico. At some of the othercentral banks we don't know who the Governor is from one month to thenext. So we can protect ourselves, and we have. And I feel I'm oneof the first lines of defense on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and providing information about their past discussions and criteria that have protected them in the past. There is no evidence of any disagreement or conflicting viewpoints in the passage.


Passage number 110.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not many of those Latin American countrieshave a convertible currency.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact about Latin American countries not having a convertible currency.


Passage number 111.
MR. PARDEE. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not include any statements that suggest contention or disagreement. Instead, it simply affirms the speaker's agreement with a previous statement.


Passage number 112.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, are we ready to vote. I take it wehave to have a full-scale vote, Mr. Secretary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking if everyone is ready to vote and assuming that a full-scale vote is necessary.


Passage number 113.
MR. ALTMANN. Well, it requires a vote. It isn't necessarilya roll call vote, but if there are any dissents we would record that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that a vote is required and that any dissenting opinions will be recorded.


Passage number 114.
MR. BALLES. Might I ask, Mr. Chairman, given the pros andcons of all of this and what we've heard: Would you care to tell uswhat your recommendation is on balance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for the Chairman's recommendation after considering the pros and cons.


Passage number 115.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, my recommendation is to do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is making a personal recommendation without opposing or conflicting views.


Passage number 116.
MR. BALLES. All right. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude.


Passage number 117.
MR. COLDWELL. Well, [because] of the publicity, I think itwould be preferable not to have a split vote on this, so I would votefor it, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Coldwell agrees with the idea because of the publicity and expresses his intention to vote for it.


Passage number 118.
-12-8/14/79MR. WALLICH. So would I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement of agreement.


Passage number 119.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you want to call the roll on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking if the audience wants to proceed with calling the roll, without any indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 120.
MR. ALTMANN.Chairman Volcker YesPresident Balles YesPresident Black YesGovernor Coldwell YesPresident Kimbrel YesPresident Mayo YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Schultz YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich YesFirst Vice President Timlen YesUnanimous.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The word "unanimous" at the end of the passage suggests that all the individuals listed have agreed or voted in favor of something.


Passage number 121.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Sternlight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context about Mr. Sternlight, so it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 122.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would just liketo say first that I appreciate very much the Committee's earlieraction and expression of confidence. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 123.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 124.
MR. COLDWELL. Peter, what is the dealers' inventory positionnow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question being asked by Mr. Coldwell to Peter.


Passage number 125.
MR. STERNLIGHT. In issues over one year, as of Friday whichis my last figure, they had about a $460 million net long position.No doubt it is lower now because we did some sizable buying of couponissues yesterday. We bought almost a billion dollars of coupon issuesyesterday, some of which would have come from the dealers' inventoriesand some from customers. I would guess that they are probably atclose to an even position in over 1-year issues.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It is a statement of facts regarding the net long position in over 1-year issues and the recent purchases made.


Passage number 126.
MR. COLDWELL. I didn't mean a particular date, Peter; Imeant a time frame of, say, over the last 3 or 4 weeks. Have theybeen holding about a plus or an even position.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Coldwell is clarifying his statement and expressing a general time frame.


Passage number 127.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, that goes up and down as the marketgears up for a Treasury refunding and then takes on those securities.Typically [dealers] have wanted to be moderately short in theirpositions because they had that kind of view of the market. They hadgotten into a deeper short position as this Treasury quarterlyrefunding approached. They used the refunding to build up a longposition and by now they have distributed securities that they hadtaken on and have gotten back to close to an even position again, Iwould say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information about dealers' positions in the market.


Passage number 128.
MR. COLDWELL. You see no discernable change in theirattitude toward keeping either a balanced or a short position.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states that Mr. Coldwell does not observe any noticeable change in their attitude towards keeping either a balanced or a short position. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 129.
MR. STERNLIGHT. They seem to want to be in about a balancedor slight short position.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply describes that "they" (presumably a group of people or an entity) have the desire to be in a balanced or slightly short position.


Passage number 130.
8/14/79CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there is no other comment, we have toratify [the domestic transactions].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating that if there are no other comments or objections, they will proceed to ratify the domestic transactions.


Passage number 131.
MR. WALLICH. Going back to this earlier statement that theaverage age of our portfolio is now 4.3 years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states a fact about the average age of the portfolio.


Passage number 132.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I didn't give that precise a figure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Sternlight is simply stating that he did not provide an exact number.


Passage number 133.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was 4 to 6 years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contentions or disagreements. It simply states a specific time frame.


Passage number 134.
MR. WALLICH. That 4 to 6 years came in the examinationreport. That is well in excess of the average age of the total publicdebt, isn't it. So, we are a substantial factor in helping theTreasury to lengthen the debt unless what they report is only thepublicly held debt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of fact followed by a question seeking confirmation or clarification.


Passage number 135.
MR. STERNLIGHT. They report it both ways. They give theaverage length including Fed holdings and government accounts andexcluding them. They have achieved a significant lengthening oneither basis. I wouldn't say that our behavior has been a majorfactor in enabling them to lengthen the average.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply highlights that there are different ways of measuring the average length and that it has been lengthened significantly, without indicating any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements.


Passage number 136.
MR. HOLMES. I think they normally use the publicly held debtas an estimate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Holmes expressing his belief or opinion.


Passage number 137.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I may not remember [correctly], but Ithought that publicly held debt was getting up in the 4-year area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is merely expressing uncertainty regarding the accuracy of the information being discussed.


Passage number 138.
MR. STERNLIGHT. It might be up to around 4 years or so. Ithink our average length might be slightly longer. We have beenconscious of that and for that reason on the recent quarterlyrollovers we have steered a somewhat greater proportion of ourrollovers into the shorter options.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 139.
MR. WALLICH. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude by thanking someone.


Passage number 140.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [We need to] ratify the transactions.Without objection. Mr. Zeisel.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Without objection" suggests that there is agreement among the participants.


Passage number 141.
MR. ZEISEL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any statements that indicate contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude and addressing the chairman.


Passage number 142.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether you made explicityour assumptions. [You have assumed] no changes in fiscal policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: This passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the writer is unsure if the assumptions were explicitly made and then goes on to mention one of those assumed criteria.


Passage number 143.
MR. ZEISEL. No change in fiscal policy other than theautomatic adjustments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there will be no change in fiscal policy other than the automatic adjustments.


Passage number 144.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right. [And you've assumed] the presenttargets on monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 145.
MR. ZEISEL. And the present targets on monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply mentions the topic of monetary policy targets without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 146.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would appreciate it if you would confineyourselves at this point to questions and be as brief as possible. Wewill come back and have comments on the economic situation. JohnBalles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a request for the audience to focus on asking questions and to keep their inquiries concise. There is no indication of any opposing viewpoints or arguments being presented.


Passage number 147.
-14-8/14/79MR. BALLES. I really wanted to follow up on the question youjust raised, Mr. Chairman. Jerry, have you had a chance to do anycalculating on what the automatic changes in fiscal policy mightproduce--that is, the revenue losses built into your economic modeland the expenditure [increases]. I think it's important to all of us.I am certainly struggling to get a fix on how much fiscal stimulus wemight get to cushion the downturn, in order to pinpoint theappropriate role for monetary policy in this period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 148.
MR. ZEISEL. Right. [Given] the contraction that we'veprojected--which affects unemployment benefits most importantly in anautomatic way but social security benefits to some minor degree andfood stamps and so on--the total impact is about $1-3/4 billionautomatically on transfer payments. The receipts are adjusted down byabout $3 billion, I think, but I don't have those figures [in front ofme]. I will have to check that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing projected impacts of a contraction on various transfer payments and mentions that they do not have specific figures at hand.


Passage number 149.
MR. MAYO. Is that for calendar 1980 or what, Jerry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Mayo is simply seeking clarification about the timeframe being referred to.


Passage number 150.
MR. ZEISEL. That is for fiscal year 1980.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Zeisel is simply stating a fact or providing information.


Passage number 151.
MR. MAYO. It would be much more than that I would think inits economic effect, because your figures would reflect thecollections on corporate taxes and they would still be running prettyhigh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Mayo is simply making a statement about the potential economic effects of certain figures reflecting collections on corporate taxes.


Passage number 152.
MR. ZEISEL. Yes, that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It simply acknowledges the correctness of a statement or assertion made by someone named Mr. Zeisel.


Passage number 153.
MR. MAYO. If corporate profits fall off next year, then weare going to have a much bigger effect than $3 billion, I would think,by fiscal 1981.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Mayo is stating a hypothetical situation and expressing his personal opinion about the potential effects of corporate profits falling off. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 154.
MR. PARTEE. The projected deficit goes up $10 billion nextyear, Jerry, and I don't think it would go up if we didn't have arecession.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no explicit contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact about the projected deficit increasing for the next year and expressing their opinion that the increase is due to the recession.


Passage number 155.
MR. AXILROD. President Balles, it's a measure of the fiscalpolicy effects that's conventionally [used]. People look at the highemployment surplus to standardize for the level of activity. And onthat projection--granted the measurement differences among people--thechange from, say, the 2nd quarter of '79 to the 4th quarter of '80throughout is fairly consistently in a restrictive direction. Thatis, the high employment surplus grows so that more is being taken outof the economy as it gets weaker rather than vice versa. That's justone measure people take as an indicator of fiscal policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining how fiscal policy is conventionally measured and how the high employment surplus is used as an indicator. They are not expressing any opposing views or engaging in debate.


Passage number 156.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Coldwell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 157.
MR. COLDWELL. Jerry, could we probe just a minute. In yourcomment on the unemployment rate, I heard you say that you areforecasting a loss of jobs in the industrial sector. What do you havein the way of advance indicators of employment changes so you couldsay to us, for example, that the demographics are there to provide Xamount of new labor force. [Are there other indicators such as] theloss of help wanted ads in the newspapers, the changes that you seedeveloping in the automobile industry or whatever else to give yousome leg up on what the unemployment rate is likely to be over thecoming quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a question asking for clarification and additional information from Jerry. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 158.
-15-8/14/79MR. ZEISEL. Well, obviously the growth in the labor force isa significant element in our projection procedure. We don't have anyconcrete evidence from current economic series indicating layoffs ofany substantial magnitude beyond the employment figures that Ireferred to--that is, the cut in manufacturing employment by about130,000 over the last few months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is stating a fact about the growth in the labor force and explaining that there is no concrete evidence of substantial layoffs.


Passage number 159.
MR. COLDWELL. You do have some [accession] rate figures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply mentions the fact that there are some accession rate figures.


Passage number 160.
MR. ZEISEL. We have those and they don't show any reallydramatic changes. Our assumption is that labor force growth will bequite moderate in the coming year--around 1-1/2 percent, which isabout half the rate it was in 1978. Characteristically theparticipation of women has not suffered particularly during recentrecessions. That's a function of social and other considerations, aswell as the fact that women tend to go into employment sectors whichcontinue growing. But basically we are projecting a fairly stableoverall participation rate. That would mean a continued decline inthe participation rate of adult males, particularly older adult malesand a continued rise, although at a more moderate rate, for women.And I would consider our projections of labor force growth to be onthe conservative side. The projections of the employment side, ofcourse, fall out of our production projections.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents information and projections without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 161.
MR. COLDWELL. On the question of the participation of women,isn't it possible that we may get a more comparable reaction [to thatof] men now that the level of participation is [sharply] higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It presents a statement by Mr. Coldwell about the participation of women and suggests that with higher levels of participation, the reaction of women may become more comparable to that of men.


Passage number 162.
MR. ZEISEL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual passage being provided.


Passage number 163.
 You mean that they would tend to stay orcontinue--MR. COLDWELL. Well, that we won't have this division[unintelligible] further increases in participation rates at the timewhen labor demands weaken.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Coldwell explaining that there will be increased participation rates in the labor market even when labor demands weaken.


Passage number 164.
MR. ZEISEL. Basically, the participation rate of the adultmen, let's say those age 25 to 54--what we generally call the core ofthe adult male labor force--tends to remain pretty stable, and wewould expect it to remain stable. There's a certain degree ofdiscouragement reflected in those who are more marginal members of thelabor force in that group; they move out [of the labor forcestatistics] when they're not looking for work. But basically thedecline that we get in the [adult male] participation rate when thelabor market weakens is among people who are older. They are makingdecisions about whether to stay in or not. When the employment marketis strong and there are attractive job opportunities those olderworkers tend to stay in. When things look poor and the opportunitiesare not there, they tend to drop out. So we tend to see someaccelerated decline in the participation of men in the age 55 and overgroup. We would expect that the participation rates would be held upin part by the degree of inflation--the pressure on household incomes.That tends to result in women particularly looking for jobs or stayingin the labor market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 165.
MR. COLDWELL. [You have] looked over this range ofinformation, which you obviously thought greatly about. And yet ineach of the last 3 months I think you have expressed some surprise8/14/79that the unemployment rate has not started to move up. Do you nowview that as an immediate possibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification and the other person's opinion on a previous statement they made.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 166.
MR. ZEISEL. I certainly hope so, in a sense. My socialconscience is at war with my economic view of [the situation]. Thelack of a rise in unemployment, which is the other side of the coin ofa cut in employment, is reflected in the enormous deterioration ofproductivity in the last couple of quarters. Obviously, if onebelieves the output figures, then employers have not rationalizedtheir labor forces yet; they have not adjusted. Possibly thisreflects the fact that they were taken by surprise by the decline inoutput. Possibly they want to hold off for a while. In any event, Iwould think that rational behavior would dictate substantial cuts inemployment over the next couple of quarters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is conflicted between their social conscience and their economic view. They discuss the lack of rise in unemployment and the deterioration of productivity, suggesting that employers have not yet made necessary cuts in employment. However, the speaker also acknowledges that employers may have been taken by surprise by the decline in output and may want to hold off on making cuts. This difference in opinions about the need for substantial cuts in employment indicates disagreement or contention.


Passage number 167.
MR. COLDWELL. Unless [employers] thought they were going toneed that labor in the near term.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact or opinion without any opposition or contradiction.


Passage number 168.
MR. ZEISEL. That's correct. But when they look at theirbooks and see what happened to profits in Q1 and Q2--and probably willhappen to profits in Q3--given the employment levels that currentlyexist in the face of declining output, I think those [numbers] aregoing to be persuasive arguments to them to cut back on employment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing a statement about what might happen in the future based on certain conditions and data.


Passage number 169.
MS. TEETERS. But this is not an unusual pattern at thisstage of the cycle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not mention any conflicting opinions or disagreement. It simply states a pattern without any opposing views.


Passage number 170.
MR. ZEISEL. It's a bit worse than average but you are quiteright, Governor Teeters, that the pattern is not unusual.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with the statement made by Governor Teeters.


Passage number 171.
MR. MORRIS. It seems to me that it's quite similar to thefirst half of '74; we had a [comparable] phenomenon at about the sametime [of the cycle].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is simply making an observation.


Passage number 172.
MR. ZEISEL. That's correct. This one seems to be a littleworse; the decline in productivity is a bit more dramatic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Zeisel simply acknowledges that the decline in productivity is more dramatic in this particular case.


Passage number 173.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage, "Governor Wallich," does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 174.
MR. WALLICH. Looking at your projections, am I right inthinking that net exports and the change in business inventories arethe two really dynamic factors and that they roughly offset each otherwith a swing of about $30 billion at a maximum. My question is aboutthe degree of confidence with which you hold these [projected] sizableswings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking about the level of confidence the projections have.


Passage number 175.
MR. ZEISEL. I think you are quite right, in the sense thatthey not only offset one another in some respect but also that thedegree of confidence we hold in our forecasts [of those two measures]is very similar. However, that degree of confidence is extremely low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with the idea that the two measures offset each other and that the degree of confidence in the forecasts is low.


Passage number 176.
MR. WALLICH. With some of these elements, [such as]consumption, I think you probably have a very narrow confidenceinterval.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. It simply states that the speaker, Mr. Wallich, believes that the confidence interval for consumption is narrow.


Passage number 177.
MR. ZEISEL. I'll speak first about inventories and I willlet Mr. Truman attack the problems of projecting net exports. Quitefrankly, our projections of inventories are determined largely by-17-8/14/79business behavior in regard to their management of stocks in recentyears. Businessmen have tended to be quite conservative; they havetended to respond very quickly to their perception of any backup instocks. We saw a number of very small, very rapid adjustments inproduction, too, whenever there was an indication of stock building.We are projecting a continuation of that behavior. There areindications that inventories had built up in June and in automobilesundoubtedly in July also. There has been some buildup in inventoriesin real terms elsewhere. We think production adjustments areoccurring rather rapidly, but they are not very large so they can beput out of the way rather quickly. And we would expect thatbusinessmen will attempt to continue to keep their stocks more or lessin line with sales--in fact on the conservative side over theprojection period. But we have a number of equations to forecast, andI don't put any more credence in those equations than I do in thiskind of visceral judgment based upon recent past performance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing his own perspective and analysis.


Passage number 178.
MR. TRUMAN. We would like to believe that the net exportprojection is slightly more firmly held than the inventory projection.The facts may not be so right. It is true in the net exports areathat we are now dealing with a $600 billion total--and it's made up offactors which move in very different directions and have differentfutures--so that the range of error on the net export projection canbe quite large if we look out as long as six quarters. I'm prettycomfortable, though, with this projection as it now stands. The oilsituation is rather straightforward, based on the assumptions that wehave. And the question might be how responsive imports will be toslow growth in the United States. We have put in a fairly modestdownturn in real imports in connection with this; it could in fact belarger. On the export side, things look fairly good--carrying throughto the middle of next year--as long as growth is reasonable, given therecent growth in major industrial countries. The question I think[arises] in the latter part of 1980, when we do expect a considerableslowdown; if that is more [severe], then clearly exports will fall offless. In terms of the global numbers, the one area of particularuncertainty has to do with service income, which gets fed into theseprojections. There has been a dramatic increase in service income inthe last quarter of last year and the first quarter of this year. Webasically have not extrapolated that increase but we have a furthermodest buildup from the current level. Now, we have been fooled bystatistical flukes in those series, so the numbers could be off, butin the basic merchandise trade area, I'm pretty comfortable [with ourprojection]. I would say that the swing in nominal terms that we havehere is much less than that in so-called real terms. It's an area ofstrength but not a great deal of strength.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their confidence in the net export projection, but also acknowledging that there are factors that could result in a large range of error. They also mention uncertainty in service income, but overall they feel comfortable with the projection.


Passage number 179.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have three names on my list. I hope thequestions will be brief and that there won't be any more than threenames. I might just say--I can't restrain myself from saying--thatthese two uncertainties may be mutually related if merchandise tradedoes so well because the economy is in a recession that is generatedby the inventory reduction. If you don't get the inventory reductionyou won't have such a good trade balance and vice versa. FrankMorris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 180.
MR. MORRIS. Do you have any estimates of the burden ofconsumer debt service--taking into account mortgage debt plus otherdebt--now and how it would compare to 1974.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question regarding estimates of consumer debt service.


Passage number 181.
-18-8/14/79CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I refer you to an exhaustive article inthe Quarterly Review of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply referring the reader to an article in the Quarterly Review of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.


Passage number 182.
MR. ZEISEL. The level is fairly high and the burden is a bithigher than it was back then. [Mike], do you have those figures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply making a statement about the level and burden being high without any conflicting opinions or opposition being expressed.


Passage number 183.
MR. PRELL. The repayment to income ratio is 23 percentroughly--at the record level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a fact about the repayment to income ratio being at a record level of 23 percent. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 184.
MR. ZEISEL. That's a record level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact.


Passage number 185.
MS. TEETERS. But the peak was reached last fall. It hasbeen drifting down ever so slightly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In the given passage, there is no contention or disagreement. It simply states that the peak was reached last fall and that it has been drifting down ever so slightly. There is no opposing viewpoint or conflicting information presented.


Passage number 186.
MR. PRELL. Consumer installment credit particularly hasleveled off but I think the mortgage debt is still drifting up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating two separate trends - consumer installment credit leveling off and mortgage debt drifting up.


Passage number 187.
MR. ZEISEL. The article in the New York Federal Reserve[publication] makes a point that the simple view of this probablyoverstates the burden of debt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions an article in the New York Federal Reserve publication and states that it argues that the burden of debt may be overestimated.


Passage number 188.
MR. PARTEE. Demographics.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "MR. PARTEE. Demographics" is a simple statement without any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a neutral reference to the topic of demographics.


Passage number 189.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It argues that there are many morefamilies now in heavy debt bearing categories, and if you adjust forthat and adjust for the credit card debt--which would be a differentkind of debt--the figures don't look as high as they do absolutely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presenting an argument about the increase in families in heavy debt categories, suggesting that adjusting for certain factors may change the perception of how high the figures appear.


Passage number 190.
MR. MORRIS. The issue is whether the debt burden seemssignificant [enough] or not to affect consumer behavior and perhapscreate a slower response on the part of the consumer in the upturnthan we have been accustomed to in the past.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Morris, is simply stating an issue for discussion about the impact of debt burden on consumer behavior.


Passage number 191.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The conclusion of that article is that[the debt burden] is high but not so high as it looks on the surface.It therefore moderates the conclusion; they still may be[unintelligible]. Chuck Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 192.
MR. PARTEE. I just wanted to ask for your interpretation ofthe retail sales figures, Jerry. [The article] in the paper was alittle confusing. The July increase looked very small to me but thenthere was some talk of a revision in May and June and I couldn'treally make it out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The speaker expresses confusion and seeks clarification regarding the interpretation of the retail sales figures. This indicates some disagreement or differing viewpoints about how to interpret the data.


Passage number 193.
MR. ZEISEL. Yes, that's correct. The July increase wasquite small--0.4 both for total sales and sales ex-autos. Both Mayand June were revised up, which suggests that the second quarterconsumption figures will not be as weak as we had thought earlier.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states the facts and mentions a revision that suggests a different conclusion from previous expectations.


Passage number 194.
MR. PARTEE. But were they revised very much. This is just aquestion of fact.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply asking for clarification on a factual matter and does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 195.
MR. ZEISEL. Other things equal, they probably would reviseGNP up by 1 percent or so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement evident in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a hypothetical scenario where GNP might be revised up by 1 percent, without any indication of disagreement or differing views.


Passage number 196.
MR. PARTEE. One percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no disagreement or contention evident in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a numerical value without any conflicting viewpoints being presented.


Passage number 197.
8/14/79MR. ZEISEL. It's fairly significant. But as I pointed out,the pattern is still a relatively weak one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that the pattern is relatively weak but significant.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 198.
MR. BALLES. Just another question quickly, Mr. Chairman, onthe fiscal policy matter. Jerry, earlier this year you may rememberwe called attention to some startling differences between yourprojections of the high employment surplus and those of the Council ofEconomic Advisers. They were much different magnitudes and evendifferent signs. Could you bring us up-to-date in a nutshell on wherethat stands today if you know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker mentions "startling differences" between their projections and those of the Council of Economic Advisers, suggesting disagreement or conflicting perspectives on the fiscal policy matter.


Passage number 199.
MR. ZEISEL. Well, we still have differences in the level,and those differences are a reflection of a different approach incalculating the figures. We tend to move generally in harmony,however, with the Council's movements at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Zeisel acknowledges differences in approach when calculating figures, but also notes that they tend to move in harmony with the Council's movements.


Passage number 200.
MR. MORRIS. They both show a rising surplus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a fact, without presenting any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 201.
MR. ZEISEL. We both show a rising surplus, yes. I thinkthat's really the most significant way of assessing these numbers. Tocome back to this issue of how much of a loss as a result of therecession, the projected decline in the deficit increases in ourprojection between '79 and '80 by about $10 billion and the highemployment move is an additional $17 or $18 billion. I guess a verysimplistic view would be to add those and it comes close to $30billion in fiscal loss. But we will calculate that carefully for youand send a note along.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a discussion of numbers and projections.


Passage number 202.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Axilrod. You want to give us a surveyof what are called financial relationships.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any evidence of contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating that Mr. Axilrod will provide a survey of financial relationships.


Passage number 203.
MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be either a statement or a response without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 204.
[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not a clockwise, counterclockwise, orprotocol man, so if you want to talk at this stage, get on Mr.Zeisel's list--I mean Mr. Altmann's list. I'm sorry, I was looking atthe wrong end of the table. I know which way interest rates go evenif I don't know which end of the table I'm at. Go ahead, Mark.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 205.
MR. WILLES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I found your commentsvery helpful and I am very sympathetic with them. I guess the onlything I'd like to do is to make you feel a little less insecure aboutthe impact of where I think you are heading and what that would implyin terms of the real economy and recession.It seems to me that as we look at what's happening in thereal sector, two issues are relevant. One is what caused therecession that we are heading into. I think you rightly attributedthat primarily to the energy problem. And if that's the case--and Ihappen to think it is--there is really nothing that printing money or,I would add, deficit spending could do to offset that. Second, as youknow, we have convinced ourselves at least in Minneapolis that even ifthat weren't the case, there is no exploitable tradeoff betweeninflation and unemployment. So [in our view], a conscious decision togo easy on money in order to ameliorate the unemployment effect justreally wouldn't have any impact. In fact, that would have the effect-23-8/14/79you suggested--that is, it would come out in terms of prices ratherthan in more rapid real economic growth and less unemployment.So it seems to me--with inflationary expectations clearlyhaving worsened in contrast to our expectation earlier that they wouldstart to get better about this stage of the year--that we almostsingle-mindedly have to devote ourselves to the task of doingsomething about inflation. Then the question is: What do we do andhow do we do it. I found Steve's comments very helpful and useful inthat they implied a tremendous amount of uncertainty about how tofigure out what is happening to the demand for money. I don't pretendto be able to forecast that any better than anybody else, and theimplication of that to me is that we have to try rather hard to holdthe short-term rate of growth of money in line on the assumption thatwe can then respond in whatever way is appropriate to hit the long-runtargets. I'm impressed by the fact that money is growing too rapidly.We talk a lot about ATS but lots of other [financial instruments] havecome into use as money substitutes, as we have talked about; I thinkyou've even mentioned them on occasion, [Mr. Chairman]. If we add anyportion of those to the rate of growth of M1, for example, we getreally quite large numbers. Let's assume that we get 4.8 percentgrowth of M1 for August, which I think is the forecast. Any of theranges proposed in the Bluebook would allow for high double digitgrowth in September, excluding these other non-M1 factors. I thinkthat would just be much too rapid growth at this very critical time.So I think we need to reduce substantially any of the ranges that arelisted here in the Bluebook, perhaps going with the range we have atthis time which is 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent. And if it turns out thatthat requires an upward adjustment in the funds rate, it seems to mewe've got to do that in the short run in order to head off what Ithink would be a substantially more serious long-run implication.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Willes, expresses agreement and sympathy with the Chairman's comments and discusses his own views on the causes of the recession and the need to address inflation. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 206.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Dave Eastburn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is simply a person's name, "Dave Eastburn," and does not provide any information or statements that could lead to contention or disagreement. It is only a name without any context.


Passage number 207.
MR. EASTBURN. Paul, I was very much interested in yourrecital of the almost upside down economy that we are in, where usualroles really have reverse implications. There is one, however, thatoccurs to me that you didn't mentioned and that is the possibilitythat in this kind of world a recession of any magnitude can beinflationary in a longer-run sense. I think that's a real possibilityparticularly if, as I suspect, the staff's assumptions about fiscalaction underestimate the stimulus that we would get if we were to havea recession, particularly one of greater magnitude than now forecast.So I think it's quite possible that we run the danger of overstayingrestraint--creating a worse recession than is now projected,stimulating very sharp action on the fiscal front to get the economymoving, having very adverse psychological and expectational effectsthroughout the economy, and thus in the long run doing more tostimulate inflation than perhaps anything else we could do. All thisis by way of saying that my inclination is to be very careful aboutmoving vigorously toward restraint at this time, particularly giventhe lags that we all know exist between what we do now and the timethat it is going to affect the economy.I'd like to end by asking Steve a question because hisanswers will determine in part just how confident I feel about all ofthis. Steve, on your fourth-quarter projections for M1 and M2, youhave something like 4 percent and 7-1/2 percent with any of the8/14/79alternatives--"A", "B", or "C". Given past history with recessionsand what they do to money growth, does that change your confidencelevel with respect to those fourth-quarter figures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 208.
MR. AXILROD. Given the recession we have projected, which isslightly under 2 percent [negative GNP], and the degree of inflation,I guess I have the normal lack of confidence, but not any more thanthat. But I would think that [those projections] might be too lowrather than too high if the nominal GNP we have forecast develops. Isay that because on our quarterly econometric model--and you knowthere's uncertainty around that--the amount of so-called drift that'simplied in that number is 3 percentage points. It's fairly high, andwe have turned out to be right in the past on drift. But that wecan't be certain about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their lack of confidence in the projections, but they do not mention any disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 209.
MR. EASTBURN. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 210.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I need the complete passage in order to determine if there is contention or disagreement. Could you please provide the full text?


Passage number 211.
MR. BALLES. Well, Mr. Chairman, I find myself verysympathetic to the approach that you outlined in your assessment ofthe immediate and longer-run problems. It might seem odd in a waysince last May I was in the distinct minority that thought we ought toease a bit in view of an impending recession, which our staff had beenforecasting for some months. My concern at that time [involved] whatwas going on in terms of interest rate levels and the effects infinancial markets as well as the monetary growth record. There hadbeen a period of very slow monetary growth over a half year. Now tomy great surprise we have found just the opposite, with the summersurge in the aggregates. That apparently calmed down in August, butagain there's a very strong projection for September, which Steve hasalready reviewed for us. So it seems to me that we have a crediblereason for snugging up a bit right now and, therefore, I would leantoward what you were proposing, a conservative set of ranges and maybean Alternative C type of approach for the period immediately ahead.That's simply because the aggregates have shown such strong growthsince April--August being about the only exception--and [that surge ingrowth is] coming at a time when there is great sensitivity aboutinflation problems and how [that affects] people's behavior and theposition of the dollar.One of the reasons why I was probing on the fiscal policyside this morning was that, while we can't decide this today, in myown mind I have been trying to formulate what could be a longer-runstrategy. And it's based on an expectation that is yet to bedemonstrated--that we will get a lot of fiscal stimulus, probablycoming through a tax cut. That's just a personal guess, obviously.And while we talked about the high employment budget, I'd like toemphasize that in my opinion there is real stimulus in the real worldfrom an enlarging deficit, which we are surely going to get on an NIAbasis, perhaps of the magnitude shown in the Greenbook. If we aregoing to get that kind of stimulus down the road from the fiscal side,whether we want it or not--and I think we are going to get it--itmight be a good thing to cushion the effect on the economy. I guessI'm now leaning more toward the view than I was in the spring thatmonetary policy may have to address itself principally to some gradualdeceleration in the inflation rate, because if we don't get thataccomplished, we will have an even bigger recession down the road.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing agreement and support for the proposed approach.


Passage number 212.
-25-8/14/79CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Tom Timlen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the provided passage. It appears to be a random combination of numbers and names without any context or indication of disagreement.


Passage number 213.
MR. TIMLEN. Mr. Chairman, I'm generally in agreement withyour comments in the areas of concern that you referred to. Havingbeen trained in the traditions of Benjamin Strong, Allan Sproul, andPaul Volcker, I may have some shadings of view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker states that they are generally in agreement with the comments made by the chairman.


Passage number 214.
MR. PARTEE. Sounds like a tight money man.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: There is no explicit contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a statement mentioning someone's opinion or characterization of a person being a "tight money man."


Passage number 215.
MR. TIMLEN. I don't think I will comment in depth on all theareas you touched on, but certainly [foremost] in my mind are thelevel of inflation, the strong growth in the aggregates, and thetentative position of the dollar in the foreign exchange markets.Sure, we have to be concerned about the prospect of a recession andhigh [un]employment, but now is a time when psychology is a veryimportant factor. I think the perception of the Federal Reserve'sresolve may be at issue and I believe it's timely to give anindication of the direction in which we may be going. It's myjudgment that there should be a continuing gradual process oftightening and we should adjust to developments over time as they[occur]. Those are my comments, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Timlen expressing his thoughts on various economic factors.


Passage number 216.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the given passage, there is no contention or disagreement evident as it only mentions "Mr. Black" without any further context or information.


Passage number 217.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, were you not more original and morearticulate than I, I would have assumed that you had borrowed my notesto make that talk of yours. I guess the only point on which I mightdiffer with you is that I tend to attribute more of the oncomingrecession--if that's in fact where we are headed--to inflation thanyou did and less to the energy situation. In any event that leads meto the same conclusion: that we ought to approach the recessionproblem very carefully or otherwise we are going to lay the groundworkfor more recession or inflation, and then more severe recessions downthe road. And I think we have to deal not only with this recessionbut with the problem of recurring cycles.This leads me to the point where I conclude that we reallyhave to do something about the rate of growth in the aggregates. Iconcur with Mark Willes' remark in that all the ranges [in theBluebook] seem too high. I'll offer two brief bits of evidence insupport of that. If we go back to March, when growth in theaggregates began to spurt, and look at the period from March toSeptember, under alternative B with a money market directive, forexample, M1 could grow over that period by as much as 9 percent beforewe really acted. And that's a pretty long period of time. M2 couldgrow as high as 12 percent before we acted, and with "C" it's just atad different from that. The second point is that we ought not tolose sight of the necessity for mentally adding back in 1-1/2 percentto the top of that adjusted 3 to 6 percent range for M1 because it'sreally comparable to 7-1/2 percent; and we are very near the top ofthat range now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Black, expressing his agreement with the speaker and offering additional evidence and viewpoints.


Passage number 218.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual passage provided. Please provide the relevant passage for a more accurate answer.


Passage number 219.
MR. WALLICH. Well, I'm very much aware of the need tobalance the considerations of recession and inflation. I think if wetighten up a little now, which is my inclination, we probably will addsomething to the depth of the recession but not much. And I would not-26-8/14/79consider that this may provoke such ill-timed and ill-thought-outresponses on the fiscal policy side that we can't do that. I think wehave to do what seems right and then contribute as we can in asensible way to other decisions being taken. Now clearly, monetarypolicy has eased a great deal in recent months, [looking at] theaggregates themselves or the quasi-monies which we can add to M1, inwhich case they nearly double the rate of growth. Or we can add themto M4 or M7 and they have a less dramatic impact, but [the quasi-monies] are really pretty close to M1. Real interest rates havebecome much more negative as inflation has accelerated. And if youcan't buy the CPI, you can always take your money abroad and buy acurrency that is somewhat like the CPI; people are doing that. So wehave had a change in monetary policy that we had not intended. Wehaven't been going out of bounds [on the long-run ranges] because wehad that six months of flat movement in the aggregates from late lastyear through earlier this year. But I think the important thing iswhat has happened in recent months.[Let me mention] one consideration about the real economy.We are projecting, hopefully, a reduction in inflation of 1 or 2percentage points from a double-digit range in the period after thisrecession. Remember that in 1974-75 we also got into the double-digitrange; inflation was about 12 percent in 1974 and we brought it downto about 6 percent in 1975 and to about 4-1/2 or 5 percent in 1976.In other words we did a great deal better then--at considerable costin unemployment--than we expect to be doing, at least for the firstyear of the post-recession period. If that means that we go into anew expansion in 1980 with a base inflation rate of 10 percent orthereabouts and we go through the same experience and the rate ofinflation because of an expansion increases by about half of itsvalue, we will find ourselves with inflation in the 15 to 20 percentrange. I think that prospect is no longer at all incredible. I don'tthink our present policies involve very strong inflation fighting;they involve a very heavy component of fighting recession and in myview the result of that will be that we will go through one furtherround of slightly diminishing inflation and then we will see sharplyaccelerating inflation again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, is discussing their views on balancing recession and inflation and the potential consequences of various policies. They are expressing their own thoughts and projections without contradicting or conflicting with any other viewpoint.


Passage number 220.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Coldwell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Not enough information is provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 221.
MR. COLDWELL. Mr. Chairman, the situation as I view it has acouple of interesting quirks. As you recall, last fall we talkedabout the real economy expanding while the monetary economy heldquiet. We are now looking at a monetary expansion with a presumptionthat the real economy is flat. I didn't believe the one last fall,and I don't believe the one now. I think we have either a stockadjustment problem going on or a flow problem. At any rate, I thinkwe are caught in a vicious circle. We start with an inflation ratebase of whatever you want to call it--say, 7, 8, 9, or 10 percent.From that comes encouragement for higher oil prices and higher wages;we get lower productivity, we get higher costs, the dollardepreciates, and then we get higher inflation. We have got to breakout of this circle, and breaking out of it I think means we have torefuse to validate some of these higher costs and prices. It's goingto be an expensive process for us; it's going to be a traumaticprocess for some of our people. But I think the threat of anintensification of recession, while a cautionary flag, still is not-27-8/14/79balanced against the costs of inflation, which are now in the double-digit range and have been there for some time. The costs even if wejust take it against GNP are obviously over $200 billion a year.We've got to get out of this box. I don't think we are goingto break out of it today or tomorrow, but we are going to have tobreak out of it somehow or we will just continue to have a higher andhigher inflation and a constant recurrence of international crises.The downside risks are there, certainly. But there's a certainty tothe upside risks, too, in terms of inflation. I haven't had muchconfidence in these aggregates figures for almost 10 years now. Icertainly have not seen anything to improve my confidence in them.The impact on the dollar has come to be a new element in this packageand I think in the long run it means that we have to pay attention toour international position, perhaps a little more so than we have donein the past.All of this says to me that we still have a role to play.Monetary policy can't do it all but its role at the moment is to fightinflation. I would hope that the Committee would also look at thelong-range strategy of how we are going to get out of this box that Ihave tried to portray for you. We need to try to look at thepossibilities of getting more certain figures on our money supply,[perhaps by] getting greater reserve coverage throughout the wholerange of financial institutions and maybe even some nonfinancial onesalso. We must try to get ourselves equipped so we can know preciselywhat we are creating and be able to limit that creation of credit whenwe think it is necessary to dampen inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Coldwell, expresses skepticism and disagreement with the idea that there is an ongoing monetary expansion and a stagnant real economy. He believes that there may be a stock adjustment problem or a flow problem causing the current situation. He also disagrees with the idea of validating higher costs and prices and emphasizes the need to break out of the cycle of inflation. Furthermore, Mr. Coldwell expresses a lack of confidence in aggregate figures and calls for a long-range strategy to address the issues at hand.


Passage number 222.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Kimbrel.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only provides the name "Mr. Kimbrel", without any other context or information.


Passage number 223.
MR. KIMBREL. Mr. Chairman, from my vantage point we areindeed beginning to recognize some slower growth. That may besomewhat less evident in the Southeast than in other parts of thecountry, but with all of this we are also observing some[developments] that do not provide a great deal of encouragement,specifically in the area of consumer confidence area. Perhaps much ofthis is generated by the energy concerns and the toll they're takingin every part of the economy and also the contribution they're makingto inflation, and that in turn is extracting its pound of consumerconfidence. We have never seen the man on the street demonstratingthe lack of confidence that he seems to be generating at the moment.Add to this the recent strength in the aggregates and we've becomequite concerned about our total credibility. From the foreignexchange side, we seem to be getting unmistakable readings that whatwe do today and certainly over the next few days will beextraordinarily visible. We will be watched from that vantage pointand also [from the perspective of] new leadership on this Committee.I think that makes our action today--and the direction of our actiontoday--more than usually visible. That also spills over into thedomestic arena; we are going to be having more than usual concern. Iwould venture that most of you have been called more frequently in thelast ten days than you have before [by people] wondering what wasgoing to happen here today and over the immediately succeeding days.I recognize the risks that are associated with almost anyaction we take, particularly if it's in the direction of some slightfirming. Even though the movement should be slight--even symbolic,-28-8/14/79which is the term I believe you used, Mr. Chairman--I think it wouldbe desirable at this particular juncture. Also I view the[appropriate] timing of the move with some additional pressure inmonetary policy [as] now. So if indeed in the not too far distantfuture we find it appropriate to take a turn toward ease, somestrength will have accrued, some different posture would haveidentified itself with us so as to permit the easing that would be[needed]. But as of this juncture, consumer confidence and attitudes,visibility, [and] both international and domestic [issues] lead me towant to add some degree of additional restraint today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their concerns and observations, but there is no disagreement or argument presented.


Passage number 224.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 225.
MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, I have a great deal of sympathy withthe identification of the box, which you so aptly described. Ipersonally believe that we haven't started to feel the social costs ofinflation and that they are going to surface to an increasing extentthis fall, with more attention on them. But in thinking of how we getout of the box that we have sort of built ourselves into, I have lessconfidence in our forecast of the aggregates than I do in the forecastof the economy--not only in terms of the numbers forecast but whatthey mean. On the other hand, I think any action we take--because weare certainly in the spotlight today--will be looked at very eagerlyand there are psychological reactions coming from what we do. So thatwould make me just a bit cautious as to how extensive the symbolicaction we take today [should be]. Yet in trying to find a way out ofthis box I think we do have to make some changes. And while this maygo against the grain of your background, Mr. Chairman, let me suggesta possible course: I suggest that we shave the ranges of theaggregates and shave them considerably from what appears here. At thesame time, we could widen the range of the funds rate and for once inour lives pay some attention to that and let [the funds rate] roam.Doing that gives us somewhat more adaptability to the circumstances asthey unfold. It gives us an opportunity to evolve gradually fromwhere we are rather than take an action which, if we get a reactionwithin the next week, then puts us back in another box that may becomedifficult. This would avoid tying our hands with respect to futureactions, which I am a little concerned we might do with a major actiontoday, although I have sympathy for that sort of move. [Given] myconfidence that the aggregates may be much stronger even than theestimates, by narrowing their ranges I think we achieve your goal butdo it with a different mechanism than a retention of a policy[unintelligible] at this time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses their sympathy with the identification of the box and their belief that the social costs of inflation will increase. They also express caution about the potential psychological reactions to any action taken. Additionally, the speaker suggests a possible course of action that involves shaving the ranges of aggregates and widening the range of the funds rate. While they acknowledge concerns about tying their hands with future actions, they also express sympathy for a major action. Overall, the passage presents a mixture of opinions and considerations without clear disagreement.


Passage number 226.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage is not provided. Please provide the passage you would like me to analyze for contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 227.
MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman I agree on the nature of thebox we're in as you described it. It seems to me that we can work ourway out of the box if we gear our policy to the aggregates in the next6 or 8 months. I think we're in a situation very similar to thesecond quarter of '74 when we had declining final demand. The declinewas cushioned by a very large inventory accumulation, financed by asubstantial expansion in bank credit, and this in turn I think led toa sharp rise in the aggregates. It seems to me that the problem in'74 was not that we leaned so hard against the expansion in the firsthalf, pushing the funds rate to unprecedentedly high levels, but thatwe moved so sluggishly when the aggregates failed to grow in the lasthalf of the year. Our slow movement on the other side I think-29-8/14/79produced a much bigger recession than was necessary and probably morereaction on the fiscal front than was really productive. So I wouldagree with your judgment that we should take a symbolic action todaythat would not be terribly damaging to the future prospects for theeconomy but would have some symbolic significance to the markets.I would suggest moving to 11 percent on the funds rate,raising the discount rate to 10-1/2 percent, but giving the Manager amoney market directive and informing him that there should be no movebeyond 11 percent without further consultation with the Committee. Amove of that size is not going to have any major further weakeningimpact on the economy; it would be slight, but not significant. Ithink it would yield us some psychological benefits and would be aworthwhile move provided that we're willing to perform differently inthe last half of the year than we did in the last half of '74. [Weshould] really move against a situation in which the aggregates arenot growing, and I think that's likely to be the case in the fourthquarter when we get a big decline in inventory accumulation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains disagreement or contention. Mr. Morris disagrees with the approach taken in the last half of '74 and argues for a different strategy in the current situation.


Passage number 228.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Baughman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 229.
MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, I must join the chorus that hasbeen sung pretty much around the table thus far, although I guess Iwould have to say I'm not a singer, as John Balles reminded me at thelast meeting. Coming from an area where labor markets are [tight] andthe turnover of labor is high because of that, [my singing] reallydoesn't have credibility in these circles. With respect to the boxthat has been referred to, thus far at least we are calling it a boxand not a coffin, which may prove to be overly optimistic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This passage simply includes the speaker expressing agreement with the opinions expressed by others and adding a lighthearted remark about his lack of credibility as a singer.


Passage number 230.
MR. MORRIS. We could make it into a coffin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a suggestion or idea, not a source of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 231.
MR. PARTEE. A little latent optimism.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a neutral statement expressing a mild level of optimism.


Passage number 232.
MR. BAUGHMAN. I'm not unaware of the [concern] that isbothering quite a few of us, namely that the historical record seemsto say rather unequivocally that we have usually acted late in both upand down periods of the cycle. And insofar as there is an argument insupport of a heavier reliance on the monetary aggregates, it islargely because heavier reliance on them would help us to avoid makingthose errors, if we classify them as errors. But it seems to me ifour major problem is inflation, and we visualize ourselves as being ina box and we're trying to find a way out, then we're pretty muchforced to orient monetary policy to a rather long-term horizon. Doingthat really means we throw in the sponge for our more flexibleeconomic tool, so far as influencing economic activity. And that inturn means that we turn responsibility for the short-term influence ofeconomic activity over to fiscal policy. While I don't like aspectsof this, I'm persuaded that that's probably the route we're going tohave to go if we want to find ourselves out of the inflation box.Namely, we have to focus monetary policy primarily on getting a[handle] on inflation. That seems to me to force us into a context ofworking [toward our objective over] a rather long-range horizon andfinding some way of defining it. Now a recent Congressional reportspells it out in terms of a conventional monetary aggregate. Right atthe moment I think it takes a pretty heroic person to commit himselfto hitching closely and rather unequivocally--especially over a longtime frame--to a monetary aggregate. But I don't really see much-30-8/14/79escape from it if we're going to hitch to inflation and that aspectwhich I think flows from it--I agree with Governor Coldwell--namely,the weakness of the dollar in exchange markets. That's all I have,Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's perspective on monetary policy and the need to focus on controlling inflation.


Passage number 233.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Mayo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 234.
MR. MAYO. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to look at this as anopportunity rather than a box.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Mayo's perspective on the situation.


Passage number 235.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "good" does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement in this context. It is a subjective term that generally denotes positivity or approval.


Passage number 236.
MR. MAYO. Inflation is our number one enemy. This has beendeclared far and wide, by the President of the United States and theleaders of the Congress as well as by the Federal Reserve. This maynot always be the case. There may be some folding on the fiscal side.In fact I would be willing to bet a Suzie to a penny--well, I've gotto help publicize [the Susan B. Anthony dollar]--that we will havefiscal stimulus regardless of what we do, as long as we'reresponsible, of course. If we put the discount rate at 20 percentthat's something else. We will be blamed for high interest rates andfor causing the recession regardless of whether we move [rates] up apercentage point or down a percentage point at this juncture. We tendto be too thin skinned about that. I don't think we can take itseriously as long as we act within a reasonable margin, which is amuch greater margin than this Committee has typically envisioned. Weall grant--I think Phil Coldwell put it very politely--that we have agenerally shared low level of confidence in the accuracy of ourfigures on the monetary aggregates. But having agreed with that, Idon't know what to do with that fact. I think we have to take thecentral point of the low level of confidence and work with it partlybecause--and here we are in a box--we have agreed to and the law hasbeen passed that we are to have targets and those targets have beenelaborated on. We obviously have a very concrete belief in sometargets that we ratified again just one month ago.So for foreign reasons, namely the value of the dollar, andfor inflation reasons--and not only for substantive reasons but forsymbolic reasons--I think this is an opportunity, while everybody ishating inflation so much, to move ahead and to tighten somewhat. Iwould define "somewhat" as it was just defined--I forget by whom but Ithink it was Frank--as an 11 percent central rate. A range of 10-1/2to 11-1/2 percent [for the federal funds rate] is fine with me. Maybewe could [trim] our aggregates [ranges] down a half point but Iwouldn't go farther than that because I think we would make troublefor ourselves. But I'd be ready to reverse, again partly for symbolicreasons and partly for substantive reasons, with this rather hazyconcept we have of the distribution of the lagged effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Mayo, is expressing his opinions and beliefs on various economic matters, but there is no indication that he is in opposition with anyone else.


Passage number 237.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual text.


Passage number 238.
MR. PARTEE. On balance I guess I agree with Frank Morrismore than anyone, although there are points of similarity [with otherviews]. I think the economic outlook is so bad that I wonder whetherI'm missing something. That is, it seems to me that a substantialdrop in consumption will have more effect than any other factor oncapital spending. A substantial drop in capital spending andconsumption will have a major effect on inventories, and the prospects-31-8/14/79are that we're in for a very serious recession if this continues. SoI've looked around for some things that would tell me I was wrongabout that. There are a few. First of all, Frank, the stock markethasn't gone down. I've looked back and in every other recession thestock market has dropped fairly early. In fact, it has gone up overthis period. And those are people who are betting their money on thefuture course of events.The second thing that's interesting to me is that the riskpremiums haven't increased in the securities markets. They are closeto their lowest point even for Chrysler, which is probably only thefirst of a number of corporations that will get to be in seriousdifficulty. Even Chrysler hasn't [seen a rise in] those riskpremiums, looking at low-grade corporates as against high-gradecorporates or corporates as against governments or municipal bonds,low and high grade. And even for Cleveland, the low grade munipremium is not large.The third thing is that the behavior of the money supply isextraordinarily strange. We haven't had a period associated with arecession in which we had really weak money growth followed by quitestrong money growth. It has been a rather mixed picture, butgenerally speaking the monetary aggregates weaken and stay on the weakside; they may be positive but they stay on the weak side until prettyclose to the lower turning point. This time we seem to have had 4 to5 months now of strength. It could be a change in the demandfunction, as Steve suggests, but that always bothers me because we canjust do that. Arithmetically anything we don't understand [isexplained as] a change in the demand function. Or it could be anintent to look through the recession. Indeed, all three of theseindicators might be a reference to the public's attitudes--an attemptto look through what they perceive to be a modest recession and tobuild on the future. If that's the case, we might not have muchrecession.So, I'm pretty much forced back to the aggregates as the onlydecent guide we have. And as long as they're rather strong, I'm notterribly uncomfortable about our contribution, plus or minus, towhat's happening to the system. They're a little too strong, I think,because they are running up through their ranges pretty fast. And asBob Black and I guess Mark Willes pointed out, they could very wellget to the top of the range or go above it in another couple of monthsif we happen to have strong numbers. I know all the problems with theaggregates, but I don't think they're as bad as most of you do. And Ithink we ought to be guided by the aggregates, recognize that they arehigh in the range and take a little defensive action on account ofthat. I also think the market so anticipates some little firming as aresult of today's meeting that not to do it would have its own impacton psychology and attitudes. So I would be prepared to see a littletightening partly because I'm not sure what these strengths infinancial markets mean and partly because we're running high on theaggregate ranges and we have just again reported to the Congress onthem and our intention to stay within them.For the funds rate I would suggest maybe a range of 10-3/4 to11-1/4 or 10-1/2 to 11-1/4, with a midpoint of 10-7/8 percent. Ithink we ought to reduce the short-term aggregates ranges a little butit's a mistake to reduce them too much because we will just look silly-32-8/14/79since we don't have any effect on them--to speak of--with our policiesin the next month or two. I'd maybe take a point off the aggregatesof alternative B, both the lower and upper ends and go with a moneymarket directive. That is what I would propose today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is an individual's explanation of their perspective on the economic outlook and their proposed actions.


Passage number 239.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without any specific passage provided, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 240.
MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I listened with interest to yourcomments at the beginning of the discussion, and I appreciate a gooddeal what you had to say. I agree [with what you said on] economicpolicy, increasing prices, and credibility. I also agree that ifthere were some action or set of actions that we could prescribe thatwould strike a really significant blow against inflation, turn aroundpublic expectations of continued inflation, and restore the confidencethat you mentioned, that would be an imperative thing to do. However,I'm conscious of the need to balance the goal of moving againstinflation as well as doing what we can to minimize the impact ofrecession. Obviously the economy today is weakening; even yourecognized yourself, Mr. Chairman, that the recession may turn out tobe worse than the staff now projects. Clearly most of the economicindicators are weakening; very few show any strength at all. My ownfeeling is that the recession is likely to be deeper than we now arewilling to recognize. It may be true that increasing the money supplyright now would result in higher prices instead of stimulating realgrowth, as Mr. Willes pointed out. But it may also well be true thatany restrictive action that we're likely to take, given the causes ofthe current inflation, would be unlikely to have much effect exceptperhaps symbolically. I doubt myself if any action we take will haveany really significant effect in restraining the current inflation.So I would be most reluctant at this time to move in thedirection of further restriction. I can't help noting that money andcredit are already tight and interest rates are very close to theirhistoric highs at the present time. To move further in thatdirection, in the face of the obvious evidence of a weakening economy,seems to me to run the excessive risk of making the recession deeperthan it might otherwise be. I might be persuaded differently over thenext few days or weeks as additional data come in, but at the presenttime I would prefer to see us follow a steady course--that is, notmove in the direction of further restrictiveness. But also because upto the present time the unemployment figures have not risensignificantly, I would be opposed to taking any easing actions. Iwould therefore want to follow a policy of steady as we go. I'd staywith the policy that we had adopted previously. I think this wouldtranslate, so far as the monetary [aggregates] are concerned intoalternative B, keeping the ranges roughly where they were.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement with the idea of further restriction in response to inflation and suggests instead following a steady course.


Passage number 241.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's not, of course, keeping the rangeswhere they are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 242.
MR. RICE. No, I realize that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging that they understand something.


Passage number 243.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage provided does not contain any content or information. Therefore, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement within it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 244.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, like everybody elsearound the table who has [spoken] this morning, am mindful of thebalance needed between the [potential] depth of the recession and theneed to fight inflation. Over recent months, my attention has beenmore focused on trying to moderate the depth and the length of any-33-8/14/79recession that seemed to be clearly on its way or perhaps already inprogress. I guess that's a very comfortable position when theaggregates are indeed growing at a moderate rate or even at a very lowrate; we can [then] afford that luxury. But things have changed. Theprojections we're looking at now of as much as six months of very highrates of growth in the money supply ultimately will translate in myjudgment into a worsening of the inflationary outlook.I would come to the position then of suggesting that we haveto move against those growth rates in the money supply. The questionis how and by how much. I would note that this Committee has takeninterest rates, as measured by the federal funds for example, a fullhalf percentage point higher since the last meeting on July 11.That's not an insignificant move. The proposal around the table isthat we take another 1/2 point [increase] immediately; that's a fullpercentage point from one meeting to the next. There's been a changein the Chairman of this Committee; there have been changes in severalother aspects of the Committee itself. That [increase in rates] mayhave a public perception that would be acceptable in the short run.On the other hand, it seems to me that in view of the past movementwe've already had--and if there is indeed a lag in how interest ratesaffect the growth rate in money supply--then I would oppose going upat this time in any major step.I would like to propose that if the markets question where weare [on the funds rate]--whether it's 10-5/8 or 10-3/4 percent--weindeed validate a move to 10-3/4 percent. And I'd set the ranges insuch a way that they would be below either "A", "B", or "C" as theyappear in the Bluebook. I would have them be 1 percent off the "B"ranges of 4 to 8 and 7 to 11 percent, with a rather restrictivefederal funds range of 10-1/2 to 11 percent. And if indeed we get thegrowth projected by Steve and his staff for the latter part of Augustand into September--particularly those first 2 weeks in Septemberwhich apparently is a crucial period--we should be prepared to move to11 percent and let the Desk work within those ranges, but [I'd go] nofurther than 11 percent.You asked, Mr. Chairman, for some comments with regard to thediscount rate. If we were to move [the funds rate] to anything above10-3/4 percent--if that's the decision of this Committee--then itwould be my feeling that the discount rate probably should go up andby as much as 1/2 percentage point. I would prefer, on the otherhand, if we do stay fairly stable--that is, at the 10-1/2 percenttarget we have now--that the discount rate remain where it is. Onlyif we move to 11 percent should consideration be given to a discountrate move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Guffey is suggesting that the committee should not increase interest rates at this time, while others are proposing a 1/2 point increase immediately.


Passage number 245.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Teeters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual passage being provided.


Passage number 246.
MS. TEETERS. I'm glad to find we're all in agreement that wedon't know what's going on or what to do about it. I can live with aminor tightening at the present time, given a 10-1/2 to 11 percentrange on the federal funds rate and some reduction, possibly, in theranges for M1 and M2. However, I would like to join Frank Morris inthat I think we're not going to be there very long. We should befully prepared between the next month or two to start moving back fromthese ranges as the recession develops. I think we are going to befacing an underlying real economy that will probably turn out to be-34-8/14/79somewhat worse than is being projected at the present time. If that'strue, we're going to see jumps in the unemployment rate in theneighborhood of 1/2 percent a month and I think it would be the rightpolicy when the unemployment rate starts to rise to show some responseto the developing recession, partly because it's a proper policystance for monetary policy to take and partly to reduce the size ofthe fiscal stimulus, which will be on everybody's mind when we getthose types of increases in the unemployment rate.I don't want to do very much now. I don't think it's goingto have any impact on the inflation rate. I can't really believe it'sgoing to do a great deal in the international market because what wenton in the international area was not connected to underlying economicevents but was basically a reaction to political events. However, aminor tightening at this time--I'm saying 10-1/4 to 11 percent on thefunds range--I would find acceptable. And I'd urge the Committee tobe constantly watching the developments in the economy for the turningpoint at which we can back off. There will not come a time in thenext six months at a very minimum in which we can say we have won thefight against inflation and therefore we can lower the rates. I'msure that will be an argument down the line--that we still have araging inflation and therefore we should not react to domesticdevelopments. So I would go along with the recommendation inalternative B, with some adjustment in the ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker agrees with the general consensus that they do not know what to do about the current situation and expresses their own opinion about the appropriate policy response.


Passage number 247.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 248.
MR. ROOS. Yes, sir. I purposely waited until the end of thebatting order because up until the last few expressions of opinion Iwas so wholeheartedly in agreement with everything that was said thatI didn't want to express that agreement until everyone was committedverbally to that position. I didn't want to drive others off.I subscribe, Mr. Chairman, to your introductory remarks. Ithink they express the best analysis of a longer-range strategy thatI've heard since I've been a member of this group. You have publiclyexpressed your determination to do whatever possible with monetarypolicy over a long range. Certainly we aren't going to bringinflation down in a 6-month period. And certainly we're never goingto bring inflation down if we act on a month-to-month, quarter-to-quarter [basis of] fine-tuning. I think it's terribly important, asso many others here have said, that we do something symbolically todayto reinforce the credibility of the policies that you have expressedin the short time you've been Chairman.Specifically, I would favor at least the alternative Cprogram. I think we have to move toward widening the fed funds rangeand freeing interest rates to move more freely. I would perhaps gobeyond that, as Mark Willes expressed, by reducing the monetaryaggregate ranges even below those in alternative C. But I would notrecommend anything more of [unintelligible] than that shown underalternative C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses agreement with the opinions and analysis expressed by others, including the chairman, and even states that they purposely waited to express their agreement in order to avoid driving others off.


Passage number 249.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You made one mistake at least, Mr. Roos.Vice Chairman Schultz has not yet spoken.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It merely states a fact that Vice Chairman Schultz has not spoken.


Passage number 250.
MR. ROOS. I eliminate my remark from the record.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is simply stating that they want to remove their previous comment from the official record; there is no disagreement or contention.


Passage number 251.
8/14/79CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He carefully husbanded his [remarks athis] first meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 252.
 He participated at the very beginning and thiswon't be the very end, Fred, unless you're so dramatically persuasivethat we immediately--MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I want you to know that I shall protectmy position as the caboose with fervor. My feelings are pretty muchthe same as I expressed to you yesterday, Mr. Chairman. It seems tome that inflation and credit demands, the difficulty in projecting theaggregates, and the sensitivity of the dollar would argue very clearlyagainst any easing. On the other hand, in spite of the littlesnapback that we've had in July, the economy is certainly veryfragile. And in spite of the persuasive arguments in the FederalReserve Bank of New York [article] on demographics and credit cards, Icontinue to be worried about the level of consumer debt. I'm veryconcerned about consumer confidence, not just because of the Michiganand Conference Board surveys, but in light of the longer-term kinds ofstudies that are made about consumer confidence. I just don't knowhow low that can go and I don't know how serious the recession couldget. I think that is a clear and present danger, so I would argueagainst any very strong moves to tighten.That leaves me to suggest that we stay where we are ortighten moderately. It seems to me that at this point in time amessage is very important, so I'm persuaded that we should tightenmoderately. I am concerned that the messages we send be clear, whichunder ordinary circumstances might make me want to take a littlestronger move than I would support today. But in the presentcircumstances, with everything that has been said in the media andwith the changes in leadership, it seems to me that any move towardtightening is going to be a fairly clear message. I would hope thatsometime in the future we could narrow the aggregates ranges and letthe fed funds be perhaps more volatile. But I would be a littleconcerned about that right now, as perhaps muddying the waters alittle on the clarity of the message. I would also have a bit ofconcern right now about raising the discount rate because I would liketo save some powder if the message is not taken as we think it isgoing to be. So I would come down generally in favor of alternativeC; but the fed funds rate range I would prefer is Governor Partee's10-1/2 to 11-1/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be seen in the statement "On the other hand, in spite of the little snapback that we've had in July, the economy is certainly very fragile." This suggests that there is disagreement about the state of the economy and whether it is strong enough to warrant any easing measures.


Passage number 253.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In view of the hour and the fact that anumber of people were very specific in their comments, I wonderwhether it's not appropriate for me to try to put something quitespecific on the table and let you shoot at it.First, let me make a couple of comments that occurred to mein listening to you--some points of agreement and maybe disagreementin some cases. We work with these aggregate ranges; we now have two[sets] of them [depending on] whether we modify them for ATS and NOWsor not. When I look at the modified ones in particular, the questionthat Governor Wallich raised keeps occurring to me--whether we wereanticipating all the events that brought about the quasi-monies andnear-monies that we got this year. I certainly wasn't. And I thinkthere is a rather persuasive case that money in that statistical senseis much easier than either of the particular statistics we usesuggests. There were a lot of comments about our needing to moveperhaps against a decline in the aggregates later on; I don't know8/14/79what's going to happen there, but I allow for that possibility. Iremain very concerned that to the extent possible--and we may havevery little time--we do it from a position of strength in terms of ourtotal posture rather than weakness. That move which may becomenecessary may almost be forced upon us [and] will be takenunnecessarily amiss in terms of our longer-range concerns aboutinflation.Inevitably, all this brings up the question of fiscal policy.Let me give you a more hopeful [view] on that. Maybe I haven't beenin Washington long enough--on this tour, anyway--but obviously if therecession turns out worse than now projected, let's say, there will bea lot of pressure on fiscal policy. I would say--I'd say it in thisroom anyway, though I certainly wouldn't say it publicly now--that I'mnot sure that's altogether a bad thing, given the way personal incomeis acting and given the direct drain on purchasing power that comesfrom the oil situation. I do think there is a considerable risk,which some senators impressed upon me at my hearing, that if theAdministration doesn't come up early with a tax program that theywould like, they will have forced upon them a tax program of a kind wewouldn't like. [I mean by the latter] the kind of pure "get out thepurchasing power as quickly as possible" program. I don't know whatothers who have been up [on the Hill] think about this; maybe Nancy[has some thoughts on it]. I suspect when it comes right down to it,the Administration may have a fairly clear idea of the kind of tax cutit wants--and there was some Congressional sympathy still--which wouldbe in a constructive long-term direction. I don't know when theproper time is, if ever; I think it depends upon the businesssituation. But I am not entirely unhopeful that if it comes to havinga tax cut, (a) it might be a good thing, and (b) there is a reasonablechance of shaping it in a constructive short- and long-rangedirection. Now, maybe that's entirely too optimistic but I'm in thebusiness of being optimistic now. Is that blowing smoke completely,Nancy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 254.
MS. TEETERS. I don't think so. There is a tremendous amountof sympathy on the Hill to roll back the payroll taxes. And for thefirst time there was constituency pressure of an enormous amount onthe payroll tax increases last year. I think the people have becometerribly sensitized to them with the rapid increases of recent years.My concern is that we may again [find ourselves] in many wayspolitically in the fall of '74--when the Administration waited untilthere was a palace revolt in mid-January before even proposing anysort of tax action. It seems to me, as we get further into the fall,that the type of tax cut that the Administration wants and the type oftax cut that they want on the Hill are going to be very closetogether.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses her concern about potential delay in tax action, but there is no conflicting viewpoint being presented.


Passage number 255.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that is my hope too. Nobody canproject how it will come out, but I think they are in the same box--toreturn to that--as we are. But it's premature to begin suggestingthat kind of thing now until we're right up against it. It's inherentin the position that we're in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their hope and stating that they believe they are in the same situation as the other party. They also suggest waiting until they are closer to the situation before making any suggestions.


Passage number 256.
MR. WALLICH. I have not thought of a payroll tax cut per seas structurally a very desirable device. I would have thought [morefavorably] of something that undoes the great increase in the-37-8/14/79corporate tax resulting from under depreciation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich simply states his opinion that a payroll tax cut may not be a structurally desirable option, and suggests an alternative approach that he would have considered more favorably.


Passage number 257.
 If all they did wasto remove that, by replacement costs depreciation--MS. TEETERS. I think what they basically have in mind is apayroll tax [cut] because it would reduce pressure on prices andreduce costs directly on the employers' side. There's also apossibility of some adjustment on depreciation--accelerateddepreciation or investment tax credit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 258.
MR. MORRIS. Also, if you're going to give something tobusiness, you've got to give something to the consumer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement about the importance of giving something to both businesses and consumers in a transaction.


Passage number 259.
MS. TEETERS. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Based on the given passage, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement. The passage only provides two words and lacks any context or details to indicate if there is disagreement or contention between Ms. Teeters and someone or something else. Therefore, the answer should be "No" as there is not enough information to determine any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 260.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you've got to give something tothe consumer, so it may be some combination of that sort with someemphasis on the investment side. Now, I've got a personal problem--other people do, too--with the payroll tax pure and simple because ofthe linkage between the payroll tax and the benefits. So, I don'tknow. But we're not going to resolve fiscal policy here this morning.I'm just not quite as pessimistic about it as some of your comments[implied].The other thing that occurred to me--I don't know whetheranybody mentioned this or not--is that any of these aggregates rangesshown for the short run in comparison with the short-run ranges wehave currently could be interpreted as an easing. I don't know howserious that is. It is true that they are substantially higher thanthe present ones we're working [toward].Well, let me try something here and just shoot at it. On theaggregates, I don't think I can't bracket everybody's implicit orexplicit comments, but there was a considerable amount of commentarythat we ought to go below any of these ranges [shown in the Bluebookalternatives]. The least we can go below them is 4 to 8 percent and 7to 11 percent. On the federal funds range--I'm speaking personallybut I think it may coincide with some other views--I tend to think ofit asymmetrically. It depends on whether we think of the rangeasymmetrically or put the asymmetry right into the specifications. Wehave another problem just in terms of the message issue. Right now,while the market is a bit confused about the federal funds rate[objective], there is a substantial body of opinion that thinks we'reat 10-3/4 percent, and at the least I think we have to confirm that.Frankly, I don't know quite where we are because when I listened topeople earlier I was changing my mind. Maybe I ought to change itagain. I was [thinking] in the fairly immediate situation--I'm nottalking necessarily tomorrow, but this week--of something like 10-7/8percent or maybe even with a little flexibility, say, around 10-7/8 upto 11 percent. That is consistent, I guess, with a range of 10-3/4 to11-1/4 percent. Obviously we can widen that out. Or I suppose thealternative is something like the 10-1/2 to 11-1/4 percent that somepeople mentioned, which also gives us a 10-7/8 midpoint if I did thearithmetic correctly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is some disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that there has been commentary suggesting that they should go below the ranges shown in the Bluebook alternatives, but they personally believe that the least they can go below is 4 to 8 percent and 7 to 11 percent. Additionally, the speaker mentions that they are unsure about the current federal funds rate objective and suggests a few different options.


Passage number 261.
MR. PARTEE. Well, that does; but the other range gives you11 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 262.
-38-8/14/79CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, and we would treat it asymmetricallylow, I think. The asymmetrically low [concept] reflects the fact thatwe really don't want to have a surprise in the aggregates and movelower too quickly for a couple weeks with some low aggregate figures.My persistent problem with this is that I never know what thoseaggregates are going to show next month. I hate to be at the whim ofa really temporary move in the aggregates, which is why we always havethis question of how wide to make the federal funds rate range. Butlet's say, so I can elicit some responses here, 4 to 8 percent [forM1], 7 to 11 percent [for M2], and 10-1/2 to 11-1/4 percent as oneversion of the funds range. Or if you want to tighten it up on thelow side, 10-3/4 to 11-1/4 percent is basically the same startingpoint, maybe shaded in the second case to something like 10-7/8percent or 10-7/8 to 11 percent. Presumably we would go up to the11-1/4 percent if the aggregates come in strong. And if they come inreally strong, we'd have to have a telephone conference. If they comein the other way, presumably we'd have a telephone meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily discusses different options and considerations regarding the federal funds rate range and the potential impact of aggregate figures.


Passage number 263.
MR. BLACK. A money market directive or an aggregatesdirective, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a potential topic of discussion or suggestion.


Passage number 264.
MR. PARTEE. I never heard anything that sounds more like amoney market directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee is expressing his personal opinion or observation, without any mention of differing views or conflicting positions.


Passage number 265.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER I have no particular feeling about that,one way or the other.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Chairman Volcker expresses neutrality and indifference towards the subject at hand.


Passage number 266.
MR. BLACK. Well, the trigger points would be very different,as I view it anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Black, is simply expressing his own perspective on the matter.


Passage number 267.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't have any strong feeling about amoney market or an aggregates directive. I suppose an aggregatesdirective would make me lean more toward the 10-3/4 to 11-3/4 percentrange just in case of a fluke and the aggregates came in too quicklyon the down side. Governor Coldwell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the speaker's lack of strong feelings about a money market or an aggregates directive, and their inclination towards a specific range for precautionary purposes. Governor Coldwell's opinion is not stated in the passage.


Passage number 268.
MR. COLDWELL. Mr. Chairman, I did not express myself on theaggregates or the range for the federal funds rate. I thought we weretalking principle more than anything else on the first go-around. Iwould like to view this as kind of a 3-stage process: that we wouldlead with a small increase in the federal funds rate, move with thediscount rate, and then appraise whether the federal funds rate needsto be moved after that. I'd like to see a strong policy statementdrafted at the time of the discount rate action. And while youhaven't asked for [our comments on] this, I'm going to throw it inanyway: I'd like to see us increase our intervention in theinternational field, with the idea of strengthening the dollar orgiving it some upward push at the moment. I'm afraid we have downwardpushes headed at us down the road and if we've got any stability, I'dlike to get a little money in the bank to work with.Now beyond that, on the funds rate and so forth, I'm not afan of these ranges. Nevertheless, I have to work within what theCommittee is paying attention to, so I'm going to specify the ranges Ithink would be appropriate. Those ranges would be: 4 to 7 percentfor M1; 7 to 11 percent for M2; and a funds range of 10-1/2 to 11-1/2percent, with the understanding that we do not exceed 11-1/4 percentwithout consultation but move promptly to an 11 percent rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is explaining his viewpoint and the ranges he thinks would be appropriate, but there is no indication of disagreement or debate with anyone else.


Passage number 269.
-39-8/14/79CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. John Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It appears to be a date and a name, without any conflicting or contradictory statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 270.
MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, most of what you are suggesting asa possible position here I find--well, let me say acceptable. I'dlike to move a touch more promptly to 11 percent on the funds rate.There's one caution I'd like to draw, and maybe I'll be a voice in thewilderness this month as I was last month. We all agree that theaggregates are getting increasingly harder to understand. In my viewthat's much more true of M1 than M2. I made the suggestion last month--but got no support, I'll have to say--to put more weight on M2formally in the directive just for the reason that it is behaving lesserratically than M1. I hope before the next meeting of this Committeeto share with you an updated paper by my staff on what the recentbehavior and experience with M2 has been. It's really quiteencouraging in terms of the demand function being pretty stable andcoming back on track after departing in the first quarter, despite allthe vagaries of Regulation Q and what have you. The onlyspecification that I dwelled on, Mr. Chairman, was your very highrange for M2 at 7 to 11 percent. The projections of the staff for thegrowth of the aggregates in September are very high, bringing M2especially up near the top of this range. I think that's too high.And if we're going to pay any attention to coordinating our short-term2-month goals with our longer-term goals, I think we really need tobring the range for M2 down to a point where we won't continue todepart from the midpoint [of our long-run range]. It sounds awfullyradical but I'd like to suggest a range [with an upper limit] nohigher than 9 percent--perhaps 5 to 9 percent on M2--just so we don'tget increasingly off track from the midpoint, which is the provisionaltarget that I personally would like to shoot at.As far as the fed funds range is concerned, I could go withthe range you're talking about as long as we move pretty promptly to11 percent. If that is done, I think we should follow that up with anincrease in the discount rate of a full half point. And I'd feel morecomfortable with an aggregates directive to make sure we don't let theaggregates get too near their outer bounds without triggering someaction on the federal funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Balles is disagreeing with the Chairman's suggested range for M2 and is proposing a lower range of 5 to 9 percent. He is also suggesting a prompt increase in the funds rate and a half point increase in the discount rate.


Passage number 271.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Frank Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 272.
MR. MORRIS. Paul, I would just say this: Since we're aftersome symbolism here, I think we'd get a lot more symbolic impact at 11percent than at 10-7/8 percent. I think a movement of [only] aneighth of a point might produce a perverse reaction from the market.It seems to me that a nice round odd number like 11 percent is what weought to be seeking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is simply expressing his opinion and suggesting that an interest rate of 11 percent would have more symbolic impact than a rate of 10-7/8 percent.


Passage number 273.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can understand that argument.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker can understand an argument.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 274.
MR. WALLICH. I think we have a choice of either a narroweraggregates range that is likely to be triggered on the up side beforewe pull it down or being a little more generous on the funds rate. Icould go with 4 to 8 percent on M1 and 7 to 11 percent on M2 providedwe move to 11 percent on the funds rate and have a 10-1/2 to 11-1/2percent range, with the possibility of that being used if it istriggered by the aggregates under a regular aggregates directive sothat there's a gradual movement. If we don't want to do that, then Iwould say that we ought to pull down the upper end of the aggregates-40-8/14/79ranges and maybe the lower end also in order to have a narrower fundsrate but an earlier trigger. I would prefer the first version: 4 to8 percent, 7 to 11 percent, and [on the funds rate] 10-1/2 to 11-1/2percent and a move to 11 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Wallich presents two different options for setting the aggregates range and funds rate, and expresses a preference for the first option. This suggests that there is disagreement or debate about which approach to take.


Passage number 275.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would you go down to 10-1/2 percent if theaggregates were within those ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking a hypothetical question about adjusting something (presumably interest rates) based on certain conditions.


Passage number 276.
MR. WALLICH. Well, you have to [accept] the logic of this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: In the passage, Mr. Wallich is making a statement without any visible contention or disagreement.


Passage number 277.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You could always make the ceiling higher.I have no name on my list.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Although there are two statements in the passage, there is no disagreement or contention between them. The first statement suggests a solution or possibility for a particular situation, while the second statement simply provides information unrelated to the previous statement.


Passage number 278.
MR. WILLES. Henry made the point that I wanted to make. Iwould just like to follow up and point out that if we take 4 to 8percent with a money market directive and if the forecast for Augustis correct, then M1 growth in September would have to be over 11percent before we move [on the funds rate]. And that's 11 percentwithout any add-on for any of these near-money things. Somehow thatjust doesn't strike me as being a very forceful move to combatinflation. So, I think we really do have to decide either to drop theranges substantially if we're going to have a money market directiveor we almost have to have an aggregates directive so that we begin tomove if those numbers come in very high in the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing their opinion and suggesting a course of action, but there is no disagreement or contention present in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 279.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, there is the possibility that theCommittee could adopt a mixed directive--and the Committee once hadsuch a directive--that in effect was aggregates on the up side andmoney market on the low side. That is, you'd move the funds rate upif the aggregates were high in the range but you wouldn't [lower therate] until growth is below the bottom of the range. We had wordingat one point for such a directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. This is indicated by the phrase "there is the possibility" which suggests that there is uncertainty or differing opinions about adopting a mixed directive. Additionally, the mention of "we had wording at one point" implies that there may have been previous disagreement or changes in the directive.


Passage number 280.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Mayo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unfortunately, there is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage. More context or details about the content of the passage are needed.


Passage number 281.
MR. MAYO. Steve's point is one I was going to make. I thinkwe could do that. As far as the figures are concerned, surprisingly,I would support what Henry just said: 10-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent with acentral point of 11, and for the aggregates 4 to 8 and 7 to 11.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Mayo, agrees and supports the points made by Steve and Henry regarding the figures.


Passage number 282.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Timlen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The given passage mentions only one person, Mr. Timlen, without any information that would suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 283.
MR. TIMLEN. Mr. Chairman, I was prepared to vote for one ofyour first two alternatives: moving the funds rate up to the area of11 percent with a funds range of 10-3/4 to 11-1/4 percent, M1 at 4 to8 percent, and M2 at 7 to 11 percent. I think the important thing isthe movement of the federal funds rate. And if the general thinkingof the Committee is in terms of an objective of 11 percent, I'd beprepared to vote for [any of several] variations in the M1 and M2ranges--whether it's 3-1/2 to 7-1/2, 4 to 8, or 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percentfor M1, for example. My leaning would be 4 to 8 on M1 or somethingshaded down from that, but I think the key in the eyes of the marketis where we put the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Timlen, expresses his willingness to vote for various ranges of M1 and M2 as long as the federal funds rate is moved to the desired level of 11 percent.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 284.
MS. TEETERS. I'd be willing to support the 10-3/4 to 11-1/4with a funds rate of 11 percent and have your [proposed] ranges of 4to 8 and 7 to 11 percent. But I would be very much opposed to themixed directive. It seems to me that we're at a potential turning-41-8/14/79point of rather major proportions and if the money supply does come invery low, then [a standard type of directive] would operate to movethe rate automatically down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Teeters, expresses disagreement with the proposed mixed directive. She believes that if the money supply comes in very low, a standard type of directive would automatically move the interest rate down.


Passage number 285.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure with those specificationsthat we need the mixed directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about the specifications, but there is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 286.
MR. PARTEE. I'd prefer that, too, because I think it wouldlook awfully bad to have a biased directive in what may be adeveloping recession of size. So if we have that very tightconstraint on the funds rate, we won't move it obviously withoutconsultation. I might point out that we can move it up if in factMark's fears are [realized] and September turn outs to have a double-digit growth rate. We can always have a telephone conference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses a preference for having a non-biased directive but acknowledges the need for consultation before making any decisions regarding the funds rate. The mention of a possible telephone conference implies a willingness to discuss and consider different perspectives.


Passage number 287.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No other comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it does not present any contrasting opinions, conflicting viewpoints, or arguments.


Passage number 288.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think I make a lot more of thesetrigger points than most people do, and Henry's and Mark's points areimportant to me in selecting the ranges because they do trigger[action on the funds rate] at different points. In one case ittriggers when [the aggregates] get near the top or move beyond the topof the ranges and in the other it triggers when they movesignificantly beyond the midpoints. So with an aggregates directivewe would have wider ranges than we would with the money marketdirective, necessarily just by the sheer arithmetic of it. Mypreference, which I could alter to some extent, would be an aggregatesdirective that would trigger at an upward [move at] somewhere around6-1/2 percent on M1--which would be a range of 3-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent--and at around 9-1/2 percent on M2, which would be a range of 6-1/2to 10-1/2 percent. I don't know what federal funds rate is consistentwith that, because I despair of ever picking out of thin air somerange that will give us predictable behavior of the aggregates. Butmy best guess, which is certainly uninformed as I think everyoneelse's is, is about 10-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent. And I would favormoving to 11 percent now and once we get there, and get that ratefirmly established, following with a half point increase in thediscount rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement by Mr. Black outlining his preferences and opinions on trigger points and ranges for the aggregates directive.


Passage number 289.
MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I've been sitting here puzzlingover some of the comments with respect to what the speakers perceiveto be the need to move to 11 percent to hold the growth of theaggregates in late August and in September to something less than hasalready been projected. First of all, those are guesses. So it seemsto me that we have to focus upon what level of interest rates isappropriate for the economy in the period ahead while still movingagainst the pressures of inflation. Moving to 11 percent isn't goingto lessen the pressures of inflation. With that kind of puzzlement Iwould say--and I guess I'm repeating myself--that we have taken rathersubstantial steps in the last month. And since I don't see that atthis point an additional 1/2 or 1/4 percentage point [on the fundsrate] will bring those growth rates down any in the next six weeks, Iwould prefer to stay where we are at 10-3/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 290.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will stipulate that a 1/4 or 1/8percentage point move on the federal funds rate isn't going to haveany pronounced effect on the growth rates in the next two months--ifthat's the only thing we're worried about. I'm not sure it's the only-42-8/14/79thing we're worried about. [Unless] somebody else wants to sayanything, all I can do is try again. I'm not sure, but I think thereis a little more sentiment for moving to 11 percent now than I hadjudged. I'm going to give you two more alternatives. We can stickwith the 4 to 8, 7 to 11, and 10-3/4 to 11-1/4 percent with themidpoint [on the funds range] at 11 percent and move there. Or we cango to, say, 3-1/2 to 7-1/2 and 6-1/2 to 10-1/2, which a number ofpeople suggested--and it [moves] some distance toward other[suggestions]--and we can shade the 11 percent a little on the lowside. I'd still like the flexibility to play in that area--perhaps goafter [something around] 10-7/8 to 11 percent [on the funds rate].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage over the appropriate range for the federal funds rate. Some people are suggesting a range of 4 to 8 percent and 7 to 11 percent, while others are suggesting a range of 3-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent and 6-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent.


Passage number 291.
MR. COLDWELL. From my perspective, Mr. Chairman, it's mostimportant that we move to 11 percent promptly. I don't think 10-7/8does us any good because we're in effect already there. I am botheredby the [monetary growth] ranges having a level as high as 8 percent oreven 7-1/2 percent, but I can buy that with a money market directive,which gives us some movement if [the aggregates] come in at the upperend of the ranges. It seems to me, then, that if we want the 10-3/4to 11-1/4 percent [funds range], that just gives us a 1/4 point towork in, which bothers me a little. But the telephone is always thereand we can call a meeting and raise it if we have to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Coldwell is expressing his perspective and concerns, but there is no opposition or disagreement from others mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 292.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, shall we get a show of hands fromvoting members on 10-3/4 to 11-1/4 percent and the midpoint where itis, with 4 to 8 percent and 7 to 11 percent [on M1 and M2].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage simply states that there will be a show of hands from voting members regarding certain percentages. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention among the members.


Passage number 293.
MR. MAYO. Preference or acceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states "Preference or acceptable."


Passage number 294.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me have preferences first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they would like to express their preferences before making a decision or choice.


Passage number 295.
MR. ALTMANN. What's your midpoint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply asks a question about something that is not open to interpretation.


Passage number 296.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 11 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage provides a numerical figure (11 percent) without any additional information or context to indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 297.
MR. BALLES. Which directive, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 298.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Following Phil, here, the money marketdirective at the moment. With that high a range, I'm a little worriedabout an aggregates directive. Again, there's just some uncertaintyabout what will happen in the very short run. I just looked overTom's shoulder and New York already has a lower estimate for theseaggregates; it might be triggered on the low side before we know it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses concern and uncertainty about the money market directive and the aggregates directive, indicating potential contention with others who may have different opinions or estimates. The mention of New York having a lower estimate suggests differing views within the group.


Passage number 299.
MR. PARTEE. They did before, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "They did before, too" is a simple statement without any contradictory or opposing elements.


Passage number 300.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't attribute any great weightto that other than the inherent uncertainty in these things. I havebeen watching those numbers enough that my discount factor isextremely high. The trouble is my discount factor on all thesenumbers is extremely high in any short-run period. Let me just askthe preferences first. Well, let's go all the way and say acceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's personal view and preference.


Passage number 301.
MR. PARTEE. So, you're asking: Is this acceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply presents the question being asked by Mr. Partee without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 302.
MR. BLACK. This is alternative number one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that "this is alternative number one," without any conflicting opinions or ideas.


Passage number 303.
8/14/79CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll try out another one, but let's trythis one: 4 to 8, 7 to 11, 10-3/4 to 11-1/4 [moving to the midpointof] 11 and a money market directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage is simply stating different values or options without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 304.
MR. ALTMANN. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, not counting yourself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a series of numbers.


Passage number 305.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can try out another one ifsomebody tells me what to try. Is it with slightly lower ranges forthe aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing a willingness to try another option if someone suggests it, specifically with slightly lower ranges for the aggregates.


Passage number 306.
MR. WALLICH. I would bring those down a little.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is expressing his opinion or suggestion.


Passage number 307.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's try them a half point lower,with the same federal funds and what--change it to an aggregatesdirective just to get a little variety.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests trying a different approach (lowering the point and changing the directive) to bring about some variety.


Passage number 308.
MR. BLACK. Yes, let's do that. I think it makes a whale ofa difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses agreement and enthusiasm about a suggestion.


Passage number 309.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who suggested money market. Well, wholikes that better. It's 3-1/2 to 7-1/2 and 6-1/2 to 10-1/2, and thesame federal funds range but with an aggregates directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information about the suggested money market and the range for federal funds.


Passage number 310.
MR. MAYO. Do you really mean better or just acceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking for clarification or further explanation.


Passage number 311.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's say acceptable. That seems tohave a smaller vote than the other.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion by saying "acceptable" has a smaller vote than the other options.


Passage number 312.
MR. ALTMANN. Four.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is a dialogue, with Mr. Altman making a statement. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 313.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what other combination totry, so I think we'll just go with the first one unless somebody hasan inspiration here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is simply stating that they do not have any other options and are willing to go with the first combination unless someone else has a better idea or suggestion. There is no disagreement or contention expressed.


Passage number 314.
MR. COLDWELL. The only way I can see that you really mightseparate this as to what we're looking for is 10-7/8 to 11-3/8 percenton the federal funds range with a money market directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply sharing their perspective on how the situation should be approached.


Passage number 315.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The overwhelming impression I have is thatat this point the changes are not highly significant. Let's vote onthe original.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their impression that the changes being discussed are not highly significant. The mention of voting on the original suggests a decision-making process rather than disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 316.
MR. ALTMANN. It's 4 to 8 percent, 7 to 11 percent, a fundsrate range of 10-3/4 to 11-1/4 percent with an 11 percent midpoint,and a money market directive.Chairman Volcker YesPresident Balles YesPresident Black No. I agree with half ofit, but I think the ranges are too high with a money market directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black disagrees with the proposed ranges and the money market directive, stating that the ranges are too high.


Passage number 317.
MR. ALTMANN.Governor Coldwell YesPresident Kimbrel YesPresident Mayo YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice NoGovernor Schultz Yes-44-8/14/79Governor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich YesFirst Vice President Timlen YesIt's 10 for and 2 against.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The majority of the individuals listed agree (10 for) and only two individuals disagree (2 against).


Passage number 318.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Thank you. It's 1:30 p.m. What otherbusiness do we have here. Oh, I had one thing I wanted to mention,the [lending of] Treasury [securities], if we can dispose of that in ahurry. I take it there was one question that preoccupied the staff,which is whether we charge when we lend securities. I find itdifficult to imagine when [that authority] will be used, so it's notan absolutely central issue to me. I take it that we've alwayscharged, obviously, for the short-term extension of credit. In thiscase, we're not really extending credit in the same sense. We'relending securities upon which we continue to earn interest. However,in the market would you like to charge or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. the speaker is simply discussing whether or not to charge when lending securities.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 319.
MR. COLDWELL. I'd like to charge because it's a substitutionfor direct borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Coldwell expresses his desire to charge for something, while implying that it is a substitution for direct borrowing. This suggests that there may be a difference of opinion or conflicting views on whether charging is the appropriate course of action.


Passage number 320.
MR. PARTEE. I would like not to charge because we do in factget the return on the securities. This is a--SPEAKER(.). But don't we want to urge them not to do this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is expressing his preference not to charge because they are already receiving a return on the securities. The interruption from the Speaker does not indicate disagreement, but rather a clarification of their intentions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 321.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If it will speed up things, I thought of agreat Solomonic approach on this of charging an eighth, which is lessthan we charge--SPEAKER(.). How about 3/16th.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests charging an eighth, which is less than what they currently charge, while the other person suggests charging 3/16th. This indicates a disagreement or contention on the appropriate pricing.


Passage number 322.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we'll charge 1/8 point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presented as a proposal or suggestion, and it is assumed that it will be accepted without objection.


Passage number 323.
MR. MAYO. I think that's silly. I'd just leave it at zero.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Mayo expresses his opinion that leaving something at zero is a simple solution, but there is no indication of any opposing viewpoint or argument.


Passage number 324.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm really at the wishes of the Committeeon this one. I take it there's a certain amount of prevailingsentiment to charge. Do we want to have a vote on this or just agree.Without objection, it'll be an eighth. Oh, [do we need to talk about]swap renewals, Mr. Pardee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is seeking consensus and agreement from the Committee and suggesting a course of action without any objections.


Passage number 325.
MR. PARDEE. There's nothing coming up before the nextmeeting that is of importance, so I would pass on it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply states a lack of important items before the next meeting, and suggests passing on discussing it.


Passage number 326.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. I had one other item. The HouseBanking Committee issued a report on monetary policy and there is aparagraph in that report which says: "The law requires the FederalReserve to report on its monetary targets to 1980. In this the reportis disappointing. The Federal Reserve merely indicates that tentativeapproval has been given to the retention of the present targetsthrough 1980. No justification is offered. This is particularlydistressing in view of our committee's recommendations in its reportof March 12, 1979 that long-term monetary growth targets should beadopted. Our committee requests the Federal Reserve promptly tocorrect this defect by issuing a supplement to the report fullyexplaining its monetary targets for 1980."-45-8/14/79 -46-I would suggest that I write a letter to the [Banking]Committee saying that perhaps you misread our report. [I must admit]I haven't read it myself. In case you didn't get the message, we didsay that the targets at this point were the same for next year as thisyear, but there is an unusual amount of uncertainty, statistical andotherwise, attached to [that decision]. We did not mean to say thatwe were not suggesting a target for next year, but obviously we willreview it with great care in February. With your permission I willwrite such a letter.SEVERAL. Hear, hear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting that they write a letter clarifying a misunderstanding and stating their intention to review the monetary targets in the future. The response "Hear, hear" indicates agreement and support for the suggested action.


