
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 0

The main concern, and this is a variation of what Governor Warsh said, is that something we or the Congress might do might cut off this market.
We have to be mindful of any actions that May 9, 200765 of 130we may be taking with respect to guidance, as well as of any actions that the Congress may be taking, that could reduce this market more than otherwise.
<START>The yield curve is favorable for a lot of the variable-rate subprime borrowers to move into fixed-rate products, with payment shock of perhaps no more than 50 basis points.<END>
The delinquencies we have been seeing have not been due to resets or to payment shock.
They have been due primarily to the so-called juvenile delinquents
—the early defaulters going bad.
That means that we do not know what is coming down the line because we have not really seen the experience of the resets.
Now, with the recently benign yield curve, that situation could reasonably be worked out.
The key is whether any equity is left.
If no equity is left and the resets come, these guys are likely to walk.
If they have been doing risk layering
—putting really no money down
—and the prices go down, that will be a problem.
So I think that may be a bit of a slow burn.
<START>Coupled with the broader misalignment that we are seeing now of a little increase in housing starts, which in some ways we would see as a positive, is a sort of negative given that housing sales seem to be declining so much.<END>
Thus there seems to be a disconnect between supply and demand, and I think the Greenbook is now quite wisely saying that we will likely have a longer transition in the housing market.
A fourth area of uncertainty that we talked about last time was the financial markets
—the dramatic spike up in volatility.
That volatility spike has come down, but we, being good economists, can never be satisfied with either high volatility or low volatility.
Low volatility is of concern to us, and I very much share the concerns that Tim, Cathy, Kevin, and others have mentioned.
Not only in the United States, but also in the rest of the world, are some of those spreads a bit narrower than they otherwise would be.
In particular, there are concerns about banks chasing private equity deals going covenant-free.
In many of my discussions with private equity May 9, 200766 of 130folks, instead of saying, well, bring us on more capital, those contacts are the ones saying that the banks are pushing them to take greater leverage than they otherwise would want.
Now, if that isn’t the fox guarding the henhouse, I do not know what is.
You want the banks to be the disciplinary force, and that they would potentially be taking on very large risks is a real concern.
The fifth area of uncertainty was consumption.
<START>We have seen a bit of a step-down in consumption growth, but there is still a lot of uncertainty, and I share the exact concerns that Governor Kohn articulated;<END>
<START>given that there are likely to be some wealth effects, even though we have some offsetting effects in the stock market, I do not want to bet on those offsetting effects in the stock market being there for the next three quarters.<END>
Housing wealth seems to be flattening, if not coming down, with the Case-Shiller index on average for those ten markets down 3 to 5 percent.
If people’s thinking about their consumption pattern is based on some increase in housing wealth, the saving rate should at least gradually increase.
<START>At some point, that reality may be biting and leading to some concern.<END>
On the inflation front, once again, we will have continuing uncertainty about what drives short-term to intermediate-term inflation.
As I mentioned last time, we get very, very mild effects from the traditional things that we think that make a difference.
<START>Oil, energy, commodity prices, and resource utilization don’t seem to have that much force, but in both the short and intermediate terms I think they are leaning on the positive side rather than on the negative side.<END>
We still have the owners’ equivalent rent issue that is coming in with the transition in the housing market and is still to some extent temporarily pushing up our measured inflation rates.
Inflation expectations continue to seem to be quite well contained, and that, I think, is key because, given that these other forces do not seem to be important in the short to intermediate run, inflation expectations are very important.
<START>May 9, 200767 of 130So my bottom line is that, although I see some downside risks on growth, I think the Greenbook scenario is a reasonable central tendency one, and I see some important upside risks on inflation.<END>
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Mishkin.
MR.
MISHKIN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would characterize where we are compared with the last meeting as that we have gone through a soft patch, which was more extensive than we expected.
But the basic longer-term outlook is really the same as the one that we had the last time around.
That is what is really relevant to our policy decisions because our policy decisions now do not affect the economy until a year or two down the road.
<START>Looking at the issue of the risks, I was most worried at the last meeting about what was happening in business fixed investment, particularly because I did not really understand what was going on;<END>
and it is always the case that, when you have Knightian uncertainty, you get much more nervous.
The numbers have come in a bit better on those grounds, so I am a little less worried about business fixed investment.
But then we have had a downshift in housing, which again was unexpected.
So when I put those things together, I think that we are in a situation of a fair amount of uncertainty.
Maybe I am a little less worried about the uncertainty and the downside risk, although I think they are still there, only because in the housing case, from the point of view of the longer-run fundamentals, I do not see a big problem.
It really is an inventory-correction issue, which we are trying to sort out.
That is creating uncertainty, but it creates more uncertainty in the shorter term rather than in the longer term.
<START>Even though there is still uncertainty with the issue of business fixed investment, it may be a little bit less.<END>
<START>So perhaps there is a slight skew on the downside in terms of my confidence intervals, but a little less than last time, if that gives me any comfort.<END>
<START>May 9, 200768 of 130About the inflation issue, I am more optimistic than the Greenbook.<END>
I see inflation coming down to 2.1 percent by the end of 2007 and then to 2 percent and staying there thereafter.
My reasoning here, I think, is familiar to you.
I consider long-run inflation expectations to be a key driver of the inflation process.
<START>I see those numbers as around 2 percent, and unless we make a concerted effort to change inflation expectations, I think that is where they will stay.<END>
Also, I am confident that we will do the right thing to make sure that inflation expectations do not go up from there, and I think the markets have similar confidence in that regard.
<START>When I look at the risks in terms of inflation, of most concern to me is the issue of what has happened to structural productivity.<END>
We have numbers coming in that we really cannot fully explain.
<START>Maybe there is just something a bit wrong with Okun’s law, and productivity will revert back to it, and then we’re okay.<END>
But maybe there is actually something more, that we have had such tight labor markets when, in fact, the economy has been growing at quite a slow pace.
There is a real question about what this may mean.
<START>If structural productivity is actually downshifting more than we expect, that does create a serious inflation risk that we have to be very concerned about.<END>
On the other side is the issue about whether we really are in tight labor markets.
You look at the numbers in terms of compensation and so forth, and they don’t look too bad.
This might tell us is that the NAIRU may be somewhat lower
—again, if we even know exactly what the NAIRU concept means
<START>—which is the issue of Knightian uncertainty, not normal uncertainty.<END>
So in this context, the basic forecast outline that we have is actually a fairly benign one.
I am willing to bet that it is probably the most reasonable forecast to have.
I am pretty comfortable with it.
But we will have to wait to see what kind of data come in.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Let me try to summarize the discussion around the table and take any comments on the summary, and then I would like to add just a few thoughts.
May 9, 200769 of 130Broadly speaking, the outlook of most participants has not substantially changed since March.
Housing remains weak, and it is the greatest source of downside risk.
Whether the demand for housing has stabilized remains difficult to judge, in part because of subprime issues.
It is also unclear whether builders will seek to return inventories to historical levels, and if so, at what rate.
There is yet no indication of significant spillover from housing to other sectors, although that remains a risk.
<START>The downside risks to investment have moderated since the last meeting, although investment seems unlikely to be a strong driver of growth.<END>
The inventory cycle is now well advanced, and production is strengthening.
Consumption growth seems likely to moderate, reflecting factors such as weakness in house prices and high energy prices.
However, the labor market remains strong, particularly in the market for highly skilled workers.
Incomes generated by the labor market, together with gains in the stock market and generally accommodative financial conditions, should provide some support for consumption going forward.
Financial markets are priced for perfection, which implies some risks on that score.
Foreign economies remain strong and should be a source of support, although some are undertaking monetary tightening.
Overall, the economy is in a soft patch and will likely grow below trend for a while.
Growth should return to potential later this year or in 2008, depending on the evolution of the housing market.
The rate of potential growth remains hard to pin down.
<START>Several participants seem a bit more optimistic than the Greenbook on potential growth and the NAIRU, although there are risks.<END>
Inflation has improved a bit, and most see continued but very slow moderation.
<START>However, there are upside risks to inflation, including compensation, the dollar, energy prices, and a slowing in productivity.<END>
Moreover, a rise in inflation from current levels would be costly, particularly if it involved unhinging inflation expectations.
Vigilance on inflation must, therefore, be maintained.
<START>Overall the risks and uncertainties seem a bit less pronounced than at the last meeting, and May 9, 200770 of 130participants seemed relatively comfortable with the outlook.<END>
<START>Although there are some potentially significant downside risks to output, arising particularly from the housing sector and the possible spillover to consumption, the group still appears to view a failure of inflation to moderate as expected to be the predominant risk to longer-term stability.<END>
Are there any comments or questions?
Hearing none, I will just add a few points.
<START>First, following President Yellen, I think that the tension between slow growth and a strong labor market remains central to understanding what’s going on.<END>
Okun’s law is supposed to work better than this.
[Laughter] I looked at recent history.
Over the past twenty years or so, there has been no exact parallel to what we are seeing now.
<START>There was a jobless recovery in ’91-’93 in which unemployment remained high even though growth was picking up, and we had a midcycle slowdown in ’95 and ’96, which was relatively short and not very severe, in which the unemployment rate got temporarily ahead of growth.<END>
So there have been some deviations.
<START>Interestingly, after the 2001 recession, despite lots of talk about jobless recoveries, Okun’s law worked pretty well.<END>
So we are in an unusual situation
<START>—instead of a jobless recovery, we have growthless job growth.<END>
[Laughter] Interpreting this correctly is very important.
The staff forecast essentially assumes that Okun’s law will revert to historical tendency.
<START>I think that assumption is reasonable, particularly since the staff is not exceptionally optimistic about potential growth and, therefore, that particular source of error is moderated.<END>
That would suggest that labor hoarding is probably a good part of what is happening here.
If there is one area in which labor hoarding appears to be significant, it would be construction, as President Yellen mentioned.
I asked the staff to do a simple study of this relationship, to which Dave Stockton referred.
<START>Andrew Figura and Adam Looney of the Board’s staff performed a regression analysis in which they regressed all construction employment against all investment in structures quarterly with lags going back to 1985.<END>
The reason to look at all May 9, 200771 of 130construction in terms of both employment and production is that there is a lot of substitutability between those two categories.
That regression approach should also account for unmeasured labor, including undocumented workers and the like.
In this analysis they found that employment is roughly proportional to construction activity, but with substantial lags, which again is somewhat surprising.
Indeed, the model fits well through the fourth quarter of ’06 but then begins to underpredict significantly in the first quarter of ’07.
<START>If this model is correct, then given what is already in the pipeline in terms of reduced construction activity and then going on with the forecast in the Greenbook, we should begin to see fairly significant declines in construction employment on the order of 30,000 per month over the next year, which would be sufficient in itself, with all else being equal, to add 0.2 to 0.3 to the unemployment rate.<END>
<START>So if labor hoarding explains the failure of Okun’s law, then we may soon see some gradual rise in the unemployment rate, which would also be consistent with the view that the staff has taken that a good bit of the slowdown in productivity is cyclical.<END>
<START>It is actually fairly difficult to calculate the contribution of the construction sector to productivity because it involves not just construction workers but also upstream production of various kinds.<END>
But one estimate, which comes from discussions with the Council of Economic Advisers, had the implication of employment hoarding in construction being about ½ percentage point on productivity growth.
We will see how that develops.
Even though I believe, as does the staff, that we will see some softening in the labor market, I should say that the evidence is still quite tentative.
We saw a bit of weakness in the last labor report, but unemployment insurance claims remain low, and we do not really see a significant indication.
The other major issue is the housing market.
Again, as a number of people pointed out, this is an inventory-cycle problem.
The two main determinants of an inventory cycle are (1) what the May 9, 200772 of 130level of final demand is and (2) how quickly you move to bring inventories back to normal.
There does seem to have been some step-down in final demand over the past few months.
<START>Assuming that homebuilders would like to get not all the way to but significantly toward their last ten years’ inventories by the end of 2008 implies fairly weak construction, not only in the second quarter but going into the third quarter as well.<END>
Only in the fourth quarter will we see a relatively minor subtraction from GDP.
That’s also relatively speculative, but residential construction does seem fairly likely to me to be more of a drag than we previously thought and to continue to be a problem into the third quarter.
There will also be a slowdown in consumption.
We have been having rates near 4 percent, which is certainly not sustainable.
We already see indications that consumption may be closer to 2 percent in the second quarter.
I think the house-price effects are going to show up.
Gasoline prices will have an effect.
The labor market is strong, but it is going to slow a bit.
So it looks to me as though underlying growth is roughly 2 percent and will be so for a couple of quarters to come.
Notice in the thinking about the underlying case that there has been quite an asynchronicity between private domestic final demand and production lately.
<START>For example, for the second quarter we expect to see weaker private domestic final demand but probably a stronger GDP number because of rebounds in net exports and the like.<END>
But we should look past that
—those are just quarter-to-quarter variations
—and observe that growth is moderate, an observation that is supported by the sense that industrial production and manufacturing seem to be picking up.
<START>To summarize, I think that the notion of moderate growth with some uncertainty and with return toward potential later in the year or early next year is still probably about the right forecast.<END>
<START>On inflation, there’s the famous stock market prediction that prices will fluctuate.<END>
<START>That seems to be true also for inflation.<END>
I mentioned at the last meeting that the monthly standard May 9, 200773 of 130deviation in inflation numbers is about 0.08, and so between 0.1 and 0.3 there is not necessarily a whole lot of information.
We have a few pieces of good news.
I think vacancy rates are rising for both apartments and single-family homes.
At some point we will begin to see better progress on owners’ equivalent rent and shelter costs.
<START>Also, the quarterly average of medical cost increases was much more moderate than in the first two months, which suggests that maybe this risk is not as serious as it may have looked.<END>
However, as many people pointed out, there are a number of negatives, including the dollar, energy, food prices, commodity prices, and most importantly, the labor market.
The compensation data remain quite mixed
—in particular, the ECI, which was a very soft headline number.
The 1.1 percent quarterly wage and salary number, or 3.6 percent for twelve months, is now more or less consistent with what we’re seeing in average hourly earnings.
If productivity falls below 2 percent, then we are beginning to get to a range in which unit labor costs will be putting pressure on inflation.
<START>So I am quite comfortable with the view expressed around the table that, although inflation looks to be stabilizing and perhaps falling slowly, there are significant risks to inflation and we should take those very seriously.<END>
Very much a side point
—I did have some interesting discussions with the staff about the role of the stock market in the forecast.
<START>This is not the staff’s fault, but there is a sort of tension in how the stock market is treated.<END>
On the one hand, the stock market is assumed to grow at 6½ percent from the current level.
On the other hand, the forecast has profit growth going essentially to zero by the third quarter but interest rates coming up.
Those two things are a little hard to reconcile.
The difficult problem is which way you should go to reconcile it.
On the one hand, it could be that the forecast is right, and therefore the stock market will in fact be weaker;
that will have implications for stability, for consumption, and so on.
On the other hand, perhaps we should be taking information from the stock market in making our forecast.
<START>So it is a very difficult problem, May 9, 200774 of 130and I just wanted to point out the tension that we will have to see resolved over the next few quarters.<END>
One partial resolution is that, as has been noted, the stock market and the economy as a whole can be decoupled to some extent because of overseas profits.
This is an interesting example of how financial globalization is creating stability for domestic consumption
—you know, decoupling domestic consumption from domestic production.
Again, we had a very good discussion with the staff about this issue, and I think it is just something we will need to think about going forward.
In summary, in the last meeting we felt that uncertainty had risen.
There has been perhaps a slight moderation of those concerns at this point
<START>—a little less inflation risk, a little less growth risk.<END>
<START>Nevertheless, the balance of risks with inflation being the greater still seems to me to be a reasonable approach.<END>
Let me now turn to Vincent to begin the policy go-round.
MR.
REINHART.3 Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I’ll be referring to the materials that were passed around during the coffee break.
For the past few years, the Committee has taken a “belt and suspenders” approach to providing guidance to financial markets by characterizing both the likely direction of interest rates and the risks to its dual objectives.
In March, you loosened the belt a few notches by replacing the reference to “additional firming” with more-balanced language but retained the macroeconomic assessment that inflation risks were the more serious concern.
The top left panel of your first exhibit provides one way to score the immediate market consequences of that change.
The black and red bars, respectively, plot the changes in two- and ten-year Treasury yields in the one-and-a-quarter-hour window bracketing the 2:15 p.m.
release of statements for the past two years.
<START>As some of you predicted, market participants saw particular significance in the March announcement that the Committee was apparently no longer presuming that its next action would be a firming, and two- and ten-year yields fell 10 and 5 basis points, respectively, the biggest moves in the sample shown.<END>
After a bit of confusion about what the statement really meant, markets ultimately got the message, aided in part by Chairman Bernanke’s testimony, your speeches, and the minutes.
I take from this the sense that the wording of the statement is important [laughter], but that there are also other opportunities to provide a more-nuanced policy message.
The message that market participants got both from you and from the incoming data, on net over the intermeeting period, is seen in the top right panel by the shift from the dotted red to the solid black line depicting the path of the 3 Material used by Mr. Reinhart is appended to this transcript (appendix 3).
May 9, 200775 of 130expected federal funds rate.
Futures quotes now imply a consensus that policy will be kept on hold today and at the June meeting but then will be eased ¾ percentage point by the end of next year.
This modest upward repricing of money market futures yields accompanied a reemergence of remarkably benign financial conditions, the subject of the three middle panels.
Corporate bond spreads (at the left) and implied volatilities on equities and money market futures (in the middle) retraced much of the run-up of late February to end the period at relatively low levels by historical standards.
Equity prices, at the right, gained 7 percent to reach new highs.
As you’ll see a little later, this addition to household wealth pushed up estimates of the equilibrium real federal funds rate and may importantly influence your thinking about near-term economic prospects.
In the bottom left panel, I trot out the usual suspects for why stock prices rose.
First-quarter earnings reports were solid, so higher share value may just be a bet on rising domestic and foreign profits
—the latter seeming especially more secure in light of the apparent vigor of the global economy.
Our estimates of the equity premium
—one of which is shown at the bottom right as the spread between the forward earnings-price ratio and the long-term real interest rate
—narrowed a bit, suggesting that investors were more accepting of risk.
<START>Also, investors may see less risk, as in answer C. Potentially bad things that seemed palpable as the subprime market melted down did not go bump in the night<END>
<START>—that is, downside risks to the outlook appeared to ease.<END>
What is the right answer to this multiple choice test?
<START>I think (D), all of the above, in that the world’s growth prospects seem a little more assured and, as a result, investors see fewer risks and are more willing to take them on.<END>
That backdrop leads naturally to a discussion of policy choices, which begins by examining the case for alternative B, which is in your next exhibit.
The last time that you sat at this table to consider the setting of policy, you chose to keep the federal funds rate at 5¼ percent.
The way the staff has filtered the flow of information since March has produced only minor changes to their outlook for real GDP growth, the top left panel, and core PCE inflation, the top right panel.
So, if you were content in March, would you not be so in May?
Keeping the nominal funds rate at 5¼ percent is consistent, as plotted in the middle panel, with the real federal funds rate, the solid black line, rising to continue to match the Greenbook-consistent measure of its equilibrium value, the dotted green line.
If you believe that framework, this stance of policy should return the level of output to its potential within three years.
Some of you might argue that such an outcome is not good enough.
With core PCE inflation lingering above 2 percent, a more forceful working down of inflation
—perhaps even at the cost of creating some slack
—may be required for acceptable economic performance.
While that may be a relevant consideration, risk-management issues may tug in the opposite direction.
In particular, and as shown by the solid line in the bottom panel, the staff forecast puts real GDP growth in the neighborhood of 2 percent for the next six quarters.
Times in which economic growth has been at or has dipped below 2 percent
—the dashed horizontal line
—have often been followed by recession
—the shaded regions.
<START>Concern that the economy would be flying close to stall speed may stay your hand from dealing more aggressively with inflation.<END>
May 9, 200776 of 130 Indeed, concerns about growth may incline you to believe that your next policy action will be an easing
—the subject of the left column of charts in exhibit 3.
As has been true for some time, the case for alternative A rests importantly on your assessment of the housing market.
New-home sales, the solid black line in the middle panel, have taken another step down, further elevating the months’ supply of unsold new homes, the dotted red line.
This inventory correction will impose a drag on residential investment for some time
—and could get worse if the availability of funds tightens some more in light of the woes in the subprime mortgage market.
You also might now harbor doubts that businesses will step up their spending, which would otherwise have cushioned any slowing in the growth of aggregate demand.
<START>While the latest readings on orders and on shipments of capital goods, plotted as the solid black and dotted red lines, respectively, in the bottom left panel, were encouraging, you might dismiss those as one month’s noisy signal around a downward-pointing trend.<END>
In addition, you might see financial markets as ripe to correct, once investors come to appreciate that earnings prospects are as tepid as in the Greenbook forecast.
But risks to economic growth are not the Committee’s sole concerns.
<START>In March you identified the failure of inflation to moderate from its current elevated level to be the predominant concern.<END>
<START>The case for alternative C, presented in the right panels, probably hinges on the view that inflation is not clearly on a downward trend, seen in the middle panel by inflation as measured by the core PCE price index (the solid black line) and the market-based core PCE index (the dotted red line).<END>
In addition, the outlook for inflation may now be seen as less favorable than in March, given the run-up in the prices of oil and other commodities.
As shown in the bottom right panel, futures-market participants have revised up their forecasts for the prices of these items well into the future.
If the pace of moderation of core inflation turns out to be even slower than previously anticipated, you might be concerned that long-run inflation expectations will drift up, making for difficult policy choices going forward.
The prevailing expectations of inaction, shaped in part by official comments, may take alternatives A and C off the table for today.
But any inclination to favor the arguments in either the right or the left columns should influence your choice of language in the statement, the subject of your last exhibit.
This exhibit is just table 1 repeated from the Bluebook with no emendation.
<START>I note that, in the discussion of communications, the Committee thus far has been reluctant to specify an inflation goal consistent with its dual mandate.<END>
However, by describing current inflation as “somewhat elevated,” as was the case in March, you are implicitly characterizing the upper limit of your tolerance for inflation, just as you delimited its lower bound in the summer of 2003 with talk of “unwelcome disinflation.” Market participants will read much into your choice of words when the time comes to change that characterization.
<START>So, at some point, you will have to come to terms with your preferred specification of your inflation goal, either directly through deliberations on communication policy or indirectly through the wording of the statement.<END>
That concludes my prepared remarks.
May 9, 200777 of 130CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Are there questions for Vincent?
If not, we can begin the policy go-round.
MR.
POOLE.
I guess by default I will start.
First of all, I favor alternative B, both the language and the unchanged federal funds target.
Let me make a couple of comments about market liquidity.
First, liquidity is not reduced at all by deals.
Deals simply transfer the funds from the buyers to the sellers, who then have to figure out what to do with all that cash.
Deals are probably being driven at least in part by very narrow risk spreads.
<START>But my sense is that so far these spreads are consistent with actual losses in the markets.<END>
Obviously, if that situation continues, then risk spreads should remain low, and we should continue to have a very active amount of deal making.
<START>Some of the returns from the deals really feed into good productivity performance because part of the purpose of these deals is to take over companies that are not performing well and to eliminate marginally profitable or unprofitable operations and that is really good for productivity.<END>
To the extent that the deals are simply increasing leverage
—sort of financial engineering
—then that does not do anything for productivity.
It does increase risk and vulnerability should the economy perform other than anticipated.
We cannot really do anything about that situation except to avoid creating surprises ourselves;
it is really, on the whole, beyond our control.
Governor Kohn talked about standard errors, and I must say that, when it comes to standard errors, I am very much an indexer and not a market timer.
[Laughter] It is easy to fool yourself just as in investment policy, but that is where I come out there.
On the issue of the inflation target
—and I am glad that we are closing in on this topic
—I honestly do not believe that we can credibly be satisfied with an inflation forecast for 2009, that far out, of 2 percent and at the same time continue to talk about a comfort zone of 1 to 2.
That does not seem to me to be internally consistent because we cannot control inflation to 0.1 percentage point.
<START>May 9, 200778 of 130So either we have to decide that our true target is something like 1½ plus or minus ½ as an issue for control errors and other considerations, or we need to start being explicit about a comfort zone of 1½ to 2½.<END>
I am worried about the latter approach because it runs the risk of raising market expectations and of unhinging expectations.
Expectations have been very solidly held.
<START>If we get into a situation in which, through inevitable things that happen that we cannot control, the inflation rate were to run consistently at, let’s say for the sake of argument, 2½ instead of around 2, then those market expectations might not be so well entrenched at 2½ as a consequence of having willingly and openly or by default<END>
—by revealed preference, if you will
—moved effectively to raise the comfort zone.
I am very much a hardliner on this.
<START>I think that we ought to continue with a comfort zone of 1 to 2, and we ought to think about the inflation target as being 1½ plus or minus a half.<END>
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Poole’s comments remind me that I did have a question, Vincent.
It is, What do you think is the effect of the term “on balance” in the inflation paragraph?
MR.
REINHART.
We added the term “on balance” in drafting the Bluebook for both the time-series and the cross-sectional perspectives.
That is, first, from the time-series perspective you are not looking at just one monthly number.
You may be doing as complicated an analysis as President Stern in looking at three-, six-, and twelve-month changes.
Second, it has a cross-sectional aspect to it.
You are not just focused on the one number of core PCE, but you’re taking in the whole suite of price indexes.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
<START>Well, let’s just say core inflation, so it wouldn’t be every inflation measure.<END>
May 9, 200779 of 130MR. REINHART.
Yes, but you are not hanging your hat necessarily on the PCE versus the CPI.
The thought is that the insertion of that language means that you’re tending to smooth through recent observations, and we took it as something that would be on balance
—[laughter] that phrase comes very natural to us, too
—a little more hawkish.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
Sorry?
Which was a little more?
MR.
REINHART.
To take it out would be a little more hawkish.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
It would be a more hawkish signal than a statement with “on balance”?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
I agree with that last statement.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
Mr. Chairman.
In the same vein, may I just ask a question about the likely conclusion that people would draw from the change in the second section?
It has the virtue of truth.
[Laughter] You could interpret it, relative to March, as a softer characterization of the recent news.
It goes in a slightly different direction from the center-of-gravity of this discussion, which is to say that indicators have actually been mixed.
<START>They are sometimes a little softer or sometimes a little stronger, but we think there is maybe a slightly thinner adverse tail in the growth outcome than we had thought in March.<END>
I am not particularly troubled by that.
But, Vince, do you think that this would be the plausible reading by the market to the change?
How would they interpret the intent of the change in section 2?
MR.
REINHART.
That it was a recognition of the incoming information.
I think an important change is also to take out the “to continue to expand” and leave it as just “to expand” because the first quarter did not have moderate economic growth.
So that part says that you are acknowledging the most recent numbers.
Again, the first clause is basically acknowledging that the first part of the year, not just the first quarter, will potentially be kind of slow.
So more than May 9, 200780 of 130anything it says that the Committee is looking through this soft patch, without using the phrase “soft patch.” MR. FISHER.
Mr. Chairman, may I ask a question?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Certainly.
MR.
FISHER.
Are you advocating that, if we use the text as written in section 3 of alternative B, we would still keep the full wording from section 4 from last time?
MR.
REINHART.
The wording of section 4 would be unchanged, yes.
MR.
FISHER.
That may mitigate some of those concerns you have.
MR.
REINHART.
Yes.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Since we are bringing these suggestions out early, one thing that you could do in section 2, the second sentence, is simply make an assertion about moderate growth.
One could say, “Overall, however, recent indicators suggest that the economy seems likely to expand . . .,” suggesting that the news recently has been somewhat more positive.
That is just a thought.
Let’s go to President Stern.
MR.
STERN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
<START>Well, earlier in talking about the economy I said that I thought the extended outlook was reasonably favorable in terms of prospects for growth and that I also expected a modest diminution in core inflation, assuming that policy would be sustained approximately where it is.<END>
That leads me directly to favoring alternative B as the policy choice.
Putting it the other way around, I do not see compelling reasons to make a change at this point, so I think we should stay where we are.
As far as language is concerned, the bulk of the language under alternative B is fine with me.
But I do have one suggestion, which is that we replace the second sentence in section 3, alternative B, which talks about inflation, with the second sentence in section 3, alternative C, which May 9, 200781 of 130emphasizes uncertainty.
<START>I advocate that for several reasons, but really they boil down to my thinking that it better describes the situation in which we find ourselves.<END>
So let me just elaborate a little.
We know that the NAIRU is at best an imprecise concept.
<START>We know that accurate measurement of productivity is difficult and that, therefore, so is estimation of potential real GDP, the output gap, and so on and so forth.<END>
<START>Indeed, simulations in the Greenbook address those two issues precisely, and there has been a fair amount of discussion recently at this meeting about uncertainty about the NAIRU and about productivity and so on.<END>
That leads me to my suggestion.
I would also observe that it is certainly not far-fetched to imagine
—although this is not my forecast
<START>—that the unemployment rate or some other measure of slack may move up for a time while inflation remains stubbornly where it is or even increases a touch.<END>
So all of that leads me to favor the language from alternative C for that one sentence.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Governor Kohn.
MR.
KOHN.
President Stern, would you add the same words on the output side?
Do you think it’s worth emphasizing uncertainty about inflation without also emphasizing the uncertainty about output?
Although a lot of people have said it has narrowed relative to last time, a lot of people have also said that the housing situation is very uncertain.
MR.
STERN.
I haven’t thought about that.
<START>But if you want to say that the economy seems likely to expand, we could, I suppose, soften that a bit to emphasize uncertainty there as well, although my sense of things is that people do, in fact, expect moderate growth going forward.<END>
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Intervention, President Fisher?
MR.
FISHER.
No, sir.
I just want to comment.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Why don’t you go ahead.
May 9, 200782 of 130MR. FISHER.
<START>Well, again, I am probably the most bearish in terms of a short-term forecast on GDP growth and have very asymmetric confidence bands, which take into account even slower growth than that.<END>
<START>Having listened to the conversation at the table and keying off the word “hawkish” that Vince used, I want to be owlish on growth in terms of listening to President Stern’s admonition, and I don’t want to be a pigeon on inflation<END>
—just to kill the aviary context here.
[Laughter] So I would advocate alternative B. I don’t believe that we should change the rate.
I like very much the suggestion that President Stern just made about inflation.
The only thing in your summary list, Mr. Chairman, that I did not hear and that I think is an issue is the behavioral pattern of private-sector leaders who were trying to figure out how to preserve their margins;
therefore, I think we will have more sustained price “instincts” than I would otherwise see from the current data.
<START>I think the second sentence in alternative C captures that uncertainty, and I agree with President Stern.<END>
Finally, as always, I would suggest that we add the word “global” before “resource utilization.” Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Noted.
Thank you.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
Mr. Chairman, may I ask just a clarifying question on this discussion?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Vice Chairman Geithner.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
Don raised the obvious question, which is whether we want to introduce the characterization of uncertainty on one piece of our outlook but not the other.
<START>But, Gary, did you suggest that uncertainty about the inflation forecast is greater today than it was in March?<END>
MR.
STERN.
Not for me personally.
<START>But as I thought more about this and listened to some of the conversation, the uncertainty seemed to be at least as great as it was in March.<END>
In fact, the May 9, 200783 of 130Greenbook marked up core inflation a touch.
<START>That doesn’t lead directly into greater uncertainty, but it is not the direction in which I would have gone if I were changing the inflation forecast.<END>
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
But is your rationale mostly about greater uncertainty, or is it mostly a continued aversion to implicit reference to the output gap as being a significant force?
MR.
STERN.
Both.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
I would like to interject.
<START>We do have to think about the time-series nature of the statement, and I am concerned, given that our last inflation reading was very good and reduced some of the anxiety that we were feeling in the last meeting, that there will be a lot of attempts to interpret what we meant by uncertainty.<END>
At this point, are we feeling that there is an increase in uncertainty and that we have lost confidence in this projection?
I think that we have to think very seriously, not just about the sentence, which is very reasonable on its face, but also about what extent the change from the last statement will be overinterpreted.
MR.
STERN.
I agree with that comment 100 percent, although I do think that is an issue we are going to confront if and when we ever make that change, quite honestly.
MR.
FISHER.
May I make an intervention, Mr. Chairman?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Yes.
MR.
FISHER.
If you do use that sentence, then you might be able to get rid of the first sentence in section 4 that you used previously.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
The core inflation sentence?
Which one?
MR.
FISHER.
“In these circumstances, the Committee’s predominant … concern . . ..” SEVERAL.
No. MR.
FISHER.
I am not arguing that you include both but that you could trade one off against the other.
May 9, 200784 of 130CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Are there any interventions?
If not, President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
Gosh, as usual the state of play here has gotten confused
—for me, anyway.
First of all, the thing I am least confused about is the policy recommendation.
I do not think we should do anything at this time.
I think we should stay the course at 5¼.
I am very much in favor of alternative B. Second, I want to comment about what Vince said about the reaction to our statement the last time, in large part because I found that the people who talked to me about it over the past several weeks felt that our statement communication was somehow murkier than usual, if that is possible.
Personally, I felt that we were very clear in that statement
—we saw that there was more two-sided risk
—and ultimately the market has come around to that belief.
I guess I have come to the view that it is not a bad thing that the market reacted a bit more strongly.
We probably should have anticipated that, and I think I even commented about it at the last meeting
—that when you make a change to open a two-way possibility for policy a little more explicitly, it will have a bigger impact on the overall market.
<START>Third, with regard to the discussion about the language in alternative B, I was of the opinion that in terms of growth we have a certain set of risks coming from the housing market and rising energy and gasoline prices, which to some extent was offset by continued strength in employment, the financial market adding to household wealth, the growth around the rest of the world, some brighter picture from business investment spending, and so forth.<END>
<START>So I look at the growth part of this as a bit more balanced and somewhat less uncertain than last time but at the inflation part as being more uncertain.<END>
<START>So I was attracted both to President Stern’s recommendation and even to a recommendation that would replace section 3 of alternative B with section 3 of alternative C. But I think about the Chairman’s most recent comments about how strongly the market might react to May 9, 200785 of 130that, what it might say about what has been a nuanced discussion here about inflation.<END>
We all expect inflation
—we in Boston somewhat less than the rest of you
—to moderate over the next year or year and a half to something that is within what some people have called their comfort zone.
I am a little worried that we might send a message of more concern than we might have intended from replacing that language, although I agree with President Stern.
I think the language of alternative C, particularly with regard to uncertainty, is somewhat more reflective of what we talked around the table than the existing language of section 3.
<START>Finally, I may be kidding myself here, but I have been taking the language in section 3 as saying not so much that we’re committed to a comfort zone of between 1 and 2, although I take President Poole’s comments on this seriously, but rather that the dynamics of inflation had the risk that inflation would accelerate rather than decelerate and that is what we were concerned about.<END>
Again, that is my personal reading on this because that is the context in which I think about concerns about inflation at this time.
I would agree with President Poole that there is a way in which you can read this that is gradually pushing us into giving a target and a target range, and that may be where everybody wants to go here.
I do not know, but I think there is a little risk around a specific number, as I have said many times.
I would agree with Governor Kohn and his comments about wondering whether we really want to push inflation just for the sheer sake of pushing it to below 2 or, rather, waiting for the ability to move opportunistically at some point.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Pianalto.
MS.
PIANALTO.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
<START>I support the recommendation embodied by alternative B. The Committee last time wanted to introduce a little more flexibility into the statement while not sending a message that our resolve about achieving price stability had changed.<END>
It took a while for that message to get through, but it did.
Since not much has changed in the way May 9, 200786 of 130the economy is unfolding relative to our expectations since the last meeting, I would prefer to make only the essential adjustments to the statement, such as acknowledging the recent slowing in economic activity.
In the spirit of making only minimal changes, I would not add the clause “on balance” to the sentence on core inflation.
<START>We had the benefit of asking what we were trying to convey with that phrase and heard Vincent’s comments about time-series and cross-sectional perspectives, but the markets aren’t going to have the benefit of that explanation until they get the minutes.<END>
I am also concerned that introducing the language about uncertainty around inflation is going to have the markets trying to interpret what we are trying to say.
They have a lower path to the fed funds rate built into their expectations, and I think they have been looking for language to help support that position;
our saying that we are uncertain about inflation may appear to them as a bit dovish rather than hawkish.
So I would just rather keep things where they are today, with very few changes to our language.
I support alternative B without “on balance,” but that is obviously not a show stopper.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Kohn.
MR.
KOHN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Like everyone else, I support the policy recommendation of alternative B, keeping the fed funds rate unchanged.
I do think that has the best odds of helping the economy meet our dual objectives of maximum employment and stable prices.
Financial conditions right now, as several people have remarked, are really quite supportive of growth, particularly in the business sector, but I think that is necessary to offset some of the drag from housing and from business and household caution.
The recent indicators, it seems to me, have still a bit of a mixed character.
We have one month of strength in capital spending, and we have some industrial production and ISM data, but consumption has definitely slowed down.
So to my mind there is still considerable uncertainty, even if it is less than last time, around the output path.
May 9, 200787 of 130Given that I think things are close to where they were before, I wouldn’t make many changes to the wording from last time.
<START>I am comfortable with section 2 on economic growth and “expand at a moderate pace over coming quarters,” unless we add something about uncertainty to the inflation piece, and then I would want to add uncertainty to the other.<END>
But I do not think we ought to add the uncertainty language to inflation.
I think the combination of that and the “predominant” language, as President Fisher was implicitly pointing out, will send a much more concerned message about inflation.
It will say that our concerns about inflation have increased since last time
—I really think it would be interpreted that way.
At some cost, we obtained some flexibility in how we are characterizing the situation and in our policy expectations by the changes we made last time to the final section.
<START>I would keep that final section the same, and I would not do something to undo that, which would be to combine the uncertainty language on inflation and the predominant risk language.<END>
<START>I think that the world would see the Federal Reserve as being much more worried about inflation than it was last time, even though the data have been a little better.<END>
On section 3, “core inflation remains somewhat elevated on balance”
<START>—one question I asked myself was, if I had a 2 percent target and the latest number was 2.1, should I be much concerned about that, or would I be comfortable with the sentence.<END>
I think I am okay with the sentence for a couple of reasons.
I’ll come to the “on balance” in a second.
One reason is that the latest data on core PCE prices are heavily influenced by those nonmarket components that I’ve denigrated at this table before, and we can be consistent there.
The year-over-year CPI still shows some acceleration, much more acceleration than PCE.
The market-based PCE shows some acceleration.
So the rate is still higher than I am comfortable with, especially when I discount the nonmarket part.
The CPI is still pretty high, and I completely agree that inflation is our predominant concern.
<START>So I think saying that core inflation remains somewhat elevated is fine with me.<END>
President Poole said something May 9, 200788 of 130about that “we” as a Committee continue with our comfort zone of 1 to 2 percent.
For the sake of the transcript, I want to make it clear that the Committee has never chosen such a comfort zone.
Several individuals have, and I agree with both President Poole and Vincent that this could get awkward soon
—but not yet
—and we need to think about it.
The Committee does not have a comfort zone.
With regard to the phrase “on balance,” I could live with the sentence either way.
Unfortunately it’s an ambiguous phrase.
I’m not sure how people will interpret it.
Was the thought that it would be more hawkish to take it out?
I didn’t follow the dialogue between Vincent and Vice Chairman Geithner on what you thought the effect would be of doing the section without “on balance.” MR. REINHART.
The theory was that you were smoothing through recent data so that, if you got another good reading on core inflation, as you did last month, you wouldn’t necessarily weight it as much.
MR.
DUDLEY.
Don, you could take “on balance” as acknowledging last month’s data, and if you take “on balance” out, you’re not acknowledging last month’s data as much.
MR.
REINHART.
May I also just ask a question?
In President Stern’s formulation, you would take the second sentence from alternative C and not make any reference to resource slack?
So I would actually take that as markets reading that you have decided to totally discount the current pressures on employment rather than increasing your weight on inflation uncertainty.
I took this as an invitation to say disregard employment
<START>—you are not worried about slack as much, and you are just asserting that inflation moderates.<END>
MR.
KOHN.
I hadn’t thought about that, I confess.
That makes me even more uncomfortable.
MR.
REINHART.
I would view that as quite a dovish statement.
May 9, 200789 of 130MR. STERN.
Well, I viewed it as a neutral statement.
[Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Poole.
MR.
POOLE.
On the other side, we are anticipating a slowdown in employment growth.
So then, the markets would look back to this and say, “Aha, the unemployment rate is rising
—the Fed is about to ease.” The question is whether this is a good time to get that notion out.
I don’t feel very strongly one way or the other, but I think there is a lot to be said for leaving it alone, given all the ambiguities here.
But basically I’m supportive of President Stern’s recommendation.
MR.
REINHART.
I would note that Bloomberg today had a linguist evaluate previous statements, and he basically concluded that the language was pretty hopeless.
[Laughter] SPEAKER[?].
Who was this linguist?
MR.
REINHART.
In fact, it was the chief editor of the American Heritage Dictionary.
MR.
MOSKOW.
Can we hire him as a consultant?
[Laughter] MR. KROSZNER.
A meteorologist and a linguist.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
Anticipating that a linguist will be reading this afterward, let me say that I strongly support alternative B. Since I’m assuming that the language is what we’re talking about, I support the current language even though there have been many suggestions for modifications.
I am not inclined to make any suggestions myself or to accept any of the others that have been put on the table unless you, as the Chairman, decide to modify this language somewhat.
I have a couple of comments, though.
Governor Kohn mentioned that we would have a long period in which we experience below-trend growth;
but from my perspective, that’s what we intend.
<START>We have had a period of modestly tight policy, and therefore we should expect somewhat below-trend growth with the objective of bringing in our inflation numbers.<END>
We are right on track May 9, 200790 of 130with that, and that is where we ought to be staying.
I am very comfortable with this modestly tight policy.
Over time it should systematically bring inflation down.
I agree, again, with Governor Kohn’s earlier comment that we can do it in this way with minimal cost to the economy, which is our objective:
to bring inflation down and to do it in the least costly way possible.
So we need to stick with this policy as we have defined it here.
I would also point out, just for the record, that if you want to make sure that we are not getting tied up into targets, as I have said before and will say again today, that I am not targeting on core PCE.
I much prefer core CPI
—it is more easily understood.
If that is the case, then the 2 percent number, if we have to talk about a number, makes a lot more sense.
<START>We can get this any way we want, but the point is that we need to bring the inflation numbers down systematically, and we are not yet where I think most of us in this room agree we should be.<END>
So where we are with the policy under alternative B is, I think, a very good choice for us.
I will end with that.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Plosser.
MR.
PLOSSER.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As I listen to the comments around the table, I am of two minds.
One, and I have said this before, maybe we ought to be in the business of changing the statement a lot more frequently to get out of some of our traps of time-series language.
Two, having said that, though, I think, as I indicated earlier, that alternative B is the correct one.
We ought to hold the fed funds rate where it is.
We are about in the right place for now.
There is some question mark going forward in terms of how things evolve and where we want to be, but for now I am certainly comfortable where we are.
If growth returns to trend more rapidly than the Greenbook projects, then we might ask ourselves other questions;
but I don’t think we’re there yet.
Acknowledging Governor Kohn’s comments, I have to confess that I think that Bill’s comments
—indeed, taken off Vince’s
—are appropriate.
<START>We need to align ourselves here better in terms of May 9, 200791 of 130where we’re going and what we’re doing.<END>
<START>As we get closer, articulating more precisely where we are, at least among ourselves, becomes even more critical.<END>
<START>Aligning our objectives with market expectations and figuring out how we get those things into alignment is a critical task that we face, and I just would like to reinforce that.<END>
In terms of wording, I could live perfectly well with alternative B as written.
I have a lot of sympathy for President Stern’s statements.
I would like to simplify our statements about inflation.
<START>In fact, if people are troubled by the notion of uncertainty, I would go so far as to stop after “inflation pressure seemed likely to moderate over time.” I recognize that is probably not the consensus view.<END>
As for the rest, I kind of liked the Chairman’s suggestion
—I think it was his
—on some of the language in section 2.
In some ways, if we don’t want to convey much to the markets at this point, changing as little as possible seems to make sense, and I would be supportive of that.
In fact, we could take the March statement in section 2 and leave it exactly as it is except to take out “to continue.” But the Chairman’s suggestion about mixed signals would be fine with me, too.
So I’m pretty flexible at this point.
The real nut to crack will be coming up over the next quarter or two, when we will face some more difficult choices, I believe.
So I’ll end with that.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Lacker.
MR.
LACKER.
Policy should be straightforward today.
<START>We’re waiting out a lull in growth while inflation is unacceptably high, at least to most of us.<END>
<START>When the downside risks have sufficiently diminished, I’m presuming we’re going to want to take action to bring inflation down;<END>
but in the meantime, we are on the sidelines obviously with regard to rates.
Coming into this I had thought the statement was going to be a pretty straightforward matter as well.
Evidently not.
Markets finally figured out what we meant in the last statement.
I think you are right, Mr. Chairman, in your autoregressive model of the statement language.
The markets do a May 9, 200792 of 130Kalman filter on whatever we issue and attach great importance to whatever we change.
I do not think much has changed about the outlook to warrant significant changes in language, although I’d be sympathetic to taking out “on balance” on the theory that it is a hawkish move in general.
<START>[Laughter] About what Gary said, I am really sympathetic to the notion of changing the way we refer to the relationship between resource utilization and inflation in our statements.<END>
I say that because the best mainstream understanding is that resource utilization and inflation are the joint outcome of economic decisions given our actions and given what we’re expected to do.
One can talk about resource utilization affecting inflation.
<START>One can just as well talk about moderating inflation keeping resource utilization high.<END>
There is really no superiority to one characterization or the other.
So the idea that a sort of independent thing is wagging around there driving inflation, rather than both of them being the result of our actions, is an area in which we could improve the public’s understanding of our understanding of how monetary policy affects the economy.
I would also like to endorse the spirit of President Poole’s remarks about inflation and what we want.
<START>You know, about this notion of opportunism or the idea of an interim target, I think again about my brother-in-law sitting down in front of retirement planning software.<END>
I guess I would be left telling him, “Well, you should put in between 1 and 2,” depending on when we decide to take the opportunity to reduce inflation below 2 percent.
I do not think that’s satisfactory.
I think we can do better.
When we choose an objective, we should view it as a once-and-for-all thing.
Part of that reflects a sense that, well, if transition costs are something we are going to describe as keeping us from going to where we now think we ought to be ultimately, what if shocks bump us up to 2¾ or 3 percent?
Are we going to say the same thing then?
I mean, it is inviting people to think that, and it is just sort of painting ourselves into a corner.
<START>Governor Kohn, you referred to the net welfare costs of 2 versus 1½ percent inflation.<END>
<START>If you do the optimal-policy calculation, the only thing that May 9, 200793 of 130governs where you get in the long run, no matter how long it takes, is that net welfare calculation.<END>
So that’s what should govern where we choose to set our objective, not whether we think transition costs are going to be high now or not.
That concludes my remarks, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
<START>I think your point about joint causality, joint endogeneity, of utilization and inflation is a good one.<END>
<START>I have tried to make that point in testimony when I talk about aggregate demand being strong and having effects both on inflation and on resource utilization.<END>
We can think about this.
<START>It is a little hard to capture complex models in these statements, but it is certainly a point well taken.<END>
President Yellen.
MS.
YELLEN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I support the Bluebook’s alternative B, both the policy and the language as it stands.
With respect to the language, I strongly support the view that you, Governor Kohn, and others expressed
<START>—that a change today would be a mistake, given the significance that the markets would attach to it.<END>
I think the language is completely acceptable and we should stick with it.
<START>If we were to move, I wouldn’t have a problem with the language in C about inflation and uncertainty, but I would also want to add something about uncertainty with respect to growth, and I see no need to make this change today.<END>
It seems to me that we do need considerable flexibility at this point to respond to emerging data.
<START>The intermeeting developments have strengthened the case for a soft landing, but there is significant risk on both sides with respect to inflation and growth.<END>
<START>I’m still comfortable stating that the predominant policy concern is the risk that inflation will fail to moderate as expected.<END>
I am worried about labor markets that remain fairly tight, oil and commodity prices that are higher, and the dollar, which has fallen.
<START>At the same time, the recent favorable inflation data have reinforced my view that a substantial part of the uptick in inflation last year was transitory.<END>
I think that the discussion we have had so far reinforces the point that going forward we are going to have trouble crafting policy and a statement if we don’t clarify
—May 9, 200794 of 130at least within the Committee, if not publicly
—what our ultimate inflation objective is.
I’m not going to weigh in again at this point on the merits, but it is obvious that we will have increasing difficulty.
<START>I am happy today to say that core inflation remains “somewhat elevated on balance.” But if we get more readings of core PCE inflation that are in the neighborhood of 2 percent and they continue, we really will have to revisit the debate about what we want to achieve and how we can reflect that decision in our statement.<END>
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Moskow.
MR.
MOSKOW.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
<START>If you step back from the discussion and just think about the policy position, we’re in a difficult position because inflation continues to run higher than most of us think is appropriate but economic activity seems to be in a soft patch, as you said in your summary of the comments, Mr. Chairman.<END>
I think alternative B
—keeping the fed funds rate at 5¼ percent and the language
—is the appropriate one for today.
If we were to take the suggestion of using the sentence from alternative C about considerable uncertainty surrounding the inflation judgment, how would the markets interpret this change, regardless of how we meant it?
I think the markets would immediately interpret it as less emphasis on inflation from our standpoint.
I think they would also say, “Well, there’s now more uncertainty, or the FOMC sees more uncertainty today about inflation than it did at the last meeting.” I don’t think either statement is accurate.
If we delete the phrase “high level of resource utilization,” they will say that we’re less concerned about high levels of resource utilization than we were before.
We’ve had this phrase in the statement for a long time.
At some point we want to take it out, but when we do the change to the statement would be very significant.
I wouldn’t do it until we felt that, in the context of looking at the overall statement in a very careful way, making that change had some May 9, 200795 of 130major benefit.
There is a virtue in making few changes in the statement unless we have a specific objective in mind or a specific message.
So I would strongly oppose making that change in the statement.
On the phrase “on balance,” I guess I was persuaded by Vincent’s description that this helps us give the impression that we’re smoothing through the recent data.
So on balance, I would keep “on balance.” [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
MS.
MINEHAN.
Mr. Chairman?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
<START>I realize that when I finished my comments I was never really clear about language.<END>
After sorting through all the comments that people have made and my thoughts about those comments, I am perfectly happy with alternative B as it is written and with the “on balance” language.
<START>I do want to say, though, that if we had replaced the language in section 3 with that about inflation pressures and uncertainty, the juxtaposition of the sentence “Inflation pressures seem likely to moderate over time, but considerable uncertainty surrounds that judgment” indicates that the uncertainty relates to “moderate over time,” and it’s clear that the uncertainty is about inflation being higher rather than lower.<END>
That statement would be somewhat more hawkish and, in fact, more reflective of where people’s balance of concern was.
I am totally in agreement that there is no need to change this language right now, but I did want to weigh in a bit there.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Lockhart.
MR.
LOCKHART.
Well, I, too, support alternative B, and simple logic:
We haven’t arrived at the optimal picture yet.
<START>Output growth is slowing, inflation is still elevated, and there is a fair amount of uncertainty.<END>
Some of us focused on uncertainty in the inflation picture, and May 9, 200796 of 130some on both sides.
I think the situation merits a patient approach at this juncture;
we should give it some more time.
Regarding the language, not being well schooled in the literary style of the FOMC, I, too, focused on the “on balance” phrase, thinking that it injected maybe a hint of equivocation.
I understand the logic.
I believe what I heard President Yellen saying is that we have to think in a two-step process here
—that is, if you put it in and then the next time around take it out, how do the markets react?
So for what it’s worth, I focus on that, not quite knowing how to process the “on balance” language.
Otherwise, I’m going to abstain from the language debates here until I have a little more experience.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
I don’t know that it will help.
[Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Governor Warsh.
MR.
WARSH.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I favor alternative B and think that there is a very heavy presumption against our changing the language much from our March statement.
<START>From all that I’ve heard today, I don’t think we have even convinced ourselves that we have matched that presumption or overcome that burden of persuasion.<END>
<START>So though I’ve had some sympathy in isolation to the Stern suggestion, I don’t think this is the right time to take it up in light of our experience of the last statement.<END>
For several days, we had the markets focused on us rather than on the data.
What you, Mr. Chairman, and others have done over the most recent period is to try to get the markets to be dependent on the data rather than to look at us.
These changes in language
—whether the Stern amendment or something else at this point
—do just the reverse of that.
I don’t think this is a good time for nuance in the markets, and so I don’t think our substitution there would be good.
<START>I don’t think we can agree, even among ourselves, what the Stern amendment would do<END>
—whether it’s hawkish or dovish;
and if we can’t, I hardly think May 9, 200797 of 130it’s a good prescription for us to send it out to the markets and have them figure it out for us.
[Laughter] So I strongly favor alternative B. I think the markets will read the change in section 2
—where we say, “Economic growth slowed in the first part of this year”
—as “We believe April as well was quite mediocre.” I think that’s what it means.
That’s what we believe, and so that change is justified by the facts.
In terms of the “on balance” language in section 3, I could live either way, but I don’t see a compelling reason for adding “on balance.” I think the markets still want to see in us a reflection of what they believe.
<START>They believe that we’re cutting, that our credibility on inflation is real, but that we’re just being a little cute now.<END>
I wouldn’t want to give them an excuse to say that we’ve taken our foot off the accelerator, that we’re less concerned about inflation.
It is just one data point, so I’d prefer to leave it without “on balance” as it was previously.
That’s it.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
I think you mean the brake.
[Laughter] Anyway, thank you.
Governor Kroszner.
MR.
KROSZNER.
As everyone else has said, there haven’t been enough data to lead us to change our view, and the policy should remain where it is.
Alternative B is the right way to go, and
—I agree with Governor Kohn
—it is the best way to meet our dual objectives.
The statement from last time bought us some flexibility, although at some cost
—it left a bit of confusion in the market, which we’ve clarified.
It is important for us to maintain that flexibility, and so in altering the statement we should think about that.
In the first part of section 2, we do have to acknowledge that growth slowed in the first part of this year.
It is important to make that change.
But because we have made that change, the Chairman’s suggestion seems quite reasonable to me
—rather than saying “nevertheless,” just assert that “recent indicators suggest May 9, 200798 of 130that the economy seems likely to expand at a moderate pace over coming quarters.” I think the Chairman had suggested starting that sentence with “overall.” If people like the phrase “on balance,” we can say “on balance recent indicators suggest that . . .” [laughter] depending on whether we choose to use the phrase “on balance” in the next sentence.
On the next sentence, I’m open about whether we use “on balance,” but I would, on balance, go for taking it out because I don’t see the particular benefit at this point of adding in that qualification.
In some sense it takes away a bit of our flexibility rather than adding to it.
I’m trying to think about the most likely scenarios going forward, and it’s more likely that we might want to remove or alter that phrase than keep it.
So from our time-series perspective going forward, it might leave us a little more flexibility not to put it in, but I don’t have a very strong view on that.
As you can see from my comments, I think that we shouldn’t be changing things much.
<START>In principle, I’m sympathetic to Gary’s proposal, but this is not the right time to make that change.<END>
There is a question about the interpretation of “high resource utilization.” If we take our central tendency discussion, we’re going to see growth around 2 percent or so, clearly below potential.
That doesn’t suggest a high level of resource utilization.
<START>But given what the Chairman mentioned about likely changes in employment growth, by the time we have our next meeting we may be adding 0.1 or 0.2 percentage point to the unemployment rate, and so it would be 0.3 percentage point higher than we were quite recently, although it’s still broadly at a relatively low level.<END>
The change would bring us back to a higher level than we’ve seen in quite a few months.
We should just be mindful of that.
I’m not suggesting that we take it out, but we will have to think about how to change it because the high level of resource utilization is not going to be there by traditional measures.
But most of us think that there is still a lot of potential to sustain those pressures, which may not just be the high level of resource utilization.
Thank you.
May 9, 200799 of 130CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Mishkin.
MR.
MISHKIN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Obviously, I support alternative B. It seems from a policy perspective that our outlook hasn’t really changed.
We want to change as little as possible in our statement.
My SAT scores in English were much lower than my SAT scores in math, so I’m not going to comment on the issue of the phrase “on balance.” [Laughter] But let me return to the issue that Vince originally raised and that has come out from several of the participants’ perspectives.
I think we will soon be facing a very difficult situation.
<START>If the forecast comes in along the lines that we expect, which for us is a nice situation in which inflation comes down to 2 percent in the core and looks as though it will stay there<END>
—that it’s not just a temporary one-shot deal and that it will go back up again
—we’re going to face a very difficult issue in terms of the statement.
Unless I have a sense of the consensus on this Committee for what is our ultimate objective for inflation, I’m going to have a real problem.
My view of where the number should be is that I lean toward 2 percent because I do think the transition costs are important, although I am concerned about the issue that President Lacker mentioned.
<START>We cannot be opportunistic and just change the number because, as I mentioned earlier, that creates actually a very bad expectations dynamic, which has the opposite effect of an automatic stabilizer in terms of what happens to both inflation and output.<END>
If the Committee decides that 1½ is a better number, I could definitely live with that.
<START>That would make it easier for me to deal with the statement because, if we’re at 2 percent and have not built a consensus on our ultimate objective for inflation, then I’m going to be opposed to saying that inflation is elevated, and that would be an issue.<END>
If the Committee does build a consensus that we should be at a lower number than 2 percent, then I would be comfortable with it.
The reason I think this is important is that we’ll be forced into a discussion about this.
May 9, 2007100 of 130The problem that will then arise is that, if we have a consensus inside it will not be transparent not to reveal that to the outside.
So the issue is that, whether or not we want to, we are going to be forced into a discussion about how we talk about our objectives on inflation, and we have to think very hard about it.
We may not be there now, but I actually hope we are because I want inflation to come down.
<START>It’s going to be on the table, and it’s going to be complicated because we’ve had trouble building a consensus in the Committee about this issue.<END>
But we need to be aware of the difficulties we will face.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
<START>Vice Chairman.<END>
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
I think we’re in a fairly good place in terms of the policy and the signal.
<START>The language in March and in alternative B today preserves a nice balance between the need to signal concern that we may not get as much moderation in inflation as we’d like and acknowledgement of some of the dispersion of views around the Committee on what our ultimate objective should be, what our preferences are, and over what period we’d like to see inflation come down to whatever level.<END>
It also gives us more flexibility.
I would not want to jeopardize that balance today.
I don’t see any compelling need to alter market expectations today, and as I said, I am quite comfortable with alternative B. Just on the latter, deeper conversation about where we’re going in June
—things will change between now and June.
June will be interesting, I suspect, even if it unfolds in the way the forecast implies.
<START>But ultimately our judgment is about whether we have an acceptable forecast for inflation.<END>
It’s whether the path going forward is acceptable to us in some sense, and that’s what our discussion should be about.
Of course, you can’t separate that from where inflation is today because that’s where you’re starting.
<START>But as Rick and many others have consistently reminded us, the language is about the forward-looking effects of policy today, or as May 9, 2007101 of 130they are built into market expectations, or as we assume today for the expected path of inflation going forward.<END>
<START>But I like B and would be averse to changing it.<END>
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you, and thank you for all the comments.
On the action, I think we’re clear that we want to stay where we are.
<START>I just want to make the observation that for almost a year now we have taken a very steady approach, not only in keeping policy at a given level but in terms of our rhetoric and in terms of our confidence in moderate growth and a slow moderation of inflation.<END>
<START>During the period, the markets and the general view have gone up and gone down, and we have maintained a pretty even keel.<END>
That increases confidence in the institution, and unless we have a reason to change our view, we should continue to stay on a steady path.
On the statement, let me start with section 4, which I recommend we not change.
The response last time was a little noisier than I expected, although I did expect some response.
We tried to do a number of things at once.
We wanted to retain a balance of risks that emphasized inflation risks, but we also wanted to get away from forward-directing language.
We wanted to get away from what I think was an inaccurate suggestion that the next move was certainly going to be up.
In some circumstances, for example, we can effectively tighten by simply staying where we are.
We also wanted to convey that, given the uncertainty we were experiencing, some more flexibility was needed.
So it was a very complicated change to make.
I’m not sure what else we could have done.
In any case, I think we have the market in sync with our views, and therefore I would be very reluctant to go through that again to change the assessment of risk.
So I’m going to demonstrate a very conservative perspective today, which probably won’t surprise you.
May 9, 2007102 of 130On the rationale, I think I’m okay with the second section as it stands.
If you’d note the parallel to March, the first sentence essentially indicated that we recognized what was going on in the economy;
nevertheless, we expected, based on longer-term considerations and on our thinking about the broad sweep of developments in the economy, moderate growth going forward.
This does the same thing.
We acknowledge what’s going on.
We saw slower growth.
We see the housing sector.
We’re not blind to current economic developments.
Nevertheless, we have good fundamental reasons to think that growth will be moderate.
I wouldn’t necessarily reject my own suggestion to put in something about recent indicators, but putting that in does create a transitory kind of sense that we’re looking only at the last few numbers.
I think it’s good to project the sense that we have a long view and that we are comfortable with our long view and are staying with it.
I’ve been trying to decide what to do about “on balance.” A couple of thoughts.
My inclination after I listened to the conversation
—and I would be happy to take a poll or whatever
—is to strike it on the following grounds:
<START>We are moving from a statement that said “recent readings on core inflation” to one that says simply “core inflation.” The implication there seems to me to be that we’re not referring now to the last couple of months but really to a broader measure of core inflation.<END>
So, again, in a conservative spirit, to avoid adding more language, I have a mild preference for dropping the phrase, but I’m open to comment on that.
With respect to the ongoing discussion about the implications of our language for an inflation target, we are going to have to address that.
In a moment I will ask Governor Kohn to talk a bit about communications.
We will have a chance in our next meeting to talk about the statement.
<START>I hope that in talking about the statement we can address issues such as how much detail we should include, how often we should change, and how we should express the balance May 9, 2007103 of 130of risks.<END>
Obviously, we won’t be able to nail all of this down, but we will have some opportunity to try to come to a broader view about what the statement’s role would be in our larger communication strategy.
That’s another reason to be slightly conservative at this point.
<START>But thinking ahead, President Stern’s suggestion about the sentence “Inflation pressures seem likely to moderate over time, but considerable uncertainty surrounds that judgment” might be a place to go at some point.<END>
<START>We might want to change the derivative, and instead of talking about the level, we could say that we are still expecting improvement, but that there is a lot of uncertainty about it.<END>
That sort of shifts it from level to direction.
That might be a solution, if we come to a point at which we are at 2 percent or just below 2 percent.
But I just raise that as a possibility.
So in summary, my recommendation is no action and alternative B as written, striking the phrase “on balance.” Are there any comments in particular on the phrase “on balance”?
President Lacker?
MR.
LACKER.
I’m against it.
MS.
MINEHAN.
Against eliminating it?
MR.
LACKER.
No. Against “on balance.” MS. MINEHAN.
Well, that’s your proposal, right?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Yes, my proposal.
MS.
MINEHAN.
We are fine with your proposal.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
We’ve given up on English and have now gone to sign language.
[Laughter] MR. KROSZNER.
How will that be represented in the transcript?
[Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Let’s have a vote.
May 9, 2007104 of 130MS. DANKER.
I’ll be reading the directive and the risk assessment from page 23 of the Bluebook.
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.
<START>To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with maintaining the federal funds rate at an average of around 5¼ percent.” The risk assessment:<END>
“In these circumstances, the Committee’s predominant policy concern remains the risk that inflation will fail to moderate as expected.
<START>Future policy adjustments will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth, as implied by incoming information.” Chairman Bernanke Yes Vice Chairman Geithner Yes President Hoenig Yes Governor Kohn Yes Governor Kroszner Yes President Minehan Yes Governor Mishkin Yes President Moskow Yes President Poole Yes Governor Warsh Yes CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.<END>
Thank you.
Let’s just take a moment to update the communications situation and hear, very briefly, any comments on the dry run.
But let me turn it over to Governor Kohn for some comments.
MR.
KOHN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have just a few points, building on what you said a few minutes ago.
Just to clarify on the federal funds rate path:
There was a consensus on the Committee not to publish the fed funds rate path, so we are collecting that just to understand what people’s policy assumptions are and how they fit into the forecast.
There was a question of whether we should assume appropriate policy or, as the Chairman had suggested, whether we should assume what you think the Committee would do rather than what it should do.
I think we May 9, 2007105 of 130just need to think about what happened.
We’ll have another dry run in June.
I think I would collect those assumptions again in June.
But when we go live, once we decide how to focus this policy, we might or might not collect the fed funds rate assumptions.
The problem with going live and collecting the assumptions is that in five years they will be part of the public record.
But as long as we’re doing dry runs, that’s not the presumption.
We’ll find out something about how the Committee thinks, and the Committee can discuss how it wants to characterize its assumptions.
We can discuss our experience with this dry run now.
<START>However, within the next couple of days we will ask the staff to survey the Committee about your reactions to how this went, how it could be improved, what aspects were most and least helpful, whether there are ways to use this even more than we did in our policy discussion, and if there are things<END>
—now that you’ve been through it once
—that you’d like to see from the staff that you didn’t get.
What about the issue of circulating our individual submissions?
Should the staff extract key issues from those submissions and circulate a list of key issues ahead of time?
There are lots of things on which we need to get your views before we formulate the June dry run.
So you will have an opportunity to make those comments in a formal way.
As the Chairman said, in June we will go on to some of the other communication aspects that we haven’t discussed before, such as the timing of the minutes, which will interact with this minutes-like description that we’re doing of the projections, and when the description needs to be published in time for the Chairman’s testimony in July and February.
There’s a possibility of moving that up.
Then how will all of this interact with the statement, with the announcement?
If we go ahead with this forecast process, we’ll need to make sure that the statement conforms to it.
<START>Regarding the statement, there are lots of questions, as the Chairman was saying, about the May 9, 2007106 of 130balance of risks and how we characterize things.<END>
So I think we need to have a discussion of that in June, and it will be on the table in June.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Are there questions for Don or any comments?
President Plosser.
MR.
PLOSSER.
I understand the concern about the fed funds rate assumption, how we interpret that, and what we ought to do.
I have two suggestions.
One, I still believe that it ought to be part of the practice.
I’ve expressed that view before.
Two, at least for internal purposes, for this next dry run it would be helpful to get that information on funds rate assumptions back in the write-up so that, as we think about how this works, we will have those data to look at and to discuss at least in the context of what it looks like and how it might shape what we’re doing.
I know that Vince gave us some indication of what people actually used when they submitted it.
I’d just make a suggestion that in the next go-round the information be included for internal purposes just to see how it shapes our discussion.
MR.
KOHN.
Why don’t we include that in the survey and see whether people want to do it or not?
MR.
PLOSSER.
Fine.
MR.
KOHN.
President Lacker.
MR.
LACKER.
I’d second being a little more transparent within the Committee about the fed funds rate.
Compared with other elements of the sausage factory that get revealed in the transcript five years from now, I don’t see why that should be so sensitive.
More broadly, though, looking at these charts, I was really struck by the dispersion of inflation forecasts for 2009.
I would think we would be quite uncomfortable releasing that.
The natural interpretation of one’s forecast for inflation at that horizon is going to be what one’s objective for inflation is, May 9, 2007107 of 130and this portrays a Committee that has not come to agreement on its objective for the central thing that it’s responsible for controlling.
Given that, I think that we want to come to closure on this issue before we go live.
Indeed, we’re doing a dry run without having gone through that.
I think the dry run after we go through that is arguably going to be different, and to my mind this argues for coming to closure sooner rather than later.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Governor Mishkin.
MR.
MISHKIN.
I just want to mention
—I don’t know if this is true of other people
—that I had two big problems when I was doing this dry run.
So though it will come out in the survey, I have a feeling that other people might have views on this.
<START>One problem was that I really had difficulty thinking about the confidence interval because I didn’t feel that I had enough background from the staff about how to think about it.<END>
It’s not your fault because we didn’t ask you to do it.
But here is my problem.
I knew what the Greenbook errors were in terms of the confidence interval.
I knew what the FRB/US confidence intervals were, and then there was an issue about how to think about them.
I think there are things we can say about that.
For example, in the context of the FRB/US, we don’t assume any model uncertainty.
So the issue is that you think some more uncertainty might exist for the FRB/US errors, but then, there are problems with the Greenbook forecast errors, which display greater uncertainty than the FRB/US errors.
So if we had a memo to really think this through, it might provide a lot of background for us to think about how we do this.
We might need to do that before we go into the next dry run, so we can have some discussion about that.
<START>The other problem in figuring out what to write down is the issue of appropriate policy, which is central.<END>
<START>Again, as relates to the issue that we just discussed, I use an appropriate policy of a 2 percent inflation goal because I think that’s one that I’m comfortable with.<END>
It’s also May 9, 2007108 of 130consistent with what I think revealed preference has been on this Committee in terms of the policy actions we’ve taken.
However, I would also be comfortable if the Committee built a consensus of 1½ percent.
Then I would have had a different view in my projections because I would have felt that the policies in that case would be different.
So there is a question mark about how to think about that in the future because it is the gray area that makes this exercise more difficult.
We do need to think about it.
That’s what I struggled with when I sat down and asked, “How am I actually going to do this?” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
<START>Vice Chairman.<END>
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
You know, we’re going to have to talk through a lot of substantive issues on this.
I thought, if we’re going to do it, let’s do it now.
But you’ve all raised some of those questions.
I’m looking at the clock.
My suggestion is this.
I don’t know what we are planning for June
—June is a two-day meeting, right?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Right.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
So I don’t think we can have these conversations before the next round.
Let’s make sure that we give ourselves time in June and beyond so we can start to talk through this
—so that those who didn’t speak today about their initial reactions aren’t left without the opportunity to engage in this because there’s a whole range of things we could address, including the three issues raised so far.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
I take Vice Chairman Geithner’s comments very seriously, but I want to raise just one thing because I would like it to get into the survey.
We were offered one way of reflecting uncertainty regarding forecasts.
There might be other ways
—for example, alternative scenarios, qualitative discussions of risk, or that sort of thing
—that seem to some of us May 9, 2007109 of 130preferable.
<START>If you can phrase a question that would draw out of us other ways in which we might like to characterize the risks around our forecast, I think that would be helpful because I, for one, find the range of distribution of errors kind of difficult.<END>
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Moskow.
MR.
MOSKOW.
Just a logistical question, Don.
On the survey, I thought I heard you say that you were going to send it out in the next couple of days?
MR.
KOHN.
I would like to.
I didn’t look at Vincent when I said that.
[Laughter] I mean, I think we ought to get feedback soon.
MR.
MOSKOW.
The only question I had is about the other iteration we’re going to go through now, commenting on the staff draft over the next two weeks.
I think it would be good for us to go through that experience before you send the survey out.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Good point.
Remind us when you can update your projections?
MR.
REINHART.
Through opening of business tomorrow.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Fine.
So you have, I guess, the rest of the day to update your projections if you like.
[Laughter] Governor Kroszner.
MR.
KROSZNER.
I just want to underscore this point.
It’s not at all clear to me that providing the median of the 70 percent confidence bands is going to be useful to the markets.
I think that we have to think about what will be useful to the markets.
It is important to convey some sense of the uncertainty
—and I very much look forward to the memo that Rick asked for.
But academics never think in terms of 70 percent confidence intervals;
they think about 90 or 95 percent confidence intervals.
I’m not sure who besides readers of the Bluebook and the Greenbook think in 70 percent confidence intervals.
<START>So thinking about alternative ways to May 9, 2007110 of 130convey something useful to the markets about our sense of uncertainty, without giving a false sense of precision of 3.0 in 2008 and 3.4 in 2009, may be a better and more sensible way to go.<END>
I think we look odd putting something like this out, and I’m not sure it would actually be helpful.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
I just want to say that this exercise is already a success in terms of the kinds of questions it’s making us confront.
So I appreciate that everyone is taking this very seriously.
We had very good, detailed responses from everyone.
Let me just close the meeting with a few quick announcements.
First, the next meeting is two days
—June 27 and June 28.
You will receive additional information about the nonpolicy part of the discussion.
Second, as usual, on the night of June 27, we’ll have a dinner at the British Embassy.
A number of us have been concerned about the late night, and so I had a discussion with the ambassador, and we’ve agreed that there will be no program or speaker.
The evening will be strictly social, and therefore maybe we’ll get out a little earlier and have more time to study the Greenbook.
[Laughter] Third, we circulated a set of proposed dates for next year’s meetings.
If you haven’t responded to Vince or Debbie, please do so.
There is lunch available in the Anteroom, and the meeting is adjourned.
Thank you.
END OF MEETING May 9, 2007111 of 130
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 140
