Passage number 1.
 Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on October 28-29, 2008 October 28, 2008—Afternoon Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good afternoon, everybody.  We received requests from members for more time at this meeting to discuss the economic situation and our policy response.  So as you know, we postponed the special presentations on inflation—my apologies to the presenters.  We will come back to that at the appropriate time. What we are going to do instead is to have three rounds of briefings today and tomorrow.  We are going to start in the first round with Bill Dudley and his usual presentation on open market operations, followed by Nathan Sheets on the swaps proposals that you have been informed about, and then Bill Bassett will give a supplementary briefing on financial markets to complete that round.  Then we’ll have Q&A at that point.  We will then turn to the economic situation and hear from Norm Morin on the nonfinancial economy and Linda Kole on the international economy and from Brian Madigan on our projections.  Then we will have another round of questions.  Tomorrow at lunch, after the close of the formal meeting, we will have some additional briefings on the TARP (troubled asset relief program), on the FDIC program, and on the supervisory and regulatory implications of that.  So we hope to make this a very informative two days, and we hope to have plenty of interaction and conversation about our broad policy response to these very difficult times.  So let me start, then, by turning to Bill Dudley.  Bill.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply outlining the schedule for the meeting and the topics that will be discussed.


Passage number 2.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, Bill.  Nathan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply shows gratitude or thanks being expressed.


Passage number 3.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  I’m going to open up in a minute to questions for Bill, Nathan, and Bill.  I want to say just three brief things about the emerging market swaps.  First, we have been talking with these countries for some time, and I think when the conversations began it was more of a preventive measure than a response to conditions.  But the EMEs are now at a flashpoint in the financial crisis, and as I think Linda Kole will probably discuss, the urgency has increased, and the risks to the broader global economy are probably higher than they were a few weeks ago.  Second, with respect to the choice of four countries that Nathan proposed—as he mentioned, we have talked to the Treasury and the State Department.  I spoke to Secretaries Paulson and Rice about this.  There was an interesting confluence of agreement that, if you are going to do this, these are the right four countries and we probably shouldn’t do more, both from an economic perspective and a diplomatic perspective in the sense that these are the countries that among the emerging markets are the most important from a financial and economic point of view.  Third, as I think Nathan also mentioned, the IMF is planning to create a liquidity facility, which will be a low-conditionality facility available to a broad range of countries.  So there has been some discussion back and forth about the relationship between this, if we do it, and the IMF facility.  I had a conversation this morning with Dominique Strauss-Kahn, the head of the IMF, and we agreed that the two facilities are complementary—that ours would provide important additional resources to the total availability of liquid resources for these countries.  If we decide to take this step, we have agreed that tomorrow, after the IMF board approves their facility, we would jointly announce these two actions so that it would create an impression of cooperation and coordination between the Federal Reserve and the IMF. So those are just a few additional pieces of information.  I’m sure that you have plenty of questions.  Who is first.  No one.  Ah, President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 4.
  MR. FISHER.  Just to follow up on your note, Mr. Chairman, I spent four years as the senior trade negotiator with all four of these countries, and I’d just like to comment on their importance to us.  Mexico is obvious.  It’s a national security risk.  We’re interlinked economically.  They have a sophisticated central bank and a very good central bank governor, and I think that would be number one on the list.  Singapore is unique.  I doubt that Singapore would ever go to the IMF.  It would be beneath Lee Kuan Yew’s dignity.  It is a vital link in terms of that sphere of the world.  You made the case earlier, or at least Nathan made a case, as to the uniqueness of Singapore.  In terms of Brazil, I’d say that is the dodgiest of the lot.  However, we should remember that 40 percent of the GDP of Latin America south of the Yucatan is produced by that one country and roughly 60 percent of the population is represented by that one country.  It has made significant progress since Cardoso was president, and it is a robust economy relatively speaking.  Every economy in Latin America borders upon it.  It does have a unique negotiating history—and Tim knows this as well as I do, having spent a lot of time negotiating with them—but I would say that it is a critical part of our hemisphere and that is the justification for including them in the package.  Finally, we have been trying to negotiate a free trade agreement with Korea for some time.  Korea is an underrepresented country in terms of discussions about developments in that part of the globe, and yet it is inordinately successful.  I would argue that it is also a strong case to make.  The only other country that I would include under the rubric that we might ever consider is Chile.  Even though it is tiny, its representation is important and its nature unique.  I think you could justify doing this by virtue of their immediate impact on our economy, their unique role in our hemisphere, and the fact that I doubt that they would want to go to the IMF in the first place.  Therefore, it is complementary to the package you announced earlier.  My only discomfort in the discussion would be the idea of allocating to the Foreign Currency Subcommittee the authority to approve additional countries.  As to the supplement for these four countries that has been proposed, I would be in favor of that.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their opinion and thoughts on the importance of Mexico, Singapore, Brazil, Korea, and Chile and expressing support for including them in a package. There is no indication of any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 5.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude.


Passage number 6.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I thought there was some pretty good risk management described in the memo, but I didn’t really follow or don’t understand exactly the process by which we would generate a loss through these swap lines.  Could you take us through the state of the world in which we would actually generate a loss.  I raised this question before with the industrialized countries, and the answer was that because those are very high quality countries, we don’t really have to worry about that.  I understand that they follow pretty reasonable economic policies during normal times.  But what are the safeguards, and what would be the process by which we would generate a loss.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is seeking clarification and understanding through their questions, but there is no disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 7.
 MR. SHEETS.  I very much agree with the thrust of the question—it would take a very severe state of nature for us to sustain losses on these.  We are protected by the full faith and credit of our central bank counterparty.  In addition to that, when we give them dollars, we take their domestic currency.  So I suppose, in some very extreme state of the world, one could imagine that the loan that was made in dollars defaulted on the central banks, the central bank chose not to make us whole, and the currency that was escrowed for us had depreciated significantly in value.  But I’d say that you are multiplying three very small possibilities, particularly the last two, that the central bank would choose to default on us, and there would have to be such a substantial fall in their currency that it would reduce the value of that effective assurance or collateral or whatever you want to call it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Sheets, is providing a response and explanation in support of the question being asked.


Passage number 8.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay.  But it would be that we have their currency and presumably that would be a state in which it had depreciated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 9.
 MR. SHEETS.  Absolutely.  These would function very similarly to the swap lines that we have with the advanced economies.  In addition, we are going to allow them to draw only $5 billion at a time at the discretion of the Foreign Currency Subcommittee.  When the Foreign Currency Subcommittee makes the determination as to whether or not a drawing should occur, it has the scope and the mandate to look broadly at what is happening in the economy and make sure that the resources are going to be used in a manner that is consistent with the terms and the expectations of the swap agreement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply describes the functioning and terms of the swap agreements.


Passage number 10.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the statement "Vice Chairman" alone.


Passage number 11.
  VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.  A clarifying question, Mr. Chairman.  Nathan, on page 4 of the memo, at the last bullet, you say, “FRBNY would have broad ‘set-off rights.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a clarifying question and does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 12.
’” MR. SHEETS.  Yes, indeed.  Maybe Trish and Bill want to jump in here as well.  What this means is that, in extinguishing any obligation that arises from the swap agreement, if the central bank for some reason doesn’t pay us, we can take other assets on the books that are being held by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to extinguish those liabilities.  Does that make sense.  So if the Brazilians are holding some additional assets at the New York Fed that are unrelated to the swap and they are not making good on the swap, we can draw on those other assets to extinguish the obligations from the swap.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining how the central bank can use other assets held by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to cover any obligations that arise from a swap agreement.


Passage number 13.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  But there is nothing that prevents them from withdrawing those assets before that, right.  Presumably, if they’re in a situation of default, they would withdraw any Treasury securities held here first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question and statement.


Passage number 14.
 MR. SHEETS.  They could do that.  But any drawing under the swap agreement would be no longer than three months, and some drawings would be much shorter.  So they would have to move very quickly, given the short nature of these transactions.  But there are certain states of nature that are so severe that we couldn’t rule it out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating the limitations and requirements of the swap agreement.


Passage number 15.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The phrase "Vice Chairman" does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states a position or title.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 16.
 VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.  Let me just state my understanding of this so that I can be corrected by Nathan or by Bill.  These countries hold substantial amounts of their reserves in dollars.  They hold a substantial fraction of those dollars in accounts at the New York Fed.  If they defaulted on their piece of the swap and the falling value of their currency left us with some exposure, we would have the ability to take assets from their accounts to cover any loss.  So it’s better than the fact that this is a sovereign credit and it is better than the fact that we have an asset on the other side of the swap, because they hold substantial foreign exchange reserves with us.  The way to think about this is just as a mechanism to help them transform the composition of their dollar reserves in a way that might be more effective in responding to lender-of-last-resort needs in dollars, rather than having to sell Treasuries or agencies into the market in a period of panic or distress to meet that cash need.  I meant it as a confirming question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states their understanding, but indicates that they are open to being corrected by Nathan or Bill. This implies that there may be differing opinions or knowledge on the topic.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 17.
 MR. SHEETS.  I agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, Mr. Sheets states his agreement, indicating that there is agreement rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 18.
 MR. STERN.  But I thought we were concerned about a shortage of Treasury collateral in the market.  So why wouldn’t we want them to sell, and in fact, what are reserves for if they don’t use them in these circumstances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply raises a question about the purpose of reserves and the potential benefits of selling Treasury collateral.


Passage number 19.
   VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.  I have never stood in their shoes, so I’m not sure I fully understand it.  You are right that the world is a little short of the risk-free asset now, and so a greater supply would be terrific in some sense.  But they have a general view, which I think our people share, that to meet the kind of lumpy, unpredictable, potentially large needs for lender-of-last-resort purposes you may face in our currency, you have to manage reserves in a way that you can meet those needs without selling Treasuries or agencies.  It would not be so terrific for the world.  I have never stood on the other side, but that’s my basic sense.  Another way to think about this is that the privilege of being the reserve currency of the world comes with some burdens.  Not that we have an obligation in this sense, but we have an interest in helping these guys mitigate the problems they face in dealing with currency mismatches in their financial systems.  We have an interest in helping them meet that in some sense.  It’s not our obligation.  We have the same basic interest that led us to be responsive to the European need in some cases.  These guys are different in that they actually have managed the countries’ balance sheets better because they at least have a huge amount of their assets in dollars.  That should make us in some ways as comfortable as—maybe more comfortable than—doing it with the Europeans because they ran a banking system that was allowed to get very, very big relative to GDP with huge currency mismatches and with no plans to meet the liquidity needs of their banks in dollars in the event that we face a storm like this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 20.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker, you had a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement simply acknowledges that President Lacker had a two-handed approach or strategy. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 21.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.  President Geithner, you described the EMEs as motivated by a desire to transform their reserves from illiquid Treasuries or from Treasuries to some more fungible and more convenient form of dollars.  That strongly suggests collateralizing their swap line with the Treasuries rather than their own currency.  What would be the disadvantage of doing that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. Mr. Lacker is suggesting that collateralizing the swap line with Treasuries rather than their own currency may have disadvantages.


Passage number 22.
 VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.  I think effectively we have done that by the way in which the thing is structured.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement suggests agreement or confirmation that something has been effectively done.


Passage number 23.
   MR. LACKER.  But the point that President Evans made is that we’re not constraining them to not withdraw the reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that President Evans made a point about not constraining them to not withdraw the reserves.


Passage number 24.
   VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.  Do you mean that you want to put a reserve floor on them, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any evident contention or disagreement. It is a question seeking clarification or confirmation about the notion of putting a reserve floor on something.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 25.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The question is whether, in an unlikely but possible state of the world in which they don’t want to pay us back, they could withdraw their Treasuries in advance of defaulting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The phrase "in an unlikely but possible state of the world" indicates that there is a disagreement or uncertainty about the likelihood of a certain scenario occurring. Additionally, the statement presents opposing views by mentioning the possibility of the country not wanting to pay the debt back and the question of whether they could withdraw their Treasuries in advance.


Passage number 26.
   MR. LACKER.  Or we could lend to them, collateralized by the Treasuries rather than by their own currency.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas. It simply presents an alternative option without any form of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 27.
 VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.  Well, lots of things are possible.  I think this is a pretty good conservative balance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that many things are possible and expresses their opinion that the mentioned conservative balance is good.


Passage number 28.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That would basically be a repo agreement, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting that the described agreement could be similar to a repo agreement.


Passage number 29.
 MR. SHEETS.  For what it’s worth, the ECB has entered into something similar to that with the Hungarians, in which the Hungarians are able to repo to them long-term euro-denominated stuff and get euros back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply provides information about a description of a situation involving the ECB and the Hungarians.


Passage number 30.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions the name "Governor Kohn" but does not provide any information or context to suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 31.
   MR. KOHN.  Thanks.  I think I’d be a little concerned about stigmatizing the swaps by saying that we have enough doubts about these other countries that we need to take collateral—we don’t have confidence that their central banks will meet the obligations that they have taken on.  So my preference would be to stick with the extension of our current swap agreements to these countries.  I think they all are using their reserves to some extent already, so this is not a case of them not touching their reserves and instead taking the swaps.  They say they don’t intend to use them, but they could very well use them.  They’re already using them. The other market that the Treasury has expressed some concern about is the agency market.  If they were just meeting a huge demand for Treasuries by selling Treasuries, that might be one thing—although intermediate- and longer-term Treasury yields themselves have moved up presumably because of supply pressures there.  But the agency spreads have widened quite a bit, and I think forcing them to sell agencies in a kind of lumpy way would feed back on our mortgage markets.  It would not be in our interest.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own preferences and concerns, but there is no direct disagreement or conflict with anyone else.


Passage number 32.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher, a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that President Fisher is a two-hander, which does not imply any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 33.
 MR. FISHER.  Just responding to President Lacker.  I think it would be an insult to these four parties, particularly given the fact that we appear to have negotiated, again, the ability to attach other assets.  I am, frankly, surprised that Singaporeans would go along with that.  If we got that, I’d use it and pocket it.  But I would argue, especially for the case of Mexico, that I don’t see any reason that we should differentiate between them and Canada, for example.  It would stigmatize them in a way, and it would be an insult to these people.  At the same time, as I think I understand the explanation from Vice Chairman Geithner and from Nathan, we do have some ramped-up security here—so it’s a special arrangement.  I think going further than that would not be appropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 34.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let me say just a couple of quick things.  One is that this would require renegotiating the whole thing from the beginning, and we would like, if possible, to do this tomorrow with the IMF.  The second point I would make is that we do have considerable security, and we will be dispensing this—under strict conditions—in limited tranches.  I think we could monitor pretty well what was going on.  But the point is well taken.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 35.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I have just a clarification.  This is a question.  Don’t we already have a swap line, a standing facility, with Mexico as a part of NAFTA.  So we don’t have to add it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 36.
 MR. SHEETS.  We do have a swap line with Mexico.  It’s a standing swap line.  It’s $3 billion under the North American Framework Agreement.  It’s the counterpart to NAFTA.  Under that agreement, we also have a $2 billion swap line with Canada.  Here we would be adding a new temporary liquidity swap line, so it would be a new legal construct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating the facts about the swap lines and agreements between the countries.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 37.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I guess my question is why we can’t use the swap line that is already in existence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Plosser, suggests using an existing swap line, implying that it should be used. However, the question itself implies that there might be reasons or obstacles preventing its use.


Passage number 38.
 MR. SHEETS.  In principle, if you were so inclined, you could probably just raise the size of the existing swap line to $30 billion.  However, we built in a variety of mechanisms and safeguards in this proposal.  In addition, the structure of what we’re putting forward is tailored particularly to meet the kinds of challenges and liquidity pressures that exist right now.  So in some sense this one is structured to meet the challenges that the Mexicans are most likely to face in the current episode rather than the more generic one that already exists on the books.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is merely explaining the proposed structure and reasoning behind a potential swap line increase for Mexico.


Passage number 39.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let me go to President Rosengren, who has been waiting patiently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that President Rosengren has been waiting patiently.


Passage number 40.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  I have two unrelated questions.  One follows up on this, but the other one is on the term auction facility.  First, given how much we have expanded the term auction facility, is there any consideration to having a minimum stop-out rate, given that the last two have had fairly low stop-out rates.  I wonder if that was being considered at all, given how much we expanded the size.  Then the second question gets to the stigma issue related to the swap lines.  There was quite a lot of discussion about how to differentiate the countries.  I had the same thought that President Lacker had—if we could have set-off rights that enable them to collateralize the swaps.  I do think going to the IMF will attach a fair amount of stigma to the organization.  So I am worried that the spillover benefits to other countries will be negative, not positive, because of that stigma.  One option would be to say that either you could go to the IMF or we would provide collateralized loans for other than these four, since it sounds as though these four are a done deal.  But rather than trying to draw the line and figure out whether Chile or some other country is appropriate, we could collateralize it.  If they held enough Treasury securities at the New York Fed, then it would seem that we would have no reason not to do it.  If they didn’t have Treasury securities, which would probably partly reflect some of their own mismanagement in their countries, then they wouldn’t be able to use the facility and would have to use the IMF.  But it would seem to be a way to get around some of the stigma issues, if someone chose to come to us and fully collateralize it.  That might be an alternative way to draw the line rather than trying to come up with criteria that seemed a little difficult to understand, as I went through the memo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 41.
 MR. DUDLEY.  Under the term auction facility, there is a minimum bid rate, the OIS rate.  So when we have a $150 billion auction and let’s say there are propositions of $120 billion, the winning bid rate is the OIS rate for everybody.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply explains how the winning bid rate is determined in a specific auction scenario.


Passage number 42.
  MR. ROSENGREN.  But I’m just wondering, as the OIS rate has come down, when you think of the band that we have for excess reserves, it does seem that the OIS provides a much bigger band, for example, than what we have even for excess reserves.  I wonder whether, during periods in which people are considering a reduction of as much as 50 or more basis points, the OIS ends up being a very low lower bound.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is merely expressing wonder and seeking clarification about the relationship between the OIS rate and excess reserves.


Passage number 43.
 MR. DUDLEY.  Yes, right now it is a very low rate because the market is building in future rate cuts.  So I think the OIS rate is now below 1 percent on a three-month basis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker is simply stating a fact about the current interest rate in the market. There is no indication of disagreement or contention in this statement.


Passage number 44.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  But as we narrow the target for excess reserves and have a narrow band there, you wonder whether the stop-out rate, having a lower band that is a little higher than the OIS, might be an alternative way to think about it, now that we have the excess reserves option as to the lower bound.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a question and suggests an alternative way of thinking about the topic.


Passage number 45.
 MR. DUDLEY.  I think that is something worth considering.  The emphasis right now has been getting term funding out in as much size as possible and not worrying so much about whether the cost of the funds is or is not at a penalty.  So I think the emphasis of the program did shift a bit over the past six weeks.  Obviously, if things settle down and the demand at the TAF auctions subsides, then you can have the option of cutting the size of the auctions or increasing the minimum bid rate or some combination of the two.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is providing their perspective on the emphasis of a program and discussing possible options for adjusting it in the future.


Passage number 46.
 VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.  Mr. Chairman, may I make an amendment to Eric’s question or suggestion.  I think that, when we have a chance to breathe and we feel as though we have achieved some durable stability in the panic, then we will want to reassess not just the basic complement of our facilities and how we think about the future but the relative economics of what we’ve done with the dollar swaps and our existing open-end auction facilities for institutions.  Ideally, we want a situation in which it is more attractive for them to borrow from their foreign central banks—the dollars we provided through the swaps—than to come to us in our auctions and other areas through their U.S. affiliates. I am a bit less troubled by the point you made than I am by the fact that we have set up a regime in which the incentives for them to come to our facilities are still substantial when they have now the ability they didn’t have before to go to their foreign central banks for dollars in large scale.  As we think about consolidation and not just exit—about how we prepare the ground for a shift over time—I think we want to come back to looking at the relative economics between our dollar facilities for U.S. banks and U.S. affiliates of foreign banks and what is open to them from their home country central banks now.  As part of that, we could think about size, reserve price, and price in our auction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's thoughts and suggestions.


Passage number 47.
 MR. DUDLEY.  The awkward thing right now is that we are trying to add liquidity as powerfully as we can.  So to raise the minimum bid rate or do anything that somehow suggests a pulling back would be a bit inconsistent with the LIBOR–OIS spread widening that we have seen and the fact that it still remains very, very elevated.  You might want to do exactly what you suggested, President Rosengren, at some future date, but I think that doing it now would send a very mixed message to the market.  I think people would be confused about what we are doing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Dudley, is explaining that raising the minimum bid rate or pulling back on liquidity would be inconsistent with the current market conditions. He agrees with the suggestion made by President Rosengren but believes that implementing it now would send a mixed message to the market.


Passage number 48.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Hoenig.  I’m sorry, Nathan had an answer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response simply mentions that President Hoenig has an answer.


Passage number 49.
 MR. SHEETS.  Could I just respond to President Rosengren’s second question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about Mr. Sheets' response to President Rosengren's second question, so there is no contention or disagreement apparent.


Passage number 50.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Go ahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I can't provide the analysis you're looking for.


Passage number 51.
 MR. SHEETS.  I think you put your finger on two very difficult judgments that we made when structuring this facility.  I don’t see the risk of creating stigma for emerging market economies that are not in our swap network as being a first-order concern.  It is broadly recognized that the folks that we are recommending are larger, more systemically important, and as well managed as anybody else.  If you were sitting down to make a list—and the Fund has recently done this—the economies that we’re recommending would be at the top of the list, and I think that is recognized by essentially all observers.  So I see what we’re doing here as really ratifying perceptions rather than creating new ones.   On the second point, the choice between the swaps versus the repos, that one is particularly tricky.  I very much agree that the repos would give us a little more security.  On the other hand, the swap framework gives the emerging market economies a little more flexibility.  As to how they are going to proceed, as President Fisher mentioned, it also creates symmetry between the industrial countries and the way we’re treating them and the emerging markets and the way we’re treating them.  Given the successes of many of these economies over the past ten years, I see this as being an appropriate step.  Nevertheless, I admit that the choice between the swaps and the repos is a difficult one.  Another thought is that the repo structure might provide a bit more security, but we have tried to get that security through other ways—through tranching, careful reviews, and so on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing different factors and considerations in structuring a facility, presenting their own perspective and acknowledging the complexities of the choices.


Passage number 52.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Hoenig, I’m sorry.  Go ahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply apologizes and allows President Hoenig to continue speaking.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 53.
 MR. HOENIG.  No, no.  In fact, it follows right on with what Nathan was just answering.  That is, for the moment we are creating kind of a broader in-list for these four countries and stigma with the non-accepted group at this point.  What will happen, then, if we do have an issue that involves—pick a country—Chile.  Are we going to send them to the IMF.  Are we going to have our subcommittee make a decision as to whether to give them a swap.  If we do that, will that then create uncertainties about others.  Are you really not concerned about the stigma and the implications of this, especially—I guess they are asking this in anticipation of the possibility, even though they think it’s fairly remote—would we not be increasing the probabilities of a problem by doing this now.  I know these are tough questions; but in this environment, I am anticipating a bad event.  So what do we do in the case of that bad event.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker is expressing concern about the potential consequences of creating a broader in-list for the four countries and the stigma associated with being in the non-accepted group. They raise questions about what would happen if there was an issue involving a specific country like Chile and how decisions would be made regarding sending them to the IMF or giving them a swap. They express concern about the potential uncertainties and implications of these actions, even though they acknowledge that the possibility of a problem is remote.


Passage number 54.
 MR. SHEETS.  I would hope that initiating these swaps would reduce the probability of bad outcomes in the emerging market economies.  Certainly, if Brazil, Mexico, and Korea are up against the ropes and experiencing significant financial stresses, my sense is that it would be an environment in which many other EMEs would be experiencing negative spillovers.  So to the extent that we can backstop these major linchpins in the emerging market world, I see that as having very positive effects for others.  That would be one point.  Second, the decision as to how to handle Chile, if Chile comes to us for a swap line, I think is very much a policy decision for the Committee to determine.  As I said in the remarks, we as staff members would very much appreciate some sort of signal from you as to whether you want to say four and that’s all we’re willing to do, and everyone else—Chile, India, and South Africa—goes to the Fund.  Or is the Committee open to having potentially a few other large, important emerging market economies have swap lines with the Federal Reserve.  I see that as being a policy decision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is the speaker's opinion and perspective on the potential positive effects of initiating swap lines in emerging market economies. The speaker also mentions that the decision on how to handle Chile's request for a swap line is a policy decision for the Committee to determine, but there is no disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 55.
 MR. HOENIG.  But it’s something that we ought to think about sooner rather than later because the likelihood is that, if you take care of these four and you get another request, you are going to get three others and not one other.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a logical outcome or likelihood based on the given information.


Passage number 56.
  MR. SHEETS.  Wherever you draw the line, there is going to be somebody who is just a bit away from the line that says, “I am very similar to those folks.”  I am reasonably comfortable with where we draw the line.  Here there is as much gap as you’re going to find.  In my mind, the next one for which you could make a case would be India.  However, India’s financial system isn’t as developed as is the case with these folks.  They are not as integrated into the global financial system as is the case with these, so there is a bit of space there.  But these are admittedly hard judgments, which we tried to flesh out regarding some of these issues in our memo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and explaining their reasoning.


Passage number 57.
 MR. FISHER.  Have we been approached by any other countries.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a question without any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 58.
 MR. SHEETS.  Yes, indeed, we have.  We have been approached by   U.S.C. (b)(4), and we have had very informal inquiries from a couple of other countries, including 552 U.S.C. (b)(4).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement.


Passage number 59.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But we have not encouraged that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply states that there has been no encouragement towards a certain activity or behavior.


Passage number 60.
 MR. SHEETS.  We have done everything we possibly can to discourage it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply refers to actions taken to discourage something without expressing any contradictory opinions or opposition.


Passage number 61.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Just to be clear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The phrase "Just to be clear" is not indicative of contention or disagreement. It is often used to make sure there is no confusion or misunderstanding in a statement or explanation.


Passage number 62.
 MR. SHEETS.  That’s right.  We’re not advertising.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage states a fact without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 63.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no mention of President Lockhart in the passage, therefore there is no contention or disagreement present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 64.
  MR. LOCKHART.  Another question for Nathan on swap lines is how this works exactly.  If the pattern holds and Mexico, for example, supports its banking system—in the case of Mexico it is a little different from others, in that all of the large banks are foreign-owned (Citibank owns Banamex, and the Spanish banks own the other two or three large banks)—where does our responsibility stop and theirs begin.  Is it possible for the subsidiary of a U.S. bank or a Spanish bank to draw dollar liquidity in Mexico and with fungible dollars move that around the world.  Or does it in one manner or another stay in Mexico.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is questioning how swap lines work and where the responsibility lies between countries like Mexico and foreign-owned banks. The speaker is unsure if the dollars obtained by subsidiary banks can be moved around the world or if they must stay in Mexico. This suggests a level of disagreement or uncertainty about the specifics of the swap lines and their limitations.


Passage number 65.
 MR. SHEETS.  A couple of thoughts.  Certainly these home-versus-host issues bedevil many, many discussions of banking issues right now.  They are true in Mexico, as you suggested, and they are true in spades in Central and Eastern Europe, where instead of U.S. banks there are European banks in the tension between the home and host.  So these considerations are very relevant and also exceedingly complicated. If the Bank of Mexico or the Mexican authorities move to address tensions in their financial system, the standard that has been set by several Federal Reserve actions, the Brits in the things they have done, and I believe a number of the other countries is to include subsidiaries of foreign firms that are operating in that country.  So, for instance, for the United States, Deutsche Bank’s U.S. subsidiary has had access to our various facilities, and that has been the coin of the realm in the announcements today.  So my feeling is that Banamex, which is owned by Citi, would have the same access to these kinds of facilities as other Mexican institutions.  Now, there is no guarantee of that, but that would be my feeling.  Regarding the question of, once a Mexican institution gets its hands on dollars, what happens to those dollars, my understanding is that they can move around.  In fact, in a discussion, Guillermo Ortiz indicated that to date Mexican institutions were net suppliers of dollars to the United States rather than the other way around.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information and opinions regarding banking issues in Mexico.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 66.
 MR. LOCKHART.  So in the case of a foreign bank—they lend to a foreign bank in their country, in Mexico in this case—defaulting, whose problem is it.  Is it the home country supervisor’s problem, or is it Mexico’s problem vis-à-vis us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents a question that suggests a potential disagreement or differing viewpoints regarding the responsibility for defaulting foreign banks. It introduces two possible options and implies that there might be opposing opinions on whether the problem lies with the home country supervisor or Mexico.


Passage number 67.
 MR. SHEETS.  I would guess that it is a joint problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Sheets is making a guess about a problem, but there is no indication of any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 68.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chair.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply states the position of the "Vice Chair" without any indication of disagreement.


Passage number 69.
 VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.  I’m not sure that this is helpful, but maybe I can give a slightly different example from another perspective.  We have a bunch of U.S. affiliates of some of the weakest European institutions that have faced very substantial dollar funding needs and have come to us and asked for substantial ongoing access to liquidity.  When they have a substantial amount of lendable collateral, collateral with substantial market value relative to the needs, we have been comfortable meeting those needs.  When their needs have substantially exceeded or might potentially exceed the market value of their eligible collateral, then we have talked to the home central bank.  We have said that, in effect, if you want us to be able to meet those needs and they have collateral in your market that is substantial relative to those needs, then the better way for us to do this is for the home country central bank to meet their dollar liquidity needs against the collateral there or meet the liquidity needs and we provide the dollar’s worth of guarantees from the central bank.   So this home–host thing is a delicate balance, and as Nathan said, it shouldn’t all fall on the host central bank.  The best thing possible is for the home country central bank to take most of the responsibility for meeting the liquidity needs and for us to help them facilitate that where necessary.  But when those needs exceed what we would normally give in terms of access, then you have to have a conversation with the foreign central bank.  So, for example, if a weak U.S. institution in Mexico faces substantial needs in Mexico well in excess of their eligible collateral in Mexico, I suspect they would call us and say, “We want you to meet those needs.”  We would have to consider at that point where they are in the liquidity-solvency spectrum and how comfortable we are in meeting those needs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining a process and sharing their perspective.


Passage number 70.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Very good.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Very good. President Lacker" is a positive affirmation or agreement with President Lacker's actions or performance.


Passage number 71.
 MR. LACKER.  I have a question for the staff.  You noted that the countries believed that this would help market confidence.  So the choice of extending a line is potentially consequential here.  I have a two-part question.  First, what do you think the risk is of the uncertainty surrounding whether particular other countries will or will not in the future be able to obtain a swap line from the Federal Reserve.  Second, what would you suggest that we say if asked by the public or if the Chairman is asked in the Congress about what criteria or principles we used to draw the line between the countries that have swap lines and those that don’t.  I know that you posed the question to us, but what would you suggest that we say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a question posed by Mr. Lacker, seeking clarification and suggestions from the staff.


Passage number 72.
 MR. SHEETS.  As outlined in the memo and then also my remarks, the first is that we are looking for economies that are large and systemically important.  The second is that we are looking for economies in which their policies have been strong and it appears that they are largely being influenced by contagion.  The third piece is countries for which we believe that the swap line might actually make a difference.   Now, let me just give you a concrete case of the third criterion because that’s a little more abstract than the first two.  Iceland came to us and requested a swap line of approximately $1 billion to $2 billion, which would have been 5 to 10 percent of Iceland’s GDP—so it was fairly large relative to the size of the country.  But the liabilities of the banking system were on the order of $170 billion, and the underlying problem was really that there was a loss of confidence in its banks.  We came to the conclusion that a $1 billion to $2 billion swap line was very little ammunition to use against a potential loss in confidence in this $170 billion financial system.  For that reason, we as the staff recommended against a swap line for Iceland. Those are the three conditions that we’d emphasize.  Sort of subsidiary to that is that I think it is very appropriate for all the European EMEs to report to the ECB for their liquidity needs.  That would further constrain the list of countries that we’d look at.  As we work down the list of countries, I think it gets easier to say “no” in that fewer and fewer of the countries can make a case that they are large and systemically important.  With the risk of creating stigma, some countries are big, and some aren’t, and that’s pretty darn objective.  Now, you can debate about, well, what’s big and what isn’t and where you draw the line, but it just so happens that these three major economies that we’re putting forward all have GDP of around $1 trillion.  That seems like a reasonable line to draw.  Again, there’s an element of arbitrariness here, but any line you draw will have an element of arbitrariness to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is simply explaining the criteria and rationale for selecting countries for swap lines. There is no debate or conflicting opinions presented.


Passage number 73.
 MR. LACKER.  And the first part of my question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement indicated in the passage as it doesn't mention any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 74.
 MR. SHEETS.  Oh, I thought I got it.  What was the first part.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a personal thought and confusion without any indication of disagreement with another person.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 75.
 MR. LACKER.  What sort of uncertainty might this engender about the likelihood of other countries qualifying.  My recollection is that many economists have claimed that the IMF had this trouble in the 1990s, when interventions would give rise to uncertainty about subsequent interventions in other cases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The economist mentioned is stating that interventions by the IMF in the 1990s led to uncertainty about subsequent interventions in other cases. This suggests disagreement or debate among economists about the consequences and effectiveness of such interventions.


Passage number 76.
 MR. SHEETS.  Well, I guess I’m not sure I know exactly what you’re driving at.  Are you concerned that, by moving on these, we’re sending a negative message about the ones we’re not moving on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Sheets is simply expressing uncertainty and seeking clarification.


Passage number 77.
   MR. LACKER.  I’m just wondering about the uncertainty that might be created about the lack of clarity about who’s in, whether this is the final list, and so on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states a question about the uncertainty and lack of clarity regarding who is in and whether the list is final. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 78.
 MR. SHEETS.  Our press release that we are negotiating lists, as clearly as one can in a press release, the criteria that we were looking at—that they are large, well-managed, fundamentally sound, systemically important countries.  So we are trying to communicate that.  In addition, in conversations when these folks come to us—and especially if we get some direction from the FOMC as to how you’d like to proceed on this issue—we can be very, very blunt with them in telling them why the answer is “no” or “yes,” depending on which way the FOMC goes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the criteria they are looking at for negotiations and how they can communicate their decisions to others.


Passage number 79.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chair, did you have a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 80.
 VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.  Well, I just want to point out that I think these are absolutely the right kinds of questions about this.  But I think these concerns are substantially mitigated by the fact that the IMF is putting in place a facility at basically the same time, which will be there with relatively little stigma for a range of other countries that need it.  There will be a universe of other countries that would not meet the test for eligibility for this swap type of facility, for the IMF or us, that will have to go through a program with conditionality and a bunch of adjustments such as Iceland is going through or Hungary will go through. So it is right to raise these questions.  But the boundary problems around our swap lines are substantially mitigated by the fact that there is a new facility coming out that’s going to the same place.  Raising the question of why we need to do our swaps is good, too, but you’ve heard lots of good arguments for that, and I think that realistically there’s a natural division of labor between what central banks have classically done with each other in the swap context and what the IMF does.  What we’re doing is a natural extension of what central banks do.  The IMF is moving a little further in from where they are in this case, and I think that will mitigate some of the signaling problems and uncertainty created by having this evolution in the scope of swap lines.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It mainly reaffirms the importance of asking questions and acknowledges the existence of a new facility by the IMF that will address some concerns. It also mentions a division of labor between central banks and the IMF in terms of swap lines.


Passage number 81.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. The passage simply states "President Plosser," without providing any additional information or context that could indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 82.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I guess I’m worried about this for all of the considerations that President Hoenig and President Lacker have just been talking about.  I don’t know where we draw the lines, and when we have to go to the State Department and start asking what countries we can or can’t develop swap lines with, I’m not sure those are the criteria we want to be using.  We mentioned the countries already.  What happens when  552 U.S.C. (b)(4).  You can just go down the list.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It primarily expresses concerns and uncertainties about the criteria for choosing swap lines with other countries.


Passage number 83.
 MR. SHEETS.  We have already said “no” to some of those.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that they have already said "no" to certain things without any opposing views being presented.


Passage number 84.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I understand, but if you really follow the logic of the argument about being large and systemically important, if we draw a line somewhere, we start expanding this now bit by bit and we draw a line somewhere, and the question then becomes, Will markets begin to question other countries on the periphery and create problems.  It’s not that any one of them— 552 U.S.C. (b)(4), I don’t know, pick one—is large and systemically important, but by doing what we’re doing and creating the uncertainty that President Lacker was referring to, maybe we are forced to go and do it collectively because they all band together and as a group say, “We’re all facing this problem.  Why can’t we have the same access.”  Partly I like President Rosengren’s suggestion about using repos with securities, which we have here as a mechanism.  Alternatively, if the IMF is creating a largely unconditional or low conditionality type of program, why not just say that everybody else goes to them first.  If they tap out of the IMF access, maybe then we might consider being a backstop rather than their coming to us in the first place.  I just don’t know where this ends.  I think that, with all of the questions you raised and tried to answer, you hit it right on the head.  On all of them that you said were kind of marginal, you went one way, and I’m leaning the other way on the same criteria.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and exploring different options and possibilities, but there is no explicit disagreement with anyone else mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 85.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser, a couple of things.  The IMF has very limited resources.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating a fact about the limited resources of the IMF.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 86.
  They’re not remotely able to meet the needs of— MR. PLOSSER.  We don’t know what the needs are yet, do we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "We don't know what the needs are yet, do we?" indicates a disagreement or contention because it challenges the statement made in the previous sentence. The speaker, Mr. Plosser, suggests that the needs are not known or understood, contrasting the assertion made in the initial statement.


Passage number 87.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, the resources are very limited.  The other thing is that the staff asked for guidance on the limits here.  I’d like to propose that, when we get to that point, to ask the voters to suggest how they stand and what qualifications they might have.  One thing that you could do, for example, would be to say, “I do or do not support this, but if I do, I think a very sharp line should be drawn at this point and be communicated that way.”  The legislative history can be part of this, and we can communicate to the staff how we feel about potential extensions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting their proposal and suggesting ways to gather input and communicate their stance to the staff.


Passage number 88.
 MR. SHEETS.  Just to put some numbers on IMF lending capacity—total IMF lending capacity is about $250 billion.  To get even that high they have to call in some special arrangements that they have with a variety of countries.  The maximum capacity is $250 billion.  So the $120 billion that we’re proposing today would be essentially half of what the IMF could do.  In that sense I really see what we’re proposing as our taking off the IMF’s hands some of the largest potential liquidity needs, which then allows them to focus on a whole range of additional countries.  A related point is that I understand that, in an IMF executive board meeting today, the managing director indicated that they are getting a fair amount of interest in this new facility.  It really is a different kind of facility, and frankly, even a week ago if you told me that the IMF was going to be able to put this facility together in this quick a time, I would have said, “No way.  There’s no way that the IMF can move this quickly.”  So it is about as good as we could expect and maybe even better than what we could have expected from the Fund.  I think that they are doing what they can to minimize stigma.  On the other hand, they don’t have enough lending capacity to really handle these folks that we’re talking about today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is providing information and expressing a positive view of the IMF's actions.


Passage number 89.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply mentions the name "President Bullard" without providing any information or context regarding any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 90.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In the Bluebook here, it says, “Additionally, the Swiss National Bank announced plans to draw on its swap line to help finance up to $60 billion in purchases of assets from a major Swiss bank.”  So is that really what you have in mind here for a country like Brazil—that they’ll draw on their swap line to purchase assets from banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification about whether the concept of drawing on a swap line to purchase assets from banks is applicable to a country like Brazil.


Passage number 91.
 MR. SHEETS.  No, and maybe the folks in New York want to talk a bit more about this.  The transaction with the Swiss National Bank was a very special transaction that occurred outside the typical constraints of the swap lines that we’d be agreeing to with these folks.  In the swap lines with these folks, they would have to tell us up front how they’re going to allocate the resources.  We would envision that it would be done in something similar to an auction, in a very transparent, on-market sort of way.  But it would not be that kind of a transaction, which was a special case in order to help a particular financial institution.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining that the transaction with the Swiss National Bank was different from the typical swap lines with other institutions.


Passage number 92.
 MR. BULLARD.  Well, if you think that there are systemically important institutions in these countries, why not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. Mr. Bullard is simply asking a question for clarification or further discussion with the other person.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 93.
 MR. SHEETS.  Again, we’re drawing lines here.  I am not prepared to give these folks carte blanche.  That’s why we’ve added additional safeguards and additional governance structures to these facilities.  Maybe the Committee has a different view on that, but I wouldn’t be prepared to let them do whatever they wanted with these resources.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Sheets, expresses his opposition to giving the mentioned individuals full control and authority over the resources. He implies that the Committee might have a different perspective on the matter, indicating a disagreement or contention between their views.


Passage number 94.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot provide a response as the passage is incomplete.


Passage number 95.
 MR. LOCKHART.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage about MR. LOCKHART.


Passage number 96.
  To continue to grill you, Nathan— MR. SHEETS.  I’m earning my pay today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 97.
 MR. LOCKHART.  You know, the atmosphere right now is largely precautionary on their part—they are well capitalized with foreign currency reserves.  But if we want to deal with hypotheticals, let’s assume that some of these recipients of the swap lines get into a liquidity crisis.  Is the European Central Bank being approached for swap lines.  I recognize that they need dollar liquidity, but in a general liquidity crisis, the euro would do as well to help.  Do we have any sense of whether the ECB is considering swap lines for some of these emerging markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is presenting a hypothetical scenario and is seeking information about the European Central Bank's approach to swap lines.


Passage number 98.
 MR. SHEETS.  I don’t have details on that.  As I’ve mentioned, I know that they have created a facility with the Hungarians, a €5 billion facility.  They were also approached by Iceland at the same time that we were.  I would speculate, but I don’t have any basis for that speculation, that given the emerging tensions in Central and Eastern Europe and Northern Europe that they probably are being approached, but I don’t have any details on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement as it is merely stating the speaker's lack of details and speculating without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 99.
 MS. MOSSER.  My understanding is that they have been approached.  I don’t know what decisions have been made other than the ones that may have been mentioned.  In addition, they have opened a swap line with the Danish Central Bank in euros, which was virtually identical to the dollar arrangement that we have with the Danish Central Bank.  So they definitely have been approached for swap lines.  On how many of them they’ll put into place, we don’t have any particular information at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their understanding and the information they have regarding swap lines with the Danish Central Bank.


Passage number 100.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 101.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only mentions President Plosser without providing any further context or information to suggest any form of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 102.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I just want to clear up the question.  I think Tim and Nathan may have both answered this, but it’s a question that President Lockhart raised earlier.  In Mexico’s case, for example, where almost all the major banks are foreign owned—EU banks, Spanish banks—those banks clearly have access to dollars through the ECB swap line.  There’s no reason that the dollar funding needs of those banks, to the extent that they can move these things around, can’t be satisfied by access to dollars from the ECB.  Is that a correct or an incorrect assumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a question being asked by Mr. Plosser to clarify a point.


Passage number 103.
 MR. DUDLEY.  The collateral isn’t always in the right place.  You are absolutely right if the collateral could be easily moved; but the collateral oftentimes isn’t in the right place.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The speaker agrees with the statement made by someone else ("You are absolutely right if the collateral could be easily moved"). There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 104.
 MR. FISHER.  Let me ask Nathan a question to follow up, if I may.  Obviously you’ve been approached by the governor of the Central Bank of Mexico—Ortiz has been here to visit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage indicates a statement being made by Mr. Fisher, without any mention of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 105.
 MR. SHEETS.  Indeed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 106.
 MR. FISHER.  So what’s his argument.  I would assume that you asked these questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

There is contention in the passage as indicated by Mr. Fisher's response of "So what's his argument." This suggests that there may be disagreement or doubt about the argument previously mentioned.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 107.
 MR. SHEETS.  Yes, absolutely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The word "absolutely" suggests strong agreement or disagreement, indicating that there is a disagreement or opposition in the conversation.


Passage number 108.
 MR. FISHER.  So inform us as to what his justification is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply asks for information regarding someone's justification, without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 109.
 MR. SHEETS.  Mexico is experiencing increased financial stresses, particularly in its corporate sector, where recently some bad bets on structured finance products have emerged, and Ortiz was very concerned about continued confidence in the Mexican economy.  Now, that said, from what he had to say, dollar funding pressures had not yet emerged, and he was emphatic that they would not draw on these until the time that those funding pressures emerged or until the time that they saw a significant further deterioration in conditions in their economy.  He was very specific about the fact that they would use their own reserves as their first, second, and third lines of defense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and relaying what Ortiz said about the use of reserves.


Passage number 110.
 MR. KOHN.  Just to add to that, he said that, to deal with the issue that Nathan raised about the problem with their businesses and the kind of dollar needs they had, they were meeting those needs out of their own foreign exchange reserves.  So they were not going to engage in a swap with us in order to meet that particular problem, but they were concerned about the dollar pressures more generally on their financial segment, particularly as year-end approaches.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply provides a statement made by Mr. Kohn about the actions taken by the individuals mentioned.


Passage number 111.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  If it’s okay, maybe we could just go ahead with the votes on this.  I’d like first to do the open market operations, which I hope are not too controversial.  There was no discussion of the New Zealand swap line.  I’ll ask to see if there is any comment on that.  Then on this issue, I’ll take a set of positions from the voters, if that’s okay.  So let’s go back to domestic open market operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting a course of action and asking for approval or feedback.


Passage number 112.
 MR. KOHN.  I move that we approve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only states what Mr. Kohn's motion is, but does not provide any information about any disagreement or contention associated with that motion.


Passage number 113.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Without objection.  The New Zealand swap.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "without objection" indicates that there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 114.
 MR. KOHN.  I move we approve that, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Kohn is making a motion to approve something.


Passage number 115.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Is there any discussion or concern.  All right.  Without objection.  Now, turning to the resolution on the EME swaps, in the interest of time I propose—and I hope it is okay—to go through the voters and ask each one to state whether you are in favor or opposed.  You can say what you want and, if you want, whether you have some argument to make or if you’re conditionally in favor—for example, I’m in favor if X or if we do Y—but just to get a sense of where everybody is, and then we’ll decide what to do.  Okay.  So let’s go down the roll here.  I’m in favor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply proposing a method to gather the opinions of the voters on a resolution.


Passage number 116.
 MR. FISHER.  Any conditionality.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any details or context to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It simply states "MR. FISHER. Any conditionality," without any further information.


Passage number 117.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think we should be fairly tough at this point.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no clear contention or disagreement in this statement. The speaker expresses their opinion about being tough, but there is no indication of opposing views or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 118.
 VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.  I’m in favor.  On the basic question of how you would deal with other requests beyond the four, Nathan gave two options.  One is that you delegate to the subcommittee discretion to make those judgments.  The second option was to say, “No, not without coming back to the Committee.”  I do think it makes sense to see how the IMF thing works and how it is received, how much participation they get, and how these boundary problems and the signaling problem play out, and it is probably a good idea for the Committee to have at least a briefing about how that is playing out so that there is some context going forward.  I would be in favor of your delegating that authority to the subcommittee, as you would expect me to be, just because sometimes these judgments need to be made quickly.  But I certainly understand why people would want to have a better sense of how this is unfolding and how we deal with it.  The boundary problems are going to get worse if we have to go broader than this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their support for delegating authority to the subcommittee but also understanding why others may want more information and context before making a decision.


Passage number 119.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 120.
 MS. DUKE.  I’m in favor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The excerpt provided does not involve any disagreement or contention. The person simply states their opinion of being in favor of something without any conflicting arguments or opposition being presented.


Passage number 121.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information about contention or disagreement regarding President Fisher.


Passage number 122.
 MR. FISHER.  I’m in favor Mr. Chairman, and I would also favor, in terms of the screening device for future requests, that you come back to the full Committee.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher expresses his support for the idea and suggests an additional step to be taken for future requests.


Passage number 123.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  That’s understood.  Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It consists of simple acknowledgments and statements.


Passage number 124.
 MR. KOHN.  I’m in favor, Mr. Chairman.  I think these boundary problems are difficult.  I agree with the Vice Chairman that our having the IMF there mitigates them.  I was encouraged by Nathan’s sense that there are some people interested in the IMF, so there might not be much stigma there.  I would be in favor of very strongly encouraging other countries to go to the IMF.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any disagreement or contention. The speaker expresses agreement with the Vice Chairman's perspective and shows support for encouraging other countries to go to the IMF.


Passage number 125.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Kroszner.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Governor Kroszner without providing any information or context that suggests there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 126.
 MR. KROSZNER.  I, too, favor the facility.  I think it’s very important that we are tranching this and using somewhat different ways of providing the money to these countries than we have with other countries because, as President Bullard and others mentioned, if we’re not careful, this could be used for purposes with which we are not comfortable.  It could be used for supporting a currency, and I don’t think we’d be particularly comfortable with that.  Obviously, we have to be realistic.  Money is fungible.  They have very large reserves.  They could be using the reserves for these other purposes and using the swaps for purposes that we find acceptable.  But I think, given the circumstances, it makes sense to be coming up with something that’s complementary to the IMF facility and make sure that the IMF facility and our facility together are sufficient to deal with the pressures in this environment.  I would be satisfied to delegate the authority to the subcommittee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses agreement with the facility and explains the need for different ways of providing money to these countries in order to avoid potential misuse. They also acknowledge the reality that money is fungible and discuss the need for coordination with the IMF facility. However, there is no indication of disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 127.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 128.
 MS. PIANALTO.  I’m also in favor of the program, and I agree with Vice Chairman Geithner’s comments that this announcement along with the IMF program should be sufficient.  But if there are other requests, I think it is important to bring them back to the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the speaker agrees with Vice Chairman Geithner's comments and suggests that any other requests should be brought back to the committee.


Passage number 129.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Understood.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "understood" implies agreement or comprehension.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 130.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I guess I’ll approve, but with reluctance.  I think this is a very slippery slope.  I’m worried about other central banks ganging up on us as a group, saying that they have to have this.  I would prefer that even these large countries use some combination of the IMF facility plus their own reserves to meet these needs.  I think that would be a better outcome and better for us in that regard.  So that’s a very reluctant “yea” vote.  I’d also insist that any further expansion come back before this Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is evident when Mr. Plosser expresses his reluctance and concern about other central banks ganging up on the US and his preference for large countries to use a combination of the IMF facility and their own reserves instead. He states a contrasting view to the proposal being discussed, indicating disagreement.


Passage number 131.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions "President Stern" without providing any information or context that suggests contention or disagreement. Without further information, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement associated with President Stern.


Passage number 132.
 MR. STERN.  I’m reluctantly in favor of this.  I won’t elaborate very much.  I’m just not persuaded that this is a very valuable contribution, as best as I can judge it.  I would be in favor of limiting it to these four countries.  I don’t know if that’s credible, though.  Certainly I would be in favor of any additional considerations coming back to the full Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Stern, expresses his personal opinion about the issue being discussed. He mentions that he is in favor of the proposal but reluctantly and does not provide much explanation for his stance. However, there is no disagreement or contention mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 133.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage only states "Governor Warsh," which does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 134.
 MR. WARSH.  Mr. Chairman, I support the proposal on the floor.  I think the safeguards are meaningful and real and should help.  I think the bar for further consideration, as Nathan described, should be high, but we shouldn’t overstate what that bar is, given how circumstances can change quickly.  I wouldn’t want to have to change that rule in the middle of the game, but I think the high-bar language works.  On the question of delegating to the subcommittee, I think in the interest of speed it would be appropriate; but given the sense around the table, certainly making sure that the folks around the table were at the very least briefed as to the thought process might be a prudent path forward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Warsh, expresses support for the proposal and believes that the safeguards in place will be effective. He also agrees with the idea of setting a high bar for further consideration but acknowledges the potential for changing circumstances. Additionally, he suggests delegating to the subcommittee for efficiency but also emphasizes the importance of keeping everyone at the table informed. Overall, his statements reflect a coherent and positive stance on the matter.


Passage number 135.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you.  So the sense I hear is that people are willing to accept it, but the bar for additional countries should be high.  We should bring any country that we propose to add back to the FOMC for approval, and we will keep you well briefed on the conditionality, the draws, and anything else that happens.  Okay.  May I have a motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement summarizing a conversation and seeking a motion.


Passage number 136.
 MR. KOHN.  So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 137.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I am going to say without objection because we had a unanimous view.  Okay.  Thank you.  Let me go on next to the economic situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that everyone had a unanimous view without objection, indicating agreement among the individuals involved.


Passage number 138.
 MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is impossible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage as it is incomplete and lacks proper context.


Passage number 139.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without the actual passage, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement. Please provide the passage to give a more accurate response.


Passage number 140.
 MR. LACKER.  Do we have time for a brief question for the Manager about the funds market.  It has behaved a little unusually in the last period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of any disagreement or contention in this passage. Mr. Lacker simply states that he has a question about the funds market and notes that it has behaved unusually.


Passage number 141.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Go ahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the phrase "Go ahead" as it is simply an invitation or permission to proceed without any indication of disagreement.


Passage number 142.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman—I appreciate this.  I have a three-part question.  As you said in your presentation, the effective funds rate (the average of brokered transactions) has been below the interest rate on reserves, and there are all of these institutions that apparently aren’t eligible to earn interest on reserves.  One, what’s the policy reason for excluding them from eligibility for interest on reserves.  I understand the policy reason for excluding them from credit, but this is the opposite, and so I’m not quite sure why we screen them out.  Second, as I read the data on your operations, it seems to me as though we have added enough reserves to drive the funds rate virtually down to the interest rate on reserves.  I want to know if that’s a fair characterization of the state of open market operations and the funds rate.  Third, I’m interested in knowing, especially if that’s true, why don’t we just give up and say that the interest rate on reserves is our target rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a series of questions rather than a statement of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 143.
 MR. DUDLEY.  Okay.  Let me take them in reverse order.  I don’t like to give up, but if I could just exclude that portion of it, it’s possible that you might want to consider the interest rate on reserves or some reasonable facsimile thereof as your target because that is essentially the risk-free rate that banks face.  That may be the purer measure of what you’re really trying to accomplish in terms of its link to monetary policy than the federal funds rate.  It’s possible.  There are obviously important governance issues that surround that choice, though, in terms of what’s the Board’s prerogative and what’s the FOMC’s prerogative.  But that’s a completely reasonable thing to think about, just as long as we don’t characterize that as giving up. Have we added enough reserves to drive the federal funds rate down to the interest on reserves.  Well, I think not.  I wouldn’t look at it quite that way because the gap in principle, if other things are not going on, should be the difference between us as a counterparty and a bank as a counterparty.  One is an unsecured loan between one bank and another bank, and the other is us as the counterparty.  So normally there should be a spread between the interest on reserves and the federal funds rate.  Now, obviously what complicates that in the current environment is the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation’s guarantee on interbank funds going forward.  So federal funds may be covered—in fact, they look as though they could be covered by that guarantee.  In that circumstance, one might argue that the federal funds rate and interest on reserves should probably be the same rate because there’s no difference in credit risk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining different perspectives and considerations regarding the interest rate on reserves and the federal funds rate.


Passage number 144.
 MR. LACKER.  Excuse me.  Without interest rates on reserves, there’s that spread plus a scarcity factor, and we’ve essentially driven that scarcity factor down to zero—that’s how I meant the question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, is simply seeking clarification for a question.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 145.
 MR. DUDLEY.  Right, but I still think that generally a bank faced with a choice of having risk with the Fed or selling fed funds to another bank would want to be compensated for that risk of selling, so they are going to get some positive spread.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: There is contention or disagreement in the passage because Mr. Dudley thinks that banks would want to be compensated for the risk of selling fed funds, while the other person in the conversation may have a different perspective or opinion.


Passage number 146.
 MR. LACKER.  I understand that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given statement does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It simply indicates that the speaker has grasped or comprehended something.


Passage number 147.
 MR. MADIGAN.  I would say that we may well be in a situation where the interest rate on excess reserves is the effective tool for controlling the federal funds rate, and there may be a spread.  As Bill said, we are in the process of learning how this works, and it may well be the case that we need to push that interest rate on excess reserves very close to the federal funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is suggesting that the interest rate on excess reserves could be an effective tool for controlling the federal funds rate, and acknowledges that they are still learning about this process.


Passage number 148.
 MR. DUDLEY.  It would not surprise me at all if, when we are finished with this process—I hope over the next six weeks as we go through a couple more reserve maintenance period rounds—that that margin might be zero and we might see the federal funds rate trading right on top of the interest rate on reserves.  But we are going to have to see.  I think our presumption at the current time would be to recommend to the Board next round to narrow that spread further—it is 35 basis points today.  Another thing that we don’t know is how much learning is going to go on by banks.  So the selling of fed funds below the interest rate on reserves is not just the GSEs; it is also banks, and so it’s a little hard to understand exactly why they’re doing that unless the leverage ratio is what’s driving that behavior.  Maybe they are just not very well informed or they haven’t gotten their first check for the interest rate compensation, so I think it’s a little too soon to be certain about how they’re going to behave going forward.  You had one other question about the policy reason for excluding the GSEs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their own thoughts and presumptions on the topic.


Passage number 149.
 MR. MADIGAN.  There’s not really a policy reason.  I would say there’s a legal reason.  The statute allows us to pay interest only on balances held by depository institutions.  My own view is that it would be a good thing if we were able to pay interest to the GSEs exactly for the reasons that we’ve been discussing.  It might be something we could seek authority for at some point in the future.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Madigan, expresses his personal view that it would be beneficial to pay interest to the GSEs, but acknowledges that there is currently a legal restriction preventing them from doing so.


Passage number 150.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage does not contain any information or context to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 151.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Just a clarification.  If we were to take that step, are there any other institutions that participate, other than the GSEs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward request for clarification.


Passage number 152.
 VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions the position of Vice Chairman Geithner without providing any information about disagreement or contention.


Passage number 153.
  Chile, Mexico—  MR. MADIGAN.  We would have to look at that.  I think there are more than just the three GSEs that we usually think of.  But they’re the biggest institutions that participate in the federal funds market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply making a statement and expressing a need to further examine the topic.


Passage number 154.
 MR. DUDLEY.  It is not at all clear that their behavior is going to persist necessarily, because they may decide to manage their short-term liquidity in a different way than selling at a very low federal funds rate to banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 155.
 MS. DUKE.  Mr. Chairman, if I could.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It is just a statement by Ms. Duke, who seems to be addressing a person holding a Chairman position. Without further context, it is difficult to determine any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 156.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Oh, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 157.
 MS. DUKE.  As part of my preparation when I talked to the banks, I asked them specifically this question about interest on reserves, and every single one of them said, “We haven’t had time to even focus on it.  We don’t even know what’s going on with that.  We’re not changing anything.”  There’s so much going on right now.  So I think we’re really going to have to wait until some of the other decisionmaking has worked through before we can draw any conclusions as to what behavior this might drive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that the banks she talked to have not had time to focus on the issue of interest on reserves and do not know what is going on with it. She concludes that it is necessary to wait for other decision-making processes to conclude before drawing any conclusions about the potential behavior it might drive.


Passage number 158.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Learning theory in practice.  Thank you very much.  Very helpful.  All right.  Mr. Morin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrases "Thank you very much" and "Very helpful" show positive and agreeable sentiment, while "All right" could be interpreted as neutrality or acceptance. There is no indication of any conflicting viewpoints or disagreement.


Passage number 159.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Before we go too long, we’ll take a coffee break, but now let’s take some questions.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they will take a break and then proceed to answer questions.


Passage number 160.
 MR. LACKER.  In the forecast, the federal funds rate goes to 50 basis points, and I take it that’s essentially as low as you think it can go.  You treat that as sort of the lower bound on nominal interest rates.  Is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker is simply seeking clarification on the forecasted federal funds rate and its perceived lower limit.


Passage number 161.
 MR. STOCKTON.  That’s how we were thinking of it.  The 50 basis points, however, was not done on the basis of any deep analytical analysis of whether that, in fact, is the zero bound, and I think that’s an issue that the staff will need to address pronto.  But the message in the forecast with that funds rate path was that we think this shock is large enough that you will need to lower the funds rate as low as you think it can feasibly go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 162.
 MR. LACKER.  Well, whatever that lower bound is, I have a question that’s kind of hypothetical.  I wasn’t a member of the Committee five years ago.  My understanding, though, is that much thought was given to how we would conduct monetary policy if we needed to reduce the nominal federal funds rate to zero or its effective equivalent.  My understanding is that the general conclusion—and my understanding is that this is mainstream economists’ general view as well—is that the way we would do that would be to expand the monetary base, perhaps by buying assets outside the normal range of assets that we would buy.  Now, the first question is, Is that correct.  Then I have a follow-up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their understanding and asking for confirmation.


Passage number 163.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  May I.  You can answer, but let me just make a suggestion, which is that there were a number of memos and studies done in 2003.  I think we ought to look at them, update them, and circulate them fairly soon.  So we’ll do this in some detail; but by all means, let’s hear the answer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. The speaker is simply asking for permission to make a suggestion and expressing a desire to review and update certain memos and studies.


Passage number 164.
 MR. MADIGAN.  President Lacker, I would say that there are a number of strategies that the Committee could think about if it were at the point that it felt it couldn’t lower the federal funds rate any further, be that zero or some higher level.  One would be communications that suggest to market participants a willingness to hold short-term rates at very low levels for a very long period of time.  Of course, one could view the 2003 experience as implementing that strategy with the “considerable period” language.  But obviously the idea is to try to hold down the longer-term rates that matter for spending to a larger degree than might be implied by market participants’ views that you might instead begin to firm monetary policy sooner. There are a number of other possibilities.  As you suggest, one would be simply to expand the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet further—engage in a sort of quantitative easing.  The effectiveness of that could be debated.  Another possibility that was discussed, at least in the period in which the studies were done, would be to change the composition of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet.  Of course, we’ve already done a lot of that with the various lending facilities, and so the scope for additional expansion there would need to be thought through.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing various strategies that the Committee could consider if it were unable to lower the federal funds rate further.


Passage number 165.
 MR. LACKER.  The reason I ask is that my understanding is that the strategy of expanding the monetary base would work through increasing inflation or reducing deflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states MR. LACKER's understanding about the strategy of expanding the monetary base.


Passage number 166.
 MR. MADIGAN.  That’s not how I would think about it.  I would think about it as giving, if it works, depository institutions increased incentives to expand their lending by providing them with a great deal more funding than they actually need and thereby increasing spending propensities.  I would see this more as part of a package of various ways to stimulate spending by reducing real interest rates but not as something that would feed through directly to inflation.  Rather this would more properly be viewed, at least in the way I think about things, as fighting deflation rather than trying to cause a higher positive rate of inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 167.
 MR. LACKER.  My understanding is that economists such as Woodford and others who have studied this believe that, by using monetary assets to purchase other assets, we can make the price level and thus the inflation rate higher than it otherwise would be.  Is that a fair understanding.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of understanding or interpretation.


Passage number 168.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I don’t think that’s right.  I think the thrust of the elementary approach to quantitative easing is the old Milton Friedman idea—that changing the composition of money and other assets changes relative returns.  So it’s a way to bring down returns on other assets and create stimulus even if the policy rate is down to zero.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their own perspective and explaining their belief about the elementary approach to quantitative easing, without contradicting any opposing views or engaging in a debate.


Passage number 169.
 MR. LACKER.  The mechanism Friedman sketched ultimately produces a proportionate increase in the price level, doesn’t it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a simple question seeking clarification or confirmation.


Passage number 170.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Eventually, but through the aggregate demand mechanism.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "eventually, but through the aggregate demand mechanism" indicates a potential outcome, but it does not present any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 171.
 MR. LACKER.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage just states a statement made by someone without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 172.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We should look at the Woodford thing, but I don’t think that’s quite the right characterization of his view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges the need to consider the Woodford thing but suggests that it may not fully align with their perspective.


Passage number 173.
 MR. LACKER.  Well, the reason I ask all of this is that, with an interest rate on reserves above zero, that’s effectively equivalent to a zero lower bound on nominal interest rates.  So we are effectively doing this quantitative easing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making a statement and providing an explanation for the question being asked.


Passage number 174.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We’re pretty close, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any signs of contention or disagreement. The phrase "We're pretty close" indicates that there is agreement or consensus between the speaker and another person.


Passage number 175.
 MR. LACKER.  Right.  So the thought that sparks is that, if the mechanism involves creating inflation, then I’d wonder what checks we have on the scale of open market operations now to ensure that we’re not, by expanding our balance sheet as much as we have, risking an increase in inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing curiosity and raising a question about the potential risks of expanding the balance sheet.


Passage number 176.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I don’t think that’s the right characterization, but I’d be happy to talk about it off line.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: In this passage, President Plosser states that he disagrees with a characterization but expresses a willingness to discuss it in a more private setting. There is no clear contention or disagreement expressed in the passage itself.


Passage number 177.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I have a question.  As you characterized the forecast in the Greenbook, it is really the result of very large adjustments to the financial constraints piece—in fact, they’re about double what they were in the September Greenbook—and those adjustments or factors really account for a large portion, maybe not all, of the downward revision in the forecast.  Now, one of the inputs in the financial factors are spreads of various kinds in the VARs that you used to estimate those.  But those spreads we’ve learned are very, very volatile.  They can rise very quickly, as we’ve seen.  They also can fall very quickly sometimes.  Spreads have actually come down a little in the last few days, which is the good news.  If our facilities are successful, they actually may fall further—knock on wood; that would be very nice.  But I get a little nervous making our forecast be driven so much by something that’s potentially very, very volatile. Now, we get a bit of a picture of this—and I want to applaud the staff—in I guess it was exhibit 5, where you were comparing the baseline forecast and the two alternative scenarios, particularly the one in which you get quicker recovery in the financial sector.  I thought that was a very useful exercise, and I really appreciate it.  My interpretation or intuition is that the “more rapid financial recovery” scenario is what the forecast would look like had we not done the additional add factors in October and instead held them to what they were in September.  That suggests that the real data, whether on spending or other things, have driven the forecast down a little, but not a whole lot.  In fact, in that scenario, you imply that the funds rate would actually be held constant at 1½ percent.  So, in looking at those two scenarios and trying to parse out how much risk or how much probability to attach to them, what is the staff’s view.  Obviously here’s what you thought the baseline would be, but if I ask you what you think the probabilities are on some of these different scenarios—in particular, I’m interested in this sort of faster recovery—do you have any sense of what the probabilities of these two different outcomes might be and how one might think about that.  They imply very different paths for the funds rate and very different forecast profiles, but their differences depend on variables that are very, very volatile.  So can you give me some probabilities of how you think about those two scenarios.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification and expressing concern about the volatility of certain financial factors in the forecast.


Passage number 178.
 MR. STOCKTON.  I can give you some probabilities, but I don’t know how seriously you should take them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Stockton is simply stating that he can provide probabilities but is unsure how reliable they would be.


Passage number 179.
  [Laughter]   MR. PLOSSER.  You can give me a distribution.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  


Passage number 180.
 MR. STOCKTON.  What we wanted to convey in the alternative scenarios that we showed this time—and we reduced the number because we thought the possible little risks that you might be facing were being swamped by some really big ones—was our sense that the likelihood function is pretty flat around the baseline and the two alternative scenarios that we show here in exhibit 5.  I share your discomfort.  As I was telling President Evans at lunch today, I feel a bit as though the forecast is going to depend a lot on when the clock stopped, given how much volatility there has been in the stock market and in corporate spreads.  When the clock stopped, we had close to a 25 percent weaker level on the stock market, 200 basis points higher on the Baa spread, and a 7 percent higher dollar.  There were a whole lot of negative forces operating on this forecast.  Indeed, both the conventional wealth effect and cost-of-capital channels account for about one-third of the downward revision we made.  The special nonconventional credit channel effects account for a third, and a third of the downward revision really is a combination of the stronger dollar and the weaker foreign outlook. The part that I feel most comfortable with in this forecast is that there has been a very significant negative shock to the economy and that it is difficult to imagine that activity will not be affected importantly by that.  The part that I feel most uncertain about—and, as you point out, is relevant to the policy decisions that you are going to make over the next several meetings—is that I have no idea about the timing or the manner in which this will fade away.  So we have it fading away gradually over the next two years.  I think that a more rapid recovery is certainly a possibility.  As you noted, even that scenario doesn’t go back to where we were in September.  One, the incoming data suggest that the underlying economy is starting out at a weaker place, and even if conditions were to improve very rapidly over the next quarter or two, you have still sustained a hit that is going to take some time to play out through the system.  By the same token, I don’t think that you can discount the more extended and deeper financial fallout here.  We have certainly been surprised over the past year in many ways by just how virulent and persistent this shock has been.  Two, looking at the current state of aggregate demand and aggregate activity, I think we are probably still just at the front edge of the credit constraint effects on actual spending.  So you could still be faced with some very substantial restraint on spending—and more than we have built into the baseline forecast. So, and as you noted, the difference in the policy prescriptions there—the worse scenario is that the funds rate stays as low as it can stay for several years.  The other would be—putting too fine a point on it—that optimal control, even with the more rapid recovery, goes down to 1 percent on the funds rate and then starts recovering to 1½ percent.  But that is obviously a very different policy picture.  I just don’t think that, at this point, science is going to allow us to put a lot of probability mass on one of those scenarios versus the other two.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 181.
 MR. MORIN.  One quick follow-on comment.  In exhibit 3, in the middle left panel, if you look at our financial turmoil effects, with the gray shading, the bulk of the markdown in 2008 actually is what we’re labeling the financial turmoil.  But those are data we pretty much already have in hand.  We are calling much of the shortfall in consumption that we expect to see in the third quarter as “financial turmoil.”  So much of the weakness in the second half of this year isn’t just taking a flyer on what we think turmoil is going to do; some of it is already in the data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information and explanation about the labeling of financial turmoil and its effects on consumption. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 182.
  MR. PLOSSER.  I was looking at the table in the Greenbook, at the bottom.  That’s where I was trying to back out some of this.  Thank you very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker was looking at a table and trying to make sense of the information.


Passage number 183.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not provide any information or context that suggest any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions "President Fisher" without any additional information or statements that would indicate disagreement.


Passage number 184.
 MR. FISHER.  I have a question and a statement disguised as a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage states that Mr. Fisher has a question and a statement disguised as a question. This does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests that Mr. Fisher will ask his question in a particular manner.


Passage number 185.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Not anymore.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage "Not anymore" because the phrase is not providing any information or claim that can be disputed.


Passage number 186.
  [Laughter] MR. FISHER.  A quick question on fiscal policy, both domestic and international.  Being struck, Ms. Kole, by your verbs “whacked” and “disintegrated”—very forceful language—what are your assumptions about fiscal policy in terms of staff projections, first, for the domestic economy and, second, for other economies.  That’s the question part.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about the assumptions regarding fiscal policy in the domestic and international economies.


Passage number 187.
 MR. MORIN.  Right now, although the odds are that there will be a fiscal package next year, it is not a feature of the baseline forecast.  We discussed two alternative simulations for different packages, but additional fiscal stimulus is not a feature of the baseline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker states that currently, a fiscal package is not included in the baseline forecast but acknowledges the possibility of one being implemented next year.


Passage number 188.
 MR. STOCKTON.  We made a deliberate decision in constructing the forecast, given the enormous uncertainty about both the size and the composition of those fiscal packages.  We had so many moving parts in our baseline forecast that we wanted to present you with that and then show you what the consequences might be, first, of a stimulus package that looks a lot like the one we had this year—which we think probably gave a shock, but a very short-lived shock, to aggregate demand and then faded away.  That doesn’t really have many important consequences for the outlook.  The second was a much larger package that delivered some stimulus over the next two years.  That had a bit of an effect in terms of raising GDP growth and lowering the unemployment rate.  But even that $300 billion fiscal package wasn’t enough, in our baseline forecast, to lift the funds rate assumption off the floor.  So I think one of the messages would be that, to have a fiscal package that would actually influence your current policy discussion, you have to think both that it would be extremely large and that it would deliver stimulus over an extended period of time to be effective that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is an explanation of the different scenarios considered in constructing a forecast.


Passage number 189.
 MS. KOLE.  I think that in many of the major foreign countries there is room for fiscal stimulus.  That may be a bit of an upside risk to our forecast because, for example, China has already put some things in place.  They have increased exporter rebates, and they are also putting more money into homebuilding and trying to prop up the construction industry.  Japan just announced a bigger package.  I’m not so sure if it will go through.  Korea has announced—and even some of the oil producers are announcing—plans to put money into the system.  I don’t think we have fully incorporated that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 190.
  Maybe we have thought about it in China’s case because we think that they will do everything they need to do to keep that economy growing at a— MR. FISHER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 191.
  So it’s possible that we might have marginally higher rates of growth than— MS. KOLE.  Right.  I think that the United Kingdom, too, is expanding fiscal policy.  Europe hasn’t really announced much yet, but perhaps they will do more as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 192.
 MR. FISHER.  The second thing goes back to this business of the judgmental effects of financial market turmoil.  Do you have any concern that the financial turmoil may have reduced the marginal effectiveness of changes in the funds rate.  In other words, if you think in my simple way of a patient on the operating table, we have an IV tube into them, we titrate the fed funds rate—we have been cutting rates—but the tube has been crimped.  The flow, I would suggest may not be as full as it would have been before.  Is it possible that we haven’t felt the full effects or, all things being equal, we haven’t felt the same effects that we would have felt if the pipes hadn’t been crimped.  I’m curious as to your view on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement followed by a question that seeks the recipient's opinion or view on the matter.


Passage number 193.
 MR. STOCKTON.  The answer to that is “yes”—it is certainly possible.  Obviously, it is very difficult to separate things that might actually have changed the transmission channel of monetary policy from just big financial developments that have offset the beneficial effects of easing policy.  We built an assumption into the baseline forecast that GDP responds close to the average response to a fed funds rate reduction, as would normally be the case.  The one small technical area in which it seems as though the effect almost certainly would be smaller is that, with the equity premium so high right now, any given change in the funds rate is likely to result in a smaller change in the required return on equity and probably a smaller stock market response than you would normally get.  So I think, basically, it is certainly possible, but in our forecast we have assumed that the additional reductions will have GDP consequences along the lines of the normal response.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the difficulty of separating the effects of changes in monetary policy from other financial developments, and the small technical area where the effect may be smaller. However, there is no explicit disagreement or contention evident in the passage.


Passage number 194.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Why don’t we take fifteen minutes for coffee, and then we’ll do part of the go-round.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting taking a break for coffee and then proceeding with the activity, showing agreement and cooperation.


Passage number 195.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, why don’t we turn part of our dinner period to the go-round.  Let’s start with President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The suggestion to turn part of the dinner period into a go-round is presented as a suggestion or proposal, rather than being met with disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 196.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Most of the anecdotal information from the Sixth District is consistent with the downbeat picture that has been emerging in the national data.  The sentiment of directors and their contacts has turned decidedly more pessimistic regarding current economic conditions and the near-term outlook.  Banking contacts indicate a further tightening of credit standards, while stresses on household and small business finances have resulted in increased credit card usage.  A state economic-development official noted that some banks have halted their 90/10 SBA lending.  Bankers active in the VRDN (variable rate demand note) market noted that municipalities are under pressure with declining revenues and higher financing costs.  Nonresidential building contractors noted a large increase in the number of canceled projects.  Advisory council members described a substantial decline in domestic shipping and transport activity for most goods, other than energy products, and some slowing of export volumes through regional ports.  Finally, retail contacts, in anticipation of the coming holiday season, noted that orders are down, and heavy price discounting has begun already. Thematically, Atlanta’s forecast is consistent with the Greenbook, but we are projecting a slightly more severe and protracted downturn in business activity than the Greenbook baseline.  My assumption is that the cascading dynamic at work in the financial markets may take longer than projected in the Greenbook to come to an end.  As a consequence, I view the Greenbook’s scenario entitled “more financial fallout” as the most plausible storyline among the likely range of outcomes.  I should acknowledge that we’re in an interval between the announcement of the TARP and its full implementation.  The encouraging improvement in credit spreads and term funding we have seen in recent days may accelerate once the TARP is operational. With inflation abating more or less as expected and with such uncertainty surrounding the playing out of continuing and recently worsening turmoil in the financial markets, I have to view the balance of risks as more negative for growth than upside for inflation.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and sharing their analysis and perspective.


Passage number 197.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply includes a thank you message and the mention of President Fisher.


Passage number 198.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, I think it is clear that inflation has been rolled over by the steamroller of the credit crisis.  I am not going to belabor what I have heard from the CEOs I have spoken to.  Basically, the best summary is that things have gone from interesting to unbelievable.  We have had an implosion of economic activity.  Business women and men, not having any pricing power, are doing what you would expect them to do:  They are cutting their costs of goods sold, which means they are shedding head count dramatically.  They are stretching out their ROI assumptions, and they are cutting back on cap-ex and, basically, assuming pro-cyclical behavior on the downside.  I doubt that any of us are going to report anything different, particularly since I think I am in a District that, relatively speaking, is still strong.  I would hope that during our discussions today we would each take the time, or at least ask, for some response.  I would like some response from you in particular.  The situation is dire.  There is no question about that.  We are in dire straits.  There is no inflationary tail, or if there is, it is completely flattened in terms of the foreseeable future.  The risks are to the downside on economic growth. A question I have is, What do we do next.  Actually, I should address the issue of what we do first.  I don’t think doing dribbles and drabs is an answer.  I think we just do nothing—and I could make that case because we’ve done an awful lot—or we do something that is a firm statement.  But in response to that statement, the question has to be, What do we do as next steps.  I’m particularly curious about whether or not we address during this meeting, and tonight and tomorrow, not only next steps but what the end game is.  Where do we want to be.  How long are we going to be there, and eventually, how do we exit.  But that is, of course, the ultimate question that I think we can delay.  So, Mr. Chairman, I’d like to suggest that we not go through our standard ritual of reading about our Districts and so on because I don’t think there is going to be a whole lot of difference.  The real question is, What do we do about it, and what’s the cognitive road map from here.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear instances of contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own perspective and raising questions for discussion, but there is no explicit disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 199.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, I for one will certainly give my response to that at the appropriate time, and we need to hear from everybody.  But everyone is obviously free to talk about whatever they want to talk about.  President Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 200.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Thank you" shows gratitude or appreciation, suggesting a positive tone rather than any disagreement or contention. President Evans is likely expressing his thanks to someone.


Passage number 201.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a polite thank you message from President Lacker.


Passage number 202.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no particular contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a polite expression of thanks from someone addressing President Rosengren.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 203.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  While the LIBOR–OIS spread has narrowed somewhat, the mutual fund industry is no longer experiencing waves of redemptions, and commercial paper market conditions have improved, we’re still not back to the short-term credit conditions that prevailed before the failure of Lehman Brothers.  This outcome is striking considering the historic interventions that have occurred in the past month.  With all of the new government guarantees and equity infusions here and abroad, the limited improvement in short-term credit markets attests to the degree of concern and risk aversion prevailing in financial markets. These concerns are likely to become even more elevated if the economy slows to the degree expected in most forecasts.  Like the Greenbook, our forecast anticipates a significant recession.  The Boston forecast includes three consecutive quarters of negative GDP growth and results in an unemployment rate peaking above 7½ percent.  The weakening labor market and the large losses in housing and stock wealth make it quite likely that consumption will shrink in the second half of this year.  While we need housing to reach bottom, mortgage rates relative to federal funds rates remain quite high, and further job losses are likely to aggravate the upward trend in foreclosures and add to the downward pressure on housing prices.  With limited new home purchases and demand for vehicles weak, consumption of consumer durables is unlikely to recover until next year.  Commercial real estate, which has held up reasonably well, all things considered, is likely to be much weaker next year as new and rollover financing is difficult to obtain and staff cuts and hiring freezes affect the space needed by businesses.  More generally, firms are likely to have little incentive to make new investments until the severity of the downturn becomes much clearer.  Unfortunately, many of our trading partners are likely to face an even more severe downturn, aggravated by their slow fiscal and monetary response to deteriorating economic and financial conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage mentions concerns and risk aversion prevailing in financial markets, as well as the likelihood of a significant recession and worsening conditions in commercial real estate. These points suggest that there is contention or disagreement about the current state of the economy and the effectiveness of government interventions.


Passage number 204.
  While the Greenbook assumes the stock market will rise by 8 percent for the remainder of this year—it looks as though that happened today—  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Nice job, Dave.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is acknowledging that the prediction made by the Greenbook about the stock market rising by 8 percent seems to have been correct, and praising Dave for a good job.


Passage number 205.
  [Laughter] MR. STOCKTON.  I think that just offset the decline that had happened since the time we finished the Greenbook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply shows a statement of opinion and a continuation of a thought.


Passage number 206.
  [Laughter] MR. ROSENGREN.  —I would say that I’d be surprised by that outcome.  There are several looming financial problems that are likely to affect financial markets.  Bill Dudley highlighted the one that I think is the biggest for me, which is that the NAV (net asset value) triggers for hedge funds will be a significant problem in the fourth quarter.  Without comprehensive information on hedge funds, it’s difficult to know the extent of the problems they are facing.  However, since the stock market remains one of the few markets available for the disposing of assets in bulk without a significant liquidity haircut, I’d expect significant selling in the fourth quarter.  My second big concern is that rollover financing will become more problematic as financial problems persist.  Particularly exposed are real estate developers and highly leveraged private equity firms.  My third worry is that neither insurance companies nor commercial banks have reserved for the economic outcome in our baseline forecast.  Under-reserving and high payout ratios are likely to limit the amount of additional lending that banks are willing to take on.  These financial problems place additional downside risk to our forecast. Our forecast, like the Greenbook forecast, expects the rate of inflation to slow as a result of falling food and energy prices and significant excess capacity emerging in the economy.  In fact, our equations indicate there is a non-negligible risk that deflation will be a problem in the outyears of our forecast.  Unlike President Lacker, I was surprised that it stayed as high as 1 rather than as low as 1.  The outlook for a weak real economy and falling inflation highlights the need for both monetary and fiscal policy to offset some of the financial and economic problems that we are likely to experience.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their own concerns and observations without directly challenging or contradicting anyone else's views.


Passage number 207.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only consists of a polite expression and a title. It does not contain any information or statements that could generate disagreement or contention.


Passage number 208.
 MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me just briefly say that, in our region, we have continued to do actually better than the national average, but that is beginning to wane.  We are seeing, obviously, the energy effect show itself as rigs are being put out of production and you see a slowing there.  We are seeing some concerns being raised about agricultural prices and the boom that has been going on in that part of the economy. That said, there’s still a reasonable amount of business going on that they haven’t frozen up.  We asked our directors and our other advisers how they were seeing things, and it varies.  There were some organizations that say that our non-investment-grade borrowers from the banks, if they had credit already, are still able to access those lines.  If they lost some portion because of a bank problem or something like that, they cannot get new credit, so it is cut off in that way.  I think that’s important to keep in mind.  Businesses themselves are beginning to pull back on their capital plans.  They’ve said that.  Their balance sheets—obviously outside the auto industry—are still decent, but they’re saying, “We’re looking at this, and we’re pulling back until we see how it plays out.”  You are beginning to hear more of that.  They feel that they can get credit.  Some of them are talking about actually trying to pull down their lines to make sure they have the money, and the only thing keeping them from doing that is they don’t know what to do with it once they get it.  So that’s their dilemma.  They’re afraid of losing their credit, but they also know that it costs if they pull it down.  So the dynamics there are interesting. On the national outlook, I’ll be brief.  I think that obviously the projections for recession are in place.  Down is where we’re going.  How much, though, is speculation right now.  I don’t know.  I don’t know that anyone does until we begin to see things settle out.  Inflation should be down as well.  Obviously, when you have a recession, you will back off from that, but how much.  That’s not clear at this point.  There is a lot in play, and that’s why we don’t know the answers to those questions.  We have these liquidity facilities and an enormous amount of liquidity out.  We have the TARP that is now in process but not completed.  That’s going to have an impact, and I think those are very important.  As we discuss our own policy, we are very close to the point of the quantitative easing discussion that we had, as you said, in 2003.  Pulling that material out and taking a look at that is important as we decide what we’re going to put our money into as we try to stimulate this economy.  Right now we’re subject to waiting and seeing.  There’s been a lot done, and attitudes are a critical part of this now, and we just have to wait to see how those change over the next quarter or two.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any clear contention or disagreement. It simply discusses various economic factors and viewpoints without directly conflicting with each other.


Passage number 209.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement simply expresses gratitude towards someone named President Plosser.


Passage number 210.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I have a question about the potential output view.  So you would also have to argue that the natural rate of unemployment is higher because of this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they have a question about the potential output view and suggesting that, based on this view, the natural rate of unemployment may be higher.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 211.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The presence of the word "Yes" indicates that there is contention or disagreement. However, without additional context, it is not possible to determine the specific topic or nature of the disagreement.


Passage number 212.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You think that’s plausible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "You think that's plausible" is a statement that does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 213.
  I mean, I understand why productive capacity would be affected, but why do you— MR. PLOSSER.  Well, I don’t like the NAIRU, but in my baseline forecast, my natural rate of unemployment is higher than what the Greenbook has.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges understanding the reasoning behind the impact on productive capacity and then states their personal opinion on the concept of NAIRU without challenging or disagreeing with the other person's viewpoint.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 214.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But it rises because of the financial situation.  I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is a disagreement in the passage. The statement implies that the rise is solely due to the financial situation, but the speaker disagrees with this assertion.


Passage number 215.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Yes, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement. It simply states a response affirming the statement made by the speaker.


Passage number 216.
 MR. LACKER.  If I could, Mr. Chairman, in the dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models, one of which I understand has been adopted by the staff for use in forecasting, employment fluctuates with shocks to productivity, and it’s the natural correspondent to that.  So in some sense the unemployment rate rises because the natural rate rises, but that’s a way of saying that the natural rate goes up in recessions.  I’m not sure if proponents of the natural rate view that as consistent with that old model, but that’s what happens in these models.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement providing an explanation or clarification about the relationship between employment fluctuations, shocks to productivity, and the natural rate in dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models.


Passage number 217.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Employment fluctuates, but to get unemployment you need a richer picture of matching, or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that employment fluctuates and highlighting the need for a more comprehensive understanding of matching in order to assess unemployment.


Passage number 218.
 MR. LACKER.  Right.  You need some matching model, and you get intersectoral flows.  You get the same thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting viewpoints or disagreement. It simply states a statement made by Mr. Lacker regarding the need for a matching model and the occurrence of intersectoral flows.


Passage number 219.
 MR. PLOSSER.  But even in my steady state, if I view this as a permanent inefficiency in financial intermediation that changes things, the unemployment rate is a little higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MR. PLOSSER is expressing a hypothetical scenario and presenting his view on it.


Passage number 220.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no specific passage provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 221.
 MR. STERN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ll start with a few comments about the District economy, which will sound pretty familiar by now.  The preponderance of the anecdotes from business contacts that I’ve talked with since our last meeting have been distinctly negative.  It’s not just a slowing of activity or some deterioration but a sharp contraction in activity, particularly with regard to discretionary spending or discretionary projects, beginning in the middle of September.  The one exception to that is commercial construction, where there are enough things under way that business remains pretty good.  But the backlogs are dropping, and so weakness certainly is anticipated next year.  I thought another possible exception to the negative tone was the housing market in the Twin Cities—not that the housing market in the Twin Cities is in and of itself so important but that it might be representative of some middle-of-the-road markets across the country.  Clearly, it’s not indicative of what’s going on in Florida, California, or places like those because sales volumes in the Twin Cities had been up distinctly.  Some of that is no doubt due to short sales and foreclosures; nevertheless, there were some other signs that were favorable.  The affordability index has really improved a lot.  It is back to levels of 2002-03, which Realtors call very comfortable.  The ratio of housing prices to rent has moved back to the levels of 2002-03, and that’s also encouraging.  I already mentioned the higher sales volumes.   Unfortunately, when you get beyond those statistics and look at other things, it’s too early to declare stability in the housing market or anything resembling underlying improvement.  Part of the problem is something that we’ve talked about before.  The inventory of unsold, unoccupied properties remains very substantial—by historical experience way above anything resembling normal.  Second, even though the price-to-rent ratio has come down, it’s still elevated relative to the longer-term historical experience.  So it looks to me as though, even in that market, there are some further price declines to come and it’s going to take some more time to get through all of this—probably well into next year. As far as the national economy is concerned, I, too, have marked down my outlook for real growth for the balance of this year, for all of next year, and into early 2010 as well.  This reflects to some extent the nature of the incoming data but also the intensification of the financial problems and associated headwinds, the impact of the negative wealth effect, and so on.  When I looked at my June forecast, back then the forecast obviously looked better, although there were a number of what I called “identifiable negatives.”  They have proven, for worse rather than for better, to be relevant.  I already talked about some of them.  In addition, we still have the problem in housing with excess inventories.  We have steady declines in employment, which obviously have negative implications for consumer spending, and the credit headwinds as well.  So now I have the economy contracting through the middle of next year, modest growth resuming thereafter, and robust growth beginning with the second quarter of 2010—quite some distance off. On the inflation outlook, I have for some time been thinking that inflation would begin to slow this quarter.  With the decline in commodity prices, the evolution of the economic outlook, and so forth, my confidence in that forecast has increased, and I do expect inflation to diminish over the forecast period.  So I think I’ll conclude with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Stern, is providing his observations and analysis of the District economy and the national economy without offering any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 222.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The word "okay" suggests agreement or acceptance, and the name "President Pianalto" is stated without any judgment or disagreement.


Passage number 223.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I concur with the view that we face a very serious situation.  In most respects I agree with the Greenbook baseline projection, with the reasoning that the Board staff used to arrive at the projection, and with their view that the risks to growth are to the downside.  Like the Greenbook projection, my projection is heavily influenced by judgments that we are bringing to the projection from forces that are not captured by our models.  The magnitude of the judgmental adjustment has become strikingly large, as we talked about earlier, and I realize that, if one wanted to be a skeptic about the Greenbook baseline, one would have to look no further than these assumptions and question their significant influence on the outlook. But I am not a skeptic.  During the past few weeks, in our Bank we have stepped up our contacts with business people from large, medium, and smaller businesses, bankers, and local government officials.  We have been asking them to tell us not so much what they think and feel but what has actually happened to their order books, production runs, and account receivables and what actions they are taking as a result.  It suffices to say that the feedback about the environment was overwhelmingly negative.  Respondents say that their situation has gone either from good to bad or from bad to worse, and I want to share just two anecdotes that I think capture the essence of what we are facing—one of them from a business perspective and the other from a consumer perspective.  One of my directors is the CEO of a company that produces and sells forklift trucks all over the world.  He reported last week that his sales are down and orders have fallen off dramatically, and he expects to be announcing some layoffs soon.  But what was making a greater impression on him is the fact that orders for the forklift parts have fallen off as well, and this tells him that the warehouse operators have cut back on the use of trucks that they already own.  My second story concerns the owner of a body shop that is located in a solid, middle class community.  He told us that he was doing record business all year until last month, when business just went dead.  He said it is not that people suddenly don’t need auto repairs, but in fact, they are collecting the insurance money and not fixing their cars.  They want the cash and they don’t want to pay out the deductible. Stories like these convince me that the Greenbook baseline is on the right track.  I do part company with the Greenbook in one respect—namely, the longer-term inflation outlook.  I think it is quite likely that we are going to experience some costly reallocation of resources across some sectors of the economy.  Finance and construction are two obvious examples.  Going forward, I think there is reason to think that fewer workers and less capital are going to be employed in these sectors.  The costly adjustment is going to be characterized by slower productivity growth, higher trend unit labor costs, and a smaller output gap than would otherwise occur, leading to somewhat less disinflation in the outyears in my projection.  Nevertheless, with output and inflation expected to decline sharply over the coming quarters, I think it is essential for us to be thinking about the zero bound in conducting monetary policy in a low inflation environment, and I will address the magnitude, timing, and communication aspects of our monetary policy in tomorrow’s go-round.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreements or contentions. The speaker, Ms. Pianalto, expresses agreement with the Greenbook baseline projection, the reasoning behind it, and the view that risks to growth are on the downside. She also provides anecdotes and feedback from business people that support the Greenbook projection. The only point where she differs with the Greenbook is the longer-term inflation outlook.


Passage number 224.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Bullard.


Passage number 225.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Well, it’s a little after 6:00 p.m., a long afternoon.  Why don’t we recess the meeting until tomorrow morning.  There’s a reception and a dinner up on the terrace, which is for your convenience.  There’s no business being conducted, and we’ll see you in the morning.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting to recess the meeting until the next morning and informally mentioning the reception and dinner on the terrace as a convenient option for the participants. The phrase "Thank you" at the end is just a polite expression.


Passage number 226.
 [Meeting recessed] October 29, 2008—Morning Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody. PARTICIPANTS.  Good morning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a meeting recessed and then greets the participants.


Passage number 227.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We have some data this morning.  Dave, would you like to discuss this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply informing Dave about the availability of data and inviting him to discuss it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 228.
 MR. STOCKTON.6  Yes.  You have at your place a table on orders and shipments of durable goods, one of the more inscrutable releases to actually make sense of, but the bottom line is very little effect on our basic outlook here.  As you can see in that second set of numbers, the shipments area excluding the aircraft line was up 2 percent in September.  That was actually a little stronger than we had penciled in, but only enough to add a few basis points to GDP growth in the third quarter.  Then you can see that it has basically been averaging flat for the last two months.  This is a September figure, so it’s fairly dated at this point.  The orders figures, the set of numbers above—again looking at the “excluding aircraft” line—have been coming down.  I wouldn’t say that they’re collapsing, but they’re certainly weakening some.  So this really has no appreciable effect on our outlook for a small decline in equipment spending in the third quarter and a more appreciable decline in the fourth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker mentions that orders figures are coming down and weakening, which suggests a disagreement or contention about the state of equipment spending in the third and fourth quarters.


Passage number 229.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Does the resolution of the Boeing strike have any macro implications.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It simply asks about the macro implications of the resolution of the Boeing strike.


Passage number 230.
 MR. STOCKTON.  We actually predicted that the strike would end this week.  It did.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating a prediction that came true.


Passage number 231.
 MR. PLOSSER.  My, you’re good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "My, you're good" suggests admiration or acknowledgment of someone's skill or ability.


Passage number 232.
 MR. STOCKTON.  It wasn’t looking too good last week.  [Laughter]  But we’re expecting that it would provide a small rebound effect on first-quarter GDP growth.  It’s going to take a little while to get production back on track here.  6 The materials used by Mr. Stockton are appended to this transcript (appendix 6).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Stockton is simply stating the current situation and his expectation for a small rebound in GDP growth.


Passage number 233.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions for Dave.  Okay.  If not, let’s continue with our go-round.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting to ask more questions to Dave and then proceed with the discussion.


Passage number 234.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply consists of a polite expression of gratitude towards Governor Kohn.


Passage number 235.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only includes a thank you statement and the mention of Governor Warsh. There is no contention or disagreement evident.


Passage number 236.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Kroszner.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of a polite expression of gratitude followed by a mention of Governor Kroszner, which does not suggest any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 237.
 MR. KROSZNER.  Thank you.  Well, the autumnal bonfires have really sort of heated up since the last FOMC meeting.  I think we have evidence in the United States and now worldwide of what emerging market literature calls “sudden stops”—a sudden stopping of the flow of capital, the so-called flow of hot money, into Latin America or other countries and the devastating impact that could have when suddenly credit is no longer available.  I’ve been talking about the slow burn of the problems in the credit markets, but I think we saw that move up to a different level globally over the past six weeks.  This is the concern that we had earlier in the year about a regime shift.  We seem to have moved from a growth regime to a sliding-by-with-some-growth regime and now to a contractionary one and the nonlinear effects that we had been concerned about. As we always say, it’s particularly difficult to predict where the economy is going to go.  But there’s evidence of why it’s so difficult because almost any measure of volatility is up dramatically.  That’s true on the financial market side, on the real side, as well as just in movements of consumer confidence.  So I think that we can say with some confidence that it is particularly difficult to predict which way things are going to go.  As many people have said before, a few spreads have come down, but given the extent of our actions and those of other governments around the world—central banks, fiscal authorities, et cetera—it is surprising that there has been so little effect. Now, maybe it’s just because so much is going on that there’s a fair amount of confusion and uncertainty about what the programs mean, how they will actually be implemented, and to whom they will be applied.  I think that’s perhaps part of the reason for some of the spreads not coming down with respect to interbank borrowing—there is a lack of clarity about exactly how the FDIC program will operate and exactly how the TARP will operate.  We’ll hear more about that in a bit, but I think it’s going to take time for people to feel confident about how that will work.  Also, I think there is real uncertainty because after thirty days some banks may not get the guarantees or may have the guarantees pulled back.  I think there is also a lot of uncertainty about who will get TARP funding and who is qualified for TARP funding.  As information comes out about people not being qualified or markets being concerned that individual institutions are not going to be qualified, that could put on a lot of pressure.  Unfortunately, that’s going to be coming in addition to the end-of-the-year pressures.  So I see a number of looming risks, particularly in the financial services sector, as we fully implement and clarify some of the programs that I think on balance can be helpful but that can actually cause some uncertainty at individual institutions.  Others have also mentioned broader challenges in the emerging markets and the insurance companies and certainly we have the hedge fund redemptions that are looming.  I’m very concerned about trying to get over the end of the year with so many different pieces putting additional pressure on.  Even some of the pieces that we thought would be helpful potentially have a lot of downside risk to them. But even if we get through this—and the government guarantee programs, the special liquidity facilities, and the negative real rates that we have and potentially may make even more negative would provide some support—the fundamental uncertainty is not going to be resolved until we see what is going to work in the financial sector, what’s going to be the successful business model, and what are going to be the new sets of activities that can be undertaken.  Will certain funding markets come back and at what spread once you take away all these special programs.  Until that is worked out, I don’t see how the markets can figure out who will survive and who won’t, who is going to be there in three months and who isn’t.  I think that the programs are very valuable in providing a time out—a time for people to reassess.  But until there’s greater clarity in those financing markets going forward, I don’t think the markets will actually be able to recover.  That why the alternative simulation that puts things off a bit more seems quite sensible to me. Some specifics on consumption.  As I often do, I talked with some of the largest providers of consumer credit in the United States.  They are reporting, exactly as Governor Kohn said, that consumption or spending growth was decelerating through the summer, but it did seem to get much more rapid in September and October.  One of the large companies actually reported significant contraction on the consumer side of spending.  On the small business side, it was still positive but down from double-digit growth in the second quarter to basically flat.  They also looked across income categories.  This is not a phenomenon of just the people at one or the other end of the spectrum.  It seemed to be across the board for what they looked at.  All of them have reported, just as the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey did, a significant reduction of credit lines.  So even if we’re not seeing credit in and of itself having contracted yet, the ability to get credit down the line is going to be much, much more difficult.  Also the funding markets for the credit card companies have effectively closed.  They may reopen.  Things may come back, but I think it’s going to take time for that to happen, and they were certainly not optimistic about that. As virtually everyone has mentioned, inflationary pressures for a variety of reasons are much lower, and I think that fits into what the Vice Chairman said about thinking about the costs of moving now and perhaps moving “too quickly.”  There seem to be lower costs now in being a bit more aggressive than, let’s say, six months ago because much less inflationary pressure seems to be out there.  I think a prudent risk-management point of view would certainly take into account those costs and benefits.  We need to use our monetary policy tools as effectively as we can and then work with the other tools that a number of others have mentioned to try to get the markets to be more comfortable with where things will go and then be able to lend to each other—to have the unlocking of the credit markets without government guarantees, without negative interest rates, and without extraordinary liquidity facilities.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It mainly consists of the speaker expressing their concerns and uncertainties about the current state of the economy and the effectiveness of various government programs and policies.


Passage number 238.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude to Governor Duke.


Passage number 239.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 240.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask Governor Duke a question.  Do you sense in this deep dive into the institutions that you talked to that they are benefiting from cuts in the fed funds rate.  Are they enthusiastic or not about the prospect for a lower fed funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a question being asked by Mr. Fisher to Governor Duke regarding the institutions' perspective on the impact of cuts in the fed funds rate.


Passage number 241.
 MS. DUKE.  Actually, I have heard a couple of reports that, when we did that last 50 basis point cut, banks did not lower their prime.  A lot of banks still have prime-related credits.  As we lower the rates, whether it makes a difference on anything else, it affects the prime, and there are still an awful lot of 5 percent CDs out there.  So as we lower rates, we are cutting into those margins, and it is likely to turn some of them negative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating some facts and expressing their opinion about the potential impact of lowering rates on banks' margins.


Passage number 242.
 MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It appears to be a simple introduction or greeting between two individuals.


Passage number 243.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the provided passage.


Passage number 244.
 MR. LACKER.  I would just echo that.  I have heard the same thing from bankers in our District—just vociferous complaints about lowering rates because their loan rates go down but their cost of funds doesn’t.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that both Mr. Lacker and bankers in their district have the same opinion regarding lowering rates.


Passage number 245.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, if I could just add one other thing.  We are hearing more and more about people switching to LIBOR, trying to shift their lending contracts to LIBOR rather aggressively, obviously, because they are higher rates.  But I’m wondering if you’re picking that up as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fisher is simply adding another point to the discussion.


Passage number 246.
 MS. DUKE.  Well, I don’t know.  But just as soon as they get them switched over there, maybe we’ll be successful at bringing LIBOR down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. DUKE is uncertain about the outcome but hopes that switching over may bring LIBOR down.


Passage number 247.
 MR. MADIGAN.7  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will be referring to the version of table 1 that was distributed to you on Monday.  It is reproduced in the package before you labeled “Material for Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives.”  Changes in the language relative to the Bluebook version are shown in blue.Starting on the right-hand side of the table, even though members saw the economic and financial information that became available over the intermeeting period as worse than expected, they might be inclined to leave the stance of policy unchanged at today’s meeting, as in alternative C.  As noted yesterday, your  7 The materials used by Mr. Madigan are appended to this transcript (appendix 7). economic projections reveal that many of you anticipate that inflation pressures will diminish less quickly than the staff anticipates, and several of you noted explicitly that you thought less easing would be appropriate than was assumed in the Greenbook forecast.  Also, the Committee already reduced rates in early October, responding to at least some of the adverse economic news.  Moreover, the Federal Reserve has put in place additional facilities to support credit intermediation, and the Treasury and the FDIC are moving quickly with the implementation of other programs that should, with time, help stabilize financial institutions and markets and enhance the flow of credit to households and businesses.  Finally, you might believe that the Congress is likely to enact a second fiscal stimulus package, possibly reducing the need for additional monetary policy accommodation.The rationale section of the statement suggested for alternative C would acknowledge the intensification of financial turmoil and the weakening of the economic outlook.  However, it would also cite the range of policy actions taken in recent weeks as factors that should help over time to improve credit conditions and promote a return to moderate economic growth.  The language on inflation would be essentially identical to that used in the Committee’s statement earlier this month, noting that the upside risks to inflation have been reduced.  The risk assessment would state explicitly that the Committee’s primary concern is the downside risks to growth, suggesting a predilection for lowering rates.  Nonetheless, with market participants anticipating an easing today—a 50 basis point move is seen as most likely—an announcement along the lines of alternative C would point to a much higher trajectory for the federal funds rate over the next few months than investors had expected.  Short- and intermediate-term Treasury yields would likely jump, credit spreads probably would increase further, and equity prices might decline sharply.  If the Committee is of the view that further policy accommodation is appropriate at this time but is also quite uncertain about the extent of rate reductions that will ultimately be required, it might be attracted to the 25 basis point easing of alternative B at this meeting.  Members might have a less pessimistic outlook for the economy than that presented as the baseline in the Greenbook or might at least be quite uncertain as to the extent of the negative forces at work in the economy.  At the same time, you may view the incoming information as suggesting that the 50 basis point easing earlier this month is unlikely to be sufficient to adequately balance the risks to economic activity and inflation.  Given these considerations, you might see modest further easing today as appropriate and be prepared to cut rates again in coming months should developments warrant.The statement proposed for alternative B would note that the pace of economic activity appears to have slowed markedly, and it would repeat language from your early October statement indicating that the financial market turmoil is likely to exert additional restraint on spending.  The announcement would also indicate that, in light of the decline in the prices of energy and other commodities, the Committee expects inflation to moderate in coming quarters to levels consistent with price stability.  As noted in a box in the Bluebook, we think that, in view of your previous policy communications, outside analysts would interpret such a statement on the inflation outlook as indicating that the Committee anticipates that overall inflation will drop to around 1½ percent to 1¾ percent before long, a indication that would be consistent with the central tendency of your inflation projections for 2009.  The risk assessment in alternative B, paragraph 4, would cite the same broad range of policy actions that was proposed in alternative C, paragraph 2.  It would indicate that the predominant concern of the Committee is the downside risks to economic growth.  Market participants see a 25 basis point easing at this meeting as possible, but at this point they seem to place significantly higher odds on a 50 basis point reduction.  The explicit citation of downside risks to growth would suggest that further easing could be forthcoming after this meeting, but this announcement still would suggest a higher path for the federal funds rate than they anticipate.  Consequently, short- and intermediate-term rates might tend to edge up after such an announcement, credit spreads might widen somewhat further, and equity prices might decline.  Under alternative A, the Committee would ease policy 50 basis points at this meeting.  An economic outlook along the lines of the Greenbook forecast would provide one rationale for choosing this alternative.  The Greenbook forecast for aggregate demand has been slashed dramatically, importantly reflecting a sharp decline in equity prices, a steep rise in credit risk premiums, and a considerable climb in the foreign exchange value of the dollar.  One metric for this revision is the Greenbook-consistent measure of the short-run equilibrium real interest rate, r*, which has been cut nearly 3 percentage points since the September meeting to a level of about minus 3 percent.  That level is about 2 percentage points below the actual real funds rate defined on a consistent basis.  The staff outlook for a protracted period of substantial economic slack, together with the recent plunge in energy prices, points to a considerable diminution of inflation pressures, with overall inflation falling to 1½ percent next year in the Greenbook forecast—even with the Greenbook’s assumption of 100 basis points of further easing by early next year.  But even those who are somewhat less pessimistic about the outlook than the Board staff might view the modal outlook as having deteriorated enough, or the downside risks as having increased enough, to warrant a 50 basis point rate cut today.The rationale language for alternative A in the revised version of table 1 is similar to that for alternative B, but alternative A, paragraph 2, notes additional factors that are restraining growth.  The risk assessment, too, is similar to that for alternative B, but it references the rate reduction that would be implemented today under this alternative and notes that downside risks to growth remain, without saying that the downside risks are the Committee’s predominant concern.  An announcement along these lines seems largely consistent with market participants’ expectations, and the market reaction would likely be relatively small.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Instead, it presents three different alternatives for monetary policy, each with their own rationale and potential market reactions. There is no indication of disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 248.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Questions for Brian.  All right.  If there are no questions, why don’t we begin our go-round.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrases "Thank you," "Questions for Brian," "All right," and "If there are no questions" all indicate a polite and cooperative tone, suggesting agreement or harmony among the participants.


Passage number 249.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think that this is a tough call.  I support alternative B, with the statement wording as presented.  In my thinking, a 25 basis point cut today is part of a total 75 basis point action, including the October 8 move.  I believe the deterioration we have seen in September and October and the resulting downward revision of the outlook merit a cumulative response of this magnitude.  That said, I am sympathetic to the view that we would be well advised to keep some powder dry to respond to shocks or developments ahead.  I anticipate that, because a number of the dynamics in the markets have not really played out, we will have more shocks and they could come from further financial institution failures, corporate failures, a sovereign debt crisis, and market disarray; and in other markets, such as the municipal market, there is always a chance of a geopolitical event.  In all likelihood these things come in combination or in rapid fire.  So, as I said, I am sympathetic to the “powder dry” view, but I see the powder dry objective as being in conflict with responding to the recent deterioration.  Therefore I come to 25 basis points or alternative B to some extent as a compromise, combined with the 50 basis points of October 8.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker presents their perspective and acknowledges the potential validity of an opposing view, but ultimately comes to a conclusion that they see as a compromise.


Passage number 250.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement simply expresses gratitude to President Yellen.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 251.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative A, a 50 basis point cut in the funds rate.  This action, and even more, is justified by the dramatic developments since our last meeting—a deepening of the recessionary outlook worldwide, the near meltdown of the global financial system, and the abatement of inflationary pressures.  Frankly, it is time for all hands on deck when it comes to our policy tools, and the fed funds rate should be no exception.  Although we cut the funds rate 50 basis points a few weeks ago, the Greenbook inflation projection was revised down more than that, so the ex ante real funds rate actually edged up over the intermeeting period. We need to do much more and the sooner, the better.  One might argue against such a policy move in favor of a wait-and-see approach to better gauge if the recent flurry of policy initiatives will turn things around.  In normal times, I would have some sympathy for this argument, but these are about as far from normal times as we can get.  We are in the midst of a global economic and financial freefall, and the confidence of households, businesses, and investors is in shambles.  The adverse feedback loop is playing out with a vengeance.  Lenders continue to ratchet up terms and standards, sapping the ability of households and businesses to spend.  As the economy weakens, further loan defaults will mushroom. I think strong, clear action is needed.  Historical precedents, such as the case of Japan, teach us that it is a mistake to act cautiously as the economy unravels.  I think the clear lesson from both economic theory and real-world experience is to lower rates as quickly as possible to avoid a deeper and more protracted recession, not to keep our powder dry or to wait to use tools until later if they are available to us now.  The more medicine we give and the sooner we give it, the better.  The Bluebook optimal policy simulations tell us that, absent the zero bound, the funds rate should be lowered well below zero next year.  Since that is not an option, we should do the most with what we’ve got and cut the funds rate aggressively now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Yellen, favors a 50 basis point cut in the funds rate and argues for strong, clear action due to the deepening recessionary outlook and the near meltdown of the global financial system. However, she acknowledges that one might argue against such a policy move in favor of a wait-and-see approach to better gauge recent policy initiatives. She counters this argument by stating that these are not normal times and that historical precedents teach us to act quickly to avoid a deeper recession.


Passage number 252.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the provided passage. It is simply a polite expression of gratitude addressed to someone named Governor Kohn.


Passage number 253.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Rosengren.


Passage number 254.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Like the Greenbook forecast, our forecast predicts a significant recession.  Further easing will likely help mitigate the severity of the recession.  Coupled with improvements in short-term credit spreads, a reduction in the federal funds rate should lower rates on home equity lines of credit as well as business and consumer rates tied to LIBOR, easing cash flow for consumers and businesses.  We are facing problems of historic proportions, both here and abroad.  A 50 basis point easing, as in alternative A, is both necessary and appropriate.  Even with the easing assumed in the Greenbook, the unemployment rate remains too high for too long.  The inflation rate falls enough to be well below my target.  To avoid a severe and prolonged recession, we will very likely need further monetary easing and a significant fiscal package, even after this 50 basis point reduction in the federal funds rate. I would just note in terms of the language that, although I am comfortable with the alternative A language, my actual views would be closer to saying “the predominant concern of the Committee is the downside risk to growth” rather than “nevertheless, downside risks to growth remain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents the speaker's views and recommendations regarding monetary easing and fiscal measures to address the recession.


Passage number 255.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude towards President Evans and the tone is polite.


Passage number 256.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  After thinking about this for quite some time, I cannot convince myself that alternative A is not the right way to go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses their opinion after thoughtful consideration but does not argue or present conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 257.
  MR. KROSZNER.  Let the transcript reflect that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no disagreement or contention in the given passage.


Passage number 258.
  [Laughter] MR. EVANS.  You were very effective in listing a number of dire circumstances.  The fact that we may challenge the maximum duration of a recession in the postwar period, any mention of the 1981-82 recession is very frightening, you even mentioned 1975 in terms of the reduction in confidence, and the 1980 credit crunch also—you were able to do that without any mention of the 1930s, and that’s quite compelling, I would say.   So for the reasons that have been already discussed, the outlook is quite unfavorable, and I think that this will help improve matters.  But as I thought about the concerns that I have, one concern is whether this will actually be viewed as effective today.  I’m not sure about that.  The last time we cut rates, financial stress intervened to swamp any beneficial interpretation of that.  Whether that affects our credibility, I think that Don Kohn was very effective in mentioning that there will be credibility hits in the other direction if we don’t take some action like that.  I do think that eventually things will subside and the beneficial effects of lower policy will be seen.  About the dry powder argument, we are not going to have many more actions left after this, but I don’t see what the alternatives are other than to go ahead and put this in place.  I don’t subscribe to the view that inflation is likely to be too low, although that is a risk.  Inflation concerns, the financial stress, all of those issues, even taking into account the risk that President Bullard mentioned the other day, I think speak strongly to the fact that we’re running out of normal monetary policy options and that fiscal actions are going to be strongly important.  So I do favor alternative A.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker seems to be expressing their own thoughts and concerns without directly addressing or challenging anyone else's views.


Passage number 259.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 260.
 MR. HOENIG.  Well, Mr. Chairman, I certainly understand how serious this matter is, and I guess I am of the view that alternative A is not going to solve much.  There is a psychology, I understand, in the market that is going on, and I am not convinced that our continuing to take these actions and then having adverse outcomes is necessarily going to inspire confidence.  I think we need to let our actions work their way through.  Part of the problem is that the credit mechanism is stuck right now because of the tremendous uncertainties.  Then I look at all of the things we have done over the last month, and the ramping up of the liquidity facilities has really exceeded even our ability to sterilize.  So we have had, in effect, a funds rate that is well below our target.  We have excess reserves in that period that were over $280 billion when they are normally $2 billion, and that was before we added more swap lines and more liquidity into the market.  Frankly, I think we are at a point now where the liquidity mechanisms that we’re trying to use, not our interest rate targeting, are really our monetary policy.  As we go forward, perhaps we need to think about how we are going to conduct monetary policy under a quantitative easing environment.  That is what I think we will effectively be at if we move again today.  So how we think about liquidity and about the credit mechanisms is really where more of our attention will have to be spent.  Lowering the rate may have some positive effects, but I doubt it.  So I would just stay where we are, let some of these past actions begin to work through, and see what the effects of those are before we then take another move because I think the market would just appreciate some stability over time in our actions so that they can see these things begin to work.  It isn’t a problem of the interest rate level right now, in my opinion, so that’s why I would wait and see.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own view and perspective on the issue but there is no clear evidence of disagreement with any other party or perspective.


Passage number 261.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 262.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard, you have a handout.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude and acknowledging President Bullard's handout without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 263.
 MR. BULLARD.  I do have a handout.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is simply stating a fact that the speaker has a handout. There is no mention of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 264.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Everybody have a copy.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. The statement is a simple request or suggestion for everyone to have a copy. There is no opposition or conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 265.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Let’s see, President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude and proceeds to mention President Fisher.


Passage number 266.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, if you had kicked around in the streets of Hong Kong in 1997, then you would have wandered into elementary schools and seen what we called at that time “Quotrons”—children trading stocks on the lunchroom floor.  It was the surest indicator that the market was out of control.  This morning I opened the Wall Street Journal, and on the front page they describe an exercise run by the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association, which you know is Wall Street’s biggest trade group, with a similar program in American schools.  It says that a 13-year old in Wilmington, Delaware—Michael Ashworth—is slumped by his computer, weary from another rough day in the stock market with all his favorite picks—Domino’s Pizza, the Hershey Company, and Gap—surprise.  [Laughter]  “I’ll be honest with you,” he confided, “before all this I asked my Mom to give me stocks for Christmas.  But then, I told her not to do it.  I asked for a parakeet instead.”  [Laughter]  Now, this is not as exotic or thoughtful a handout as the one from my colleague from St. Louis, but here’s the point.  He may not get that parakeet because the pet store may not have access to credit.  This is, to me, the fundamental issue that I think President Plosser—and I won’t repeat his arguments—and President Hoenig were referring to.  The concern I have is not about the price of money.  In fact, I think we are not seeing that kind of transmission mechanism—Governor Duke gave testimony to that earlier.  All of us are aware that it is not moving as quickly through the IV tube as we would like it to because of the crimped nature of the tube. I have no problem with the language in alternative A, except for the first paragraph, and the phrase “including today’s rate reduction.”  I have an open mind.  I do think the issue in terms of restoring the system comes back to credibility and predictability.  You cannot have a functioning capitalist system if you have total uncertainty.  These are the issues that I believe President Plosser, President Hoenig, earlier President Lacker, and others were referring to in the first intervention.  I thank President Geithner in particular for addressing the questions I asked yesterday, and there was reference to them earlier. We have done so much so quickly.  We are in a quantitative easing period.  The question is whether it actually makes a difference if we cut rates or not and whether the price of money is actually the issue or the fact that money is not flowing, that there are counterparty risks and rollover risks, and all the things we have talked about at this table and each of us has articulated in our public speeches.  To be very honest with you, Mr. Chairman, I am open-minded about this because I could make that argument both ways.  If it doesn’t matter, why not cut 50 basis points.  Or why not hold.  I am not convinced yet—and I’d like to listen to the rest of the arguments—that alternative A, in terms of the action, is the right way to go.  I do think it’s very important that we be very clear and articulate in laying out how we see the world, and I do believe that the language in alternative A does the best job of all the columns that have been presented.   But I come back to the question I asked before.  What are the next steps.  I’d like to know.  What is the end game.  I’d like to know before I cast my vote.  I will conclude with actually once again agreeing with President Yellen, as I think I have done twice in history.  [Laughter]  The last time was at the last meeting.  I think it’s very important that we have all hands on deck, that we have a unanimous decision.  But, still, I would like answers to my questions.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It includes the speaker expressing their thoughts and concerns, but there is no direct disagreement or argument presented.


Passage number 267.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher, I promised you answers, and I will deliver them.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage indicates a promise made by President Pianalto to President Fisher. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 268.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I strongly favor alternative A, a 50 basis point cut in our fed funds target rate today.  I think it is important for us to move aggressively and quickly to offset the strong forces that are acting to depress economic activity.  I know that some prefer a more measured response, especially as we move closer to the zero bound, but the lesson I take from history is that more and sooner is better than taking smaller steps over time.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: In the passage, Ms. Pianalto expresses a strong favor for alternative A, a 50 basis point cut in the fed funds target rate. However, she acknowledges that some may prefer a more measured response, especially as they approach the zero bound. This indicates a disagreement or contention among members regarding the appropriate course of action.


Passage number 269.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude from President Lacker.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 270.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The economic outlook has definitely deteriorated.  On top of the slowing at the beginning of the third quarter, a sequence of policy actions and statements has spread an inchoate fear.  In response to that, a wide variety of economic agents have delayed outlays.  The breathtaking credit market interventions that we have undertaken in the last several weeks are going to make it hard to judge whether those markets are stabilized.  It is going to make it even harder to judge how and when to withdraw.   Governor Duke asked rhetorically what it would take for recovery to begin.  I think it is not going to be a very healthy recovery unless we have made substantial progress toward withdrawing these interventions.  I know it’s probably premature in the midst of a crisis to be talking about the recovery, but a number of people did, and I think it makes sense on the grounds that President Plosser advanced for us to be thinking ahead.  President Geithner talked about the will and the desire and that it amounts to a matter of will to reverse course later on.  I think that in withdrawing these subsidies and these credit market interventions is where we are going to need the will.  It is going to be really hard to disenfranchise somebody who now has access to one of these programs. The inflation outlook has improved.  Expected inflation has come down.  A couple of people have noted that.  That brings the real rate where the interest rate is now—to about zero.  So I can favor a 50 point reduction in the federal funds rate target at this meeting.  I think a funds rate that is, in real terms as best as we can measure it, about minus 1 percent is how we should see our way through here, at least in the near term.  Like President Evans, I will mention the 1930s.  What I take from my reading of the Great Depression is that this is what central banks should do in times like this—keep real interest rates low. Let me make a couple of brief observations.  As I mentioned yesterday, I think we are going to face a challenge communicating about our strategy.  If we need to reduce interest rates to the lowest practical level to which we feel we can reduce them, I think yesterday’s discussion suggests that the Committee could use a refresher course on the monetary economics of the zero bound.  I applaud President Bullard for his breaking new ground by providing a figure from the Journal of Economic Theory.  [Laughter]   I want to put something on the table about the federal funds rate.  We are voting today on the target for the federal funds rate.  The way our operations are conducted now, we are leaving so many excess reserves in the system that we are driving the federal funds rate down to the interest rate on reserves.  The interbank risk premium is likely to become small as the FDIC guarantee becomes well understood and more broadly effective.  The GSEs are likely to catch on that they deserve more on their funds.  Small banks, as Governor Duke says, that haven’t really paid attention to what this new regime is about are going to find that brokers are going to be able to find them placements at closer to the interest rate on reserves.  So I think that the sloppy trading below the interest rate on reserves is going to fade over time.  As long as we have excess reserves at the scale that we do, as long as the Desk has added that many reserves, we are going to have the effective federal funds rate at the interest rate on reserves.  Because we are voting on the federal funds target rate, I think that the Committee ought to have some understanding from the staff that either excess reserves are going to be drawn down to the point that the effective rate is lifted off the interest rate on the reserves floor or—and this would be my preferable course of action—we raise the interest rate on reserves to equal the target rate.  Otherwise, we are voting on something, but we are actually doing something else.  I can understand the desire to err on the side of soft rates.  This is what we did in August 2007.  But as rates go down, we need to be more and more careful about what the Committee is actually voting on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker is expressing disagreement with the current policy actions and advocating for a different approach. They argue that the interventions in the credit markets are causing fear and delaying economic activity, and that it is important to start thinking about withdrawing these interventions in order to have a healthy recovery. The speaker also disagrees with the current interest rate policy and suggests raising the interest rate on reserves to equal the target rate.


Passage number 271.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Just to support what you said, we are obviously still trying to find our way in how to use this in the new regime with the excess reserves interest rate.  It is possible that at some point we might decide to target that interest rate.  That might be the most straightforward thing to do.  But as I understand it—and, in fact, I’m quite confident—the intention of the staff and the Board is to try to figure out what the relationship is between the excess reserves interest rate and the federal funds rate as normally measured.  If we can establish a reliable relationship, then we should try to—and we will—use that to hit the target.  It’s coming close to it.  We certainly are not trying intentionally to come under the target.  If that fails, then we will go to what you are suggesting, which is effectively what I’m saying, and make them the same.  Then, effectively, there is no difference between targeting the interest rate on excess reserves and targeting the federal funds rate.  We are certainly open to that, and there is no intention to do anything other than to try to figure out a way to take the FOMC’s decision and put it into practice in the money markets.  President Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing different options and approaches, but there is no explicit argument or disagreement presented.


Passage number 272.
 MR. STERN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, financial headwinds continue to be a major part of my thinking about the economic outlook.  Reasonable people can differ about that issue, but it seems to me that the headwinds are significant and they are likely to persist.  Partially as a consequence and partially for other reasons, the economic outlook has deteriorated, and the inflation outlook, fortunately, has improved.  So I favor alternative A, and I am satisfied with the language associated with it. Let me make just one additional comment.  One way of thinking about lowering rates at this juncture and its potential effectiveness is that it is important to reduce the price of liquidity in this environment.  I think that’s what lowering the target would do.  That said, if I think about policy a bit beyond this meeting, I start with an observation that Governor Kohn made.  We are probably going to receive a batch of pretty negative economic news over the next several months.  At the same time, a lot of programs are in place, as everybody is aware; and perhaps my optimism is ill-conceived, but I actually think that they have the promise of being effective over time.  So it’s not just a question in my mind of the nature of the news we get, but are we also seeing signs that all these programs are getting some traction and being effective.  If they are, that ought to temper our desire to go further.  Obviously, a lot of things are in play, and a great deal of uncertainty is present here and abroad.  But we will simply have to assess all these developments as best we can as time passes.  I think I’ll end my remarks there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and opinions about the economic outlook and their support for a particular course of action.


Passage number 273.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Warsh.


Passage number 274.
 MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me begin by agreeing with Don Kohn on two things.  This is the toughest economic period I can remember in his lifetime, [laughter] and I support alternative A.  I think the inflation trends and the trends in the global economy give us flexibility, which six months or so ago I did not think we would have.  I think that gives us some degree of freedom that, given all of the negative tone, including my own, around the table, gives us at least some source of comfort. Next I would say that I agree with the consensus around the table, which is that these problems are not principally about monetary policy.  But I also think that monetary policy isn’t irrelevant to this, and all agencies of governments around the world are making tough decisions, and the marginal benefits of further monetary policy changes strike me as not high but not irrelevant.  I think President Plosser talked a bit about the alternative policy paths in the Greenbook that range from keeping the fed funds rate constant where it is to taking it to zero percent and the surprisingly small differences in output, employment, and core inflation there.  In some ways, in the discussion that we’re having about 25 or 50 or moving or not, it would not be fair for any of us to overstate the importance in terms of directly affecting the economy in the short term.   That goes to my final point, which is that the most valuable asset that we have isn’t what at the end of this meeting might be 100 basis points left of monetary policy.  Frankly, it is the credibility of the institution and the credibility of the FOMC.  If I compare our credibility now to virtually any other organization in the United States or maybe even globally, I think our credibility is holding up quite well, particularly relative to the degree of difficulty we have in front of us, relative to the trauma in financial markets and the weaknesses in the economy.  So it is that asset, that credibility, that we need to continue to protect more than incremental basis point moves on the fed funds rate.  I think that credibility will be tested over this period as it will for our counterparts.  We don’t want to find ourselves in a corner come December or come a couple of brutal days in the markets where we feel compelled to continue to act and make 50 basis point moves unless and until we know where we want to end up on this.  So I’m sympathetic to that point of view.  We need to tell the story before the story is told for us of what our lower bound is, why it’s there, and what our diagnosis of the economy is.  I think that the Chairman and the rest of us will have ample opportunity to do that between now and December and that it is quite important to make sure we come out of this as strong as we have been through this period so far.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Warsh, is expressing his agreement with various statements and views presented by others.


Passage number 275.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Kroszner.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Kroszner without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 276.
 MR. KROSZNER.  Thank you very much.  Well, I’ve not been able to convince myself not to agree with President Evans.  As everyone has said, we have this very significant global shift that has stepped down real activity and financial activity.  The inflation environment has changed dramatically from a number of months ago with the change in commodity prices, the change in the value of the dollar, and the change in not just U.S. but also global resource utilization.  I think we’ve seen just an enormous change there.  Also, when you look at the expected federal funds rate path—we have to be careful in looking at anything in the markets these days because of liquidity, risk premiums, or term premiums that we’re not quite sure about—the markets are expecting significant cuts from us.  They are not expecting any immediate or near-term significant increases in inflation, and I think all of the indications are that it will be going down. In a cost–benefit analysis, the costs seem relatively low in terms of the potential for inflation of doing this.  Now, we have to think about it in terms of benefits, and a number of people have touched on the transmission mechanism.  I do think that there are forces that mute the extent to which a 50 basis point cut translates into 50 basis points or lower on costs, but I don’t think they completely offset it.  It still has the effect of reducing the cost of liquidity, reducing many people’s borrowing costs.  I think it still does have an effect even if there’s an offsetting risk spread and even if there’s an offsetting bank action that affects that.  So in terms of costs and benefits, at this time it seems that the costs are relatively low or muted, and the benefits are positive and potentially high. In particular, as I mentioned before, I’m concerned about the confluence of forces that may make things very difficult around the end of the year.  If you look at a lot of these LIBOR or forward markets, they’re not coming down either in the United States or around the world.  We have a lot of uncertainties with hedge funds, with the potential for other institutions getting into trouble, and with just the implementation of our policies—in particular, as I mentioned, the way the FDIC guarantee program and the TARP program work may end up singling out institutions and bringing them down more quickly than otherwise.  So I think it makes sense in terms of cost–benefit analysis, even more so given the tail risk around the end of the year, to act now.  We have another opportunity to act in December and obviously an opportunity to act at any point if we do see a dramatic change.  We are getting near as much as we can do, but I don’t see the costs of acting more aggressively and more quickly here outweighing the benefits.  So I support alternative A with the language as drafted.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 277.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 278.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you.  I confess I find myself torn between the position of President Plosser and the equally compelling arguments of Governor Kohn, and that makes alternative B quite attractive as a way, not because of any optimism about the economic outcome, but I really do question the effectiveness of any move in the fed funds target given the actual trading of the fed funds rate right now.  When we set the interest rate on reserves, at that point I was concerned that our interest on reserves would disrupt the market for fed funds between banks because of the risk premium.  With the FDIC insurance, I think that goes away, and so probably President Lacker’s suggestion deserves some strong consideration.  I am also painfully aware of the operational and financial difficulties that banks experience at a 1 percent fed funds rate and the likely difficulties of other intermediaries as the absolute level of rates falls further. As I stated in my earlier remarks, I’m also most concerned about the importance of predictability in returning confidence to the markets, and in that light, I am concerned about market expectations.  But having recently been an expecter rather than a decider, I’m going to suggest that most of those doing the expecting don’t understand at all the issues that we’ve discussed here today.  There’s a thought that, if the fed funds rate just comes down, it would maybe make this pain go away.  So I agree with Governor Warsh that the public statements in the intermeeting period and as we approach the point where we simply can’t meet market expectations anymore are critically important to shape market expectations.  So I do think it’s important that the markets focus on the other efforts, and with that I would support alternative A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses that they find themselves torn between different arguments and considerations but does not outright disagree or argue against any specific point.


Passage number 279.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the provided passage. It simply expresses gratitude.


Passage number 280.
 VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.  Mr. Chairman, I support alternative A, both the action and the language for the reasons I said earlier.  I just want to make a couple of other points.  I think the only way to be predictable in a crisis like this is to be predictably inert or to be late.  I don’t understand the basic argument that you add to confidence by being inert or by being late or, as the Chairman said, by being passive despite overwhelming evidence about changes in the outlook and risks to financial stability.  The argument that makes me most uncomfortable here around the table today is the suggestion several of you have made—I’m not sure you meant it this way—which is that the actions by this Committee contributed to the erosion of confidence—a deeply unfair suggestion.   Now, a lot of things happened over the last three months and the last year, and a lot of things happened in terms of policy over the last six weeks.  There is no doubt that communication about policy by all the arms of the U.S. government and the uncertainty created by the actions by all the arms of the U.S. government contributed in ways to uncertainty about the policy response going forward.  There is also no doubt that inevitably in a crisis like this, when policy moves forcefully, it is scary because a lot of people are not yet at the point of assessing or understanding the forces driving our decisions.  But I think it’s just unfair to suggest that the actions by the Chairman and this Committee were a substantial contributor to the erosion in confidence and to uncertainty about further policy actions, even though it’s true that when we move with force and drama it has the risk of adding to uncertainty.   I’d be very careful to look more broadly at the full range of other things that happened in that period of time, including, for example, the confusion established by the range of different choices for interventions in Lehman, AIG, the GSEs, WaMu in particular, and Wachovia and what that meant.  Look particularly at the damage to confidence created by the Congress’s actions in the weeks after the legislation was first proposed.  Compare that, for example, with the announcement effect of the initial thing.  Look also at the uncertainty created around what the package was designed to do and how it was designed.  But please be very careful, certainly outside this room, about adding to the perception that the actions by this body were a substantial contributor to the erosion in confidence.  I think that Don Kohn said it best.  The whole framing, which seems to have hardened now, that the world ended with the Lehman bankruptcy is just deeply unfair to the basic truth.  Independent of whether there was an option available at the time, the erosion in underlying economic conditions and in confidence in the future outlook was powerful and substantial going into August and early September.  So I just offer that. You know, everyone wants to quote FDR.  FDR said at one point, “If I judge the mood of the country right, what this calls for is bold experimentation.”  I do not believe that this Chairman and this Committee have been irresponsibly experimenting at the cost of predictability and confidence going forward.  What we have done is a relatively well designed series of escalations in monetary policy and liquidity intended to be preemptive against what we knew was substantial risk of a very adverse economic and financial outcome.  The risks were not broadly shared, not just in this room but outside.  But I think the judgments by the Chairman were largely correct in weighing those risks appropriately at that time, and I think we all owe him a substantial amount of deference for the judgments he made and his wisdom.  Both here in this room and in the effect he had on the policy choices that the fiscal authorities also ultimately made look very good now and will look even better over time as people understand how grave and substantial the risks were that we were facing in the economy and the financial system.   One last point to President Fisher’s question.  President Fisher asked the obvious question, which is, What next.  I think a very good approach to decisionmaking is to say, “I don’t want to know so much about this.  I want to know about the next three things.”  I know the Chairman is going to give a nice, thoughtful, and complete answer to this.  But I would just say the following:  We don’t need to know today what is next on the monetary policy front.  We know there may be some arguments for going lower than 1 percent.  We have to think through very carefully the collateral damage consequence in terms of what that does to market functioning and behavior.  We have to look at the alternatives to that, including in communication.  A range of other policy options are within our capacity to influence and effect that will give us the ability to minimize downside risk going forward.  But I don’t think that we need to know—and we cannot know with precision—what the optimal mix of those things is now before deciding what to do, although I’m very sympathetic to the basic judgment.  The question really is, In moving today, are we going to do more harm than good to our ultimate objective.  It’s very hard to make the case that we do damage to any of our basic fundamental objectives and mandate.  I can see a much stronger case that we do a lot of damage to those if we don’t act today, even though we all recognize that ultimately this is going to require more than monetary policy to address the risk here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing support for the actions taken by the Chairman and the Committee and arguing against the suggestion that their actions contributed to the erosion of confidence.


Passage number 281.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply expresses gratitude.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 282.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I’d just like to just take a moment to react.  I’m not sure whom you heard saying that the result was primarily a result of this Committee’s actions or the Chairman’s actions or anyone else’s actions.  If those were words you were putting in my mouth, that was not what I said, President Geithner.  I do think I have been supportive of almost all the actions in terms of liquidity facilities; I supported the actions.  I also was supportive of the Lehman Brothers decision.  But I think it’s a far cry from saying that uncertainty about policies contributes to uncertainty—which you agreed to—it’s a far cry from that to saying we lay the blame at the feet of this Committee or the Chairman.  So I don’t know what straw man you were setting up, but it certainly didn’t apply to this member of the Committee.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser disagrees with something that President Geithner has said and believes that President Geithner is setting up a false argument.


Passage number 283.
 MR. FISHER.  First, I would like to thank you, Mr. Chairman, for that very thorough and clear elucidation.  I meant to mention earlier that I actually agree with President Evans.  It’s worthwhile now and then evoking Ronald Reagan.  What I mean by that is not his “Where’s the pony.” comment, but more important, the reason he was so successful as a leader was that he had clear objectives, they were limited, and they were well articulated.  It doesn’t matter if you’re a Democrat or a Republican.  I think it’s very important for us to understand what our objectives are in order for us to be fully supportive.  By the way, Tim, as Mr. Plosser has been, I have been fully supportive of all of these initiatives.  Again, I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, for helping us understand better the cognitive road map because it is critical for all of us to do what Janet suggested, which is have all hands on deck and make sure we’re all fully supportive.  Against that background I would support alternative A.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses agreement with President Evans, supports all of the initiatives, and thanks the chairman for his contributions.


Passage number 284.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Other questions.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage consists of three separate statements: "Thank you," "Other questions," and "President Plosser." These statements do not express any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 285.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Just a question or thought.  As the staff prepares the review of the 2003 studies and memos and thinks about what zero effectively means and how we might operate in those circumstances, one thing I think would be useful to include is a discussion of whether or not when that time comes we announce that publicly and say, “Okay.  This is it.  From now on we have to do X, Y, or Z,” and make it part of the communication strategy.  Maybe they would anyway.  But if we get to the point where we now as a group have some concerns that, well, effectively we really don’t want to go below X, we will have to do some other operational actions as a substitute for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Plosser is suggesting a possible course of action and discussing the need for a discussion on the matter. There is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 286.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think there’s no problem doing that.  I can do that.  That is not a problem.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. All the statements are expressing agreement and certainty about the situation. The mention of President Lacker does not introduce any disagreement either, as it is unrelated to the previous statements.


Passage number 287.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes, I also strongly support your charge and direction to the staff to assemble with all due haste updated information for the Committee about what the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates is.  But I’d urge you, along the lines of what President Plosser suggested, to include in that charge what we would do once we got there, what we could do, and what would be open to us.  I emphasize again the relevance even if we don’t get there because analytically we’re effectively doing that right now with interest on reserves.  The classic economics of this is that, when you get down to effective equivalence between a monetary asset and a government bond of one-day duration or whatever, to be effective monetary policy needs to be fiscal policy.  It needs to acquire other assets that we wouldn’t normally otherwise acquire.  We’re doing that right now.  So I’d emphasize the importance and relevance of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the charge given to the staff and is emphasizing the importance and relevance of considering what actions could be taken once they reach the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates.


Passage number 288.
 VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions "Mr. Chairman" without providing any statements or context that indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 289.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 290.
 VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.  I also think it would be helpful, as the staff looks at the policy options going forward, that they do other parts of the communication options, too—not just those but also other ways to think about how to make policy for looking at and communicating a path that are different from what we did in 2003.  It would be good to look at options for how we talk about policy going forward in that context along with just the operational choices and the policy choices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting that in addition to considering policy options, the staff should also explore other communication methods and alternative ways of discussing policy.


Passage number 291.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot answer the question as it is incomplete and lacks the necessary context.


Passage number 292.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Just to follow up on that—I think that’s a very excellent suggestion, President Geithner.  To be very specific about that, in our trial run, one thing that we did was to look at what we thought was the steady state.  One way to engender some communication about the longer run might be to include what the Committee thought the steady-state neutral level of the funds rate would be in that environment.  I’d describe the path by which we got there; it would convey some sense to the marketplace of what we thought would be in some normal world a reasonable level of the funds rate consistent with those targets.  I just throw that on the table as something to think about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser is simply suggesting a potential addition to the discussion or decision-making process.


Passage number 293.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Other comments.  Would you call the roll, please, Debbie.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply requesting someone to call the roll.


Passage number 294.
 MS. DANKER.  Yes.  This vote encompasses the language of alternative A that was in the package passed out earlier today as well as the directive from the Bluebook, which states the following: “The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with reducing the federal funds rate to an average of around 1 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Danker is simply restating what was included in the vote and the directive from the Bluebook.


Passage number 295.
” Chairman Bernanke   Yes Vice Chairman Geithner  Yes Governor Duke   Yes President Fisher   Yes Governor Kohn   Yes Governor Kroszner   Yes President Pianalto   Yes President Plosser   Yes President Stern   Yes Governor Warsh   Yes  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  I’ll need the governors to join me in my office for just a moment.  Everyone else, let’s all take a twenty-minute coffee break.  When we come back, maybe we can start at that point with your briefing, David, on the TARP, and around 12:15 we’ll break and get lunch and hear the end of the briefing, if that all works for everybody.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 296.
 VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.  The expected duration of the next part of our meeting is four hours, three hours.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: There is a contradiction between the expected duration of the next part of the meeting being four hours and three hours. The passage is not consistent in providing a clear duration for the meeting.


Passage number 297.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We should be done by 1:00.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 298.
 MS. DANKER.  It’s not part of the meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement doesn't present any conflicting views or opinions. It simply clarifies that something is not a part of the meeting.


Passage number 299.
 VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.  The nonmeeting part of the meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "nonmeeting part of the meeting" does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply refers to a specific portion of a meeting that does not involve formal discussions or decision-making.


Passage number 300.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It’s only a briefing, not a meeting, once we come back.  Okay.  A twenty-minute break now and then we’ll have a briefing and lunch.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a plan for a briefing and lunch after a twenty-minute break.


Passage number 301.
 [Recess] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, let me officially get to the point of adjourning the FOMC meeting just by first noting that the next meeting is Tuesday, December 16.  Put that on your calendar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 302.
 VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.  That’s a long way away.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any statement or argument that could lead to contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact or observation without any contradictory or controversial content.


Passage number 303.
  [Laughter] MR. PLOSSER.  Can’t we meet before then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting a meeting before a certain time and there doesn't seem to be any opposing argument or disagreement presented.


Passage number 304.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’d like to remind you that you have until 5:00 p.m. on Thursday to submit revisions to your economic projections, in case the markets change your views.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states a reminder about the deadline to submit revisions to economic projections, without presenting any contentions or disagreements.


Passage number 305.
 MS. DANKER.  Only through today’s meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not suggest any contention or disagreement. The statement simply mentions a meeting happening today.


