Passage number 1.
 Roberds, Policy Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of April 29-30, 2008  April 29, 2008—Afternoon Session  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let’s formally begin the meeting.  Let me start by welcoming our new colleague, Jim Bullard from St. Louis, over there in the heartland section of the table.  [Laughter]  We welcome you, and we look forward to your contribution and to working with you. I want just to note that there has been some interest in doing more work collectively—Board members and Presidents—on various issues relating to bank supervision and regulation.  We have some work streams planned, Governor Kohn will talk about this a bit tomorrow during our lunch, and we will discuss some of those things.  Let me now turn to Bill Dudley to discuss Desk operations.  Bill, if you would, also talk about some of the proposals for expanding liquidity support.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply welcoming a new colleague and discussing future plans for collective work on bank supervision and regulation.


Passage number 2.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Let’s have questions for Bill on financial markets, and then we will come back to a full discussion of the proposed actions.  Questions for Bill.  No questions.  That is unusual.  Yes, President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The dialogue simply describes a brief exchange where there are no questions asked for Bill before moving on to a different topic. President Lacker expresses surprise at the lack of questions, but there is no disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 3.
 MR. LACKER.  About consumer-loan-backed securities, spreads have widened and delinquencies and defaults have increased, but not out of line with past experience.  You seem to have inferred that spreads have widened more than is warranted by the return on those securities.  I would be interested in what computational exercises or what other analytics you and your staff have undertaken to document the hypothesis that these spreads are not warranted by the fundamentals.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker is expressing his interest in understanding the computational exercises or analytics used by the speaker to support their hypothesis about the spreads on consumer-loan-backed securities. However, there is no indication of disagreement or contention between the two speakers.


Passage number 4.
 MR. DUDLEY.  I am not so much saying that they are not warranted.  I am saying that the spreads have widened a lot relative to the actual experience, given that we are in a period of weaker economic growth.  The stress seems to be more on the spreads that the market is demanding for these assets as opposed to a deterioration in the underlying credit card loans or auto loans that back those assets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 5.
 MR. LACKER.  I think the political concern you raised and described is a very, very serious one for this institution.  Even if we thought of this ourselves before Senator Dodd and others wrote to us—and apparently it is true that we did—we are never going to be able to convince a broad array of observers that this was not a direct response to a senatorial request.  Given that, I think the perception that we included this and maybe added some other securities as a fig leaf sets just a disastrous precedent.  It would be the use of our balance sheet to circumvent the checks and balances of the constitutional process for legislating about fiscal matters.  I think that the integrity of our independence as an institution relies, to a substantial degree, on our lack of entanglement or our distance from the political fray. I would also question the value of this on the substance.  What we are doing with the TSLF, as Bill’s chart showed, looks as though it has had a big effect on the GC repo rate.  It is hard to see how some additional amount of Treasuries in the market, given the size of the Treasury market, is going to have a gigantic effect.  It is also hard to see that there is much strain or dislocation caused by the most recent observation in his graph on the gap between the funds rate and the GC repo rate—which is actually, what, like 10 or 20 basis points or about what it has historically been.  So I would question whether we really need this on the substance as well. On the other measures, the TAF is dominated by European institutions.  Term funding spreads seem dominated by the term funding demands of European institutions.  I don’t see why we don’t try to shift to European institutions the public policy responsibility for managing those situations.  We already have an apparently well-functioning mechanism for supplying dollar balances to foreign official institutions to allow them to do that.  I don’t see why we don’t limit our expansion of funding in that direction—to the swap lines—rather than expanding the TAF.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement present in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, is expressing his own opinion and perspective on the matter being discussed, but there is no direct disagreement or contention with other individuals mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 6.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions President Hoenig without providing any additional information or implying any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 7.
 MR. HOENIG.  A question—and just remind me—if we bring the student loans and these other assets in under this facility, do we have the right to swap out if the rating changes or questions come up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about the terms and conditions related to bringing student loans and other assets under a facility.


Passage number 8.
 MR. DUDLEY.  Yes.  They are priced every day; and if they are downgraded, there will be an automatic substitution.  So you are protected both on price and on the ability to substitute.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply explains a system in place for pricing and substitution.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 9.
 MR. HOENIG.  That was my first question.  The second is that we have been entangled before in appearance issues.  If we feel that we are doing the right thing, that doesn’t give me much concern.  On the substance, do you judge that the tightness in the market is such that this action is necessary to facilitate liquidity, or will this only marginally improve things.  If it is marginal, the appearance issue becomes more entangled, I think.  If it is pretty clear that we have some liquidity issues and that this will address them, then I would feel much more comfortable with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Hoenig, is presenting two opposing viewpoints. On one hand, he suggests that if the action is necessary to improve liquidity in the market, then any appearance issues shouldn't be a concern. On the other hand, he expresses concern that if the action only marginally improves things, the appearance issue becomes more entangled and problematic.


Passage number 10.
 MR. DUDLEY.  Well, I think the honest answer is that we don’t really know exactly where it is on the continuum of very modest to substantive.  One thing we can say is that this should increase the demand at the TSLF auction, so it should increase the likelihood that more of the Treasuries are actually put into the market in exchange for such collateral because we are broadening the eligible collateral.  But I don’t think the notion that this is a panacea is true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply expresses uncertainty and provides their perspective on the potential impact of the mentioned actions.


Passage number 11.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Vice Chairman" does not itself indicate contention or disagreement. It just specifies a position within an organization.


Passage number 12.
 VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.  I want to say just one thing in this context.  The Chairman alluded to this, too.  I think there is some value in taking this opportunity now to try to get a better balance in the relative attractiveness across these facilities.  So in the scheme of things, it is better for us for the auction type of facilities to be relatively attractive compared with the open facilities for which demand is unknown and we can’t calibrate it—those are much bigger reserve-management things.  I think our exit strategy from these things is easier if we evolve in that direction.  One virtue of the package that the Chairman presented is that it is worth taking another shot at trying to get those interbank term premiums down in dollars because—to use a technical term—they are screwing up the transmission mechanism of U.S. monetary policy now.  We are not quite sure how much effect we can have.  There is a plausible case that increasing the size of the swaps will help on that front.  It is worth doing now.  Second, the broader package will buy a little more insurance against the risk that these liquidity pressures reignite and we have another wave of the adverse dynamic margin-spiral-downward-self-feeding thing.  It is better to do that when other things are improving rather than wait until we are again at the edge of the abyss, although that is a tactical judgment.  It is hard to know for sure.   I think that Bill is absolutely right.  It is not clear how much incremental benefit the expanded collateral in the TSLF will offer.  We can’t be sure.  But, Jeff, it won’t come because we are increasing the size of the TSLF.  That would increase the amount of Treasuries we are putting in, and we are not increasing the size.  It would come only through what effect it might have on the broader range of asset-backed securities we have there.  Remember, at the beginning we framed this as an effort to address some unique constraints operating on securitization markets, particularly in ABS.  So there is a possibility of some additional benefit in those markets—some greater insurance against another downward spiral in that case—but not that high.  It is hard to judge the merits of that against the appearance risk you presented, but I think this is designed pretty carefully to be robust to that perception problem.  Our job is to do what makes sense and what we can defend as sensible in this context, and we have to be prepared to do that even if people have made it awkward for us to do the right thing because of the perception problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreements or arguments. It mainly consists of the author expressing their thoughts and opinions on various aspects of the Chairman's presented package and the potential benefits and risks associated with it.


Passage number 13.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only states President Rosengren's position without any opposing views or conflicting information.


Passage number 14.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Well, I certainly agree with the last statement that we should do what makes sense, and in this case, differentiating between kinds of collateral that are all AAA doesn’t make sense to me.  We should broaden it out.  I would say that in your presentation you didn’t have the asset-backed commercial paper market, but those rates actually have been quite elevated.  Some rollovers for some of the large banks have not been working all that well, and the assets that tend to be in those conduits are the very assets we are talking about expanding.  They are the student loans, the auto loans, and the various other things that go into these conduits.  So I don’t know how big an effect it would be, but if you look at the asset-backed commercial paper rates, they would look a lot like the LIBOR rates.  I think that there might be some net benefit, and it certainly does make sense to me that we would expand.  There is no reason to differentiate among AAA collateral that has many similar attributes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Rosengren, agrees with the last statement made and provides additional information to support his viewpoint.


Passage number 15.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker, a two-handed comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any information or indication of contention or disagreement. It simply mentions President Lacker without providing any additional context or details.


Passage number 16.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.  Mr. Chairman, you motivated the expansion of the term securities lending facility by the effect it would have by increasing the amount of Treasuries in the market.  Vice Chairman Geithner, you appealed to the effect it would have on the asset-backed securities that would be offered on the market.  We didn’t discuss the asset-backed securities market, except that I had this exchange with our Manager.  I am not aware of any evidence that there is something wrong with the fundamentals of those markets.  Now, admittedly, it is not clear that many of our arguments for some of these facilities have been based on some careful diagnosis of fundamentals.  If this is about those asset-backed securities markets, that is another thing entirely.  I was a little confused about that and wondered about the rationale.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing confusion and questioning the rationale behind a particular decision.


Passage number 17.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I may have misspoken, but I think I had in mind both sides of the equation.  The Treasuries have certainly responded.  It’s harder to judge on the asset side, but I guess that the premise is the same—that all of these markets are suffering from withdrawal of the normal liquidity provision of money market mutual funds and other, less sophisticated investors.  Banks and others are finding it hard to finance those assets, and that’s the liquidity backstop that we provide.  So I think on both sides.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is simply stating their thoughts and observations on the situation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 18.
 MR. DUDLEY.  If I may come back to the issue of the AAA securities and the spreads, those are AAA-rated securities for which the spread has widened hundreds of basis points.  If the loss experienced is not unusual relative to the cycle, then it’s hard to understand why AAA-rated securities would be selling at several hundred basis points over Treasuries.  It is impossible to square that circle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker is expressing disagreement or contention by stating that it is difficult to understand why AAA-rated securities are selling at such high spreads if the loss experienced is not unusual.


Passage number 19.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Since the passage is not provided, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 20.
 MR. LACKER.  If the payoff for those securities is unexpectedly low, it is likely to happen in a circumstance in which the economy is doing awfully poorly.  Risk premiums are about variances and risk aversion, but they are also about correlation with aggregate states.  Arguably, that would rationalize a widening of the risk premiums attached to a wide range of securities, mortgage-backed included.  We have yet to see any evidence from our staff refuting that interpretation of the widening spreads we have seen.  Mr. Chairman, with all due respect, what you describe is a lack of demand.  I am not sure how that squares with viewing the market as somehow malfunctioning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 21.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, we have seen the breakdown of a particular structure of lending that was based on the credit ratings.  The credit ratings have proven to be false.  Therefore, there is an informational deficit—an asymmetric information problem, would be my interpretation—which has, in turn, triggered a massive change in preferences.  But I don’t think we are going to settle this at the table here.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is a disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that the credit ratings have proven to be false, suggesting a breakdown in the lending structure. However, they also mention that they interpret the situation as an informational deficit or asymmetric information problem. This suggests that there might be differing views or interpretations of the cause of the breakdown.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 22.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The question that I have gets to the appearance issue, and it is not really about the immediate concerns.  To the extent that the markets are not functioning that well, this could be useful, and so I don’t really have any disagreement with that.  But the facilities that we are talking about currently have a temporary nature to them.  The term auction facility is temporary, although of course the Board could make it permanent.  The term securities lending facility is an expansion of a program.  What’s the permanence of that and the primary dealer credit facility as well.  As we allow other forms of collateral to be taken, what implications might that have for the future if we try to make these more permanent.  This is simply a question; I don’t know what the answer is.  Do we feel comfortable with these forms of additional collateral on a permanent, ongoing basis, if we were to do that; or do we think it would be possible to turn that off.  How costly would it be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker raises concerns about the permanence of certain facilities and the implications of allowing other forms of collateral. They admit to not knowing the answer and ask for further consideration of the issue.


Passage number 23.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The TSLF and the PDCF are emergency measures, and barring congressional action, we cannot maintain them.  Presumably, they will be phased out as markets improve.  If we are doing these things, I don’t see the argument for one set of collateral versus another.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply presents information about certain measures and suggests that they will be phased out as markets improve. The statement from President Fisher also does not introduce any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 24.
  MR. FISHER.  Along those lines, Mr. Chairman, I viewed these facilities as a liquidity bridge, an aqueduct, to getting over this credit crunch that we have had.  I am not as concerned about having this facility accept the same collateral as the other facilities.  I do have a question about the permanence, and it is a different kind of question, which is whether or not the Congress will encourage us to make these permanent.  I think that is a risk, and we need to think about it.  I don’t have an answer.  I have been on the receiving end, as you may know, of enormous pressure from the Texas delegation on the student loan business, and we have talked about it with the staff quite a bit.  I quoted you in my response, by the way, in your first series of letters.  It doesn’t bother me to have egg on my face if we are doing the right thing—again, having the same collateral regime as we have for our other facilities.  I am more worried, however, about whether it encourages them in interfering with the temporary nature of these facilities.  That is just one point to think about.  I have a question about the TAF—just to make sure that I understand.  We are talking about taking it to $150 billion in outstandings—is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's personal views and concerns.


Passage number 25.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without the passage provided, it is impossible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 26.
 MR. FISHER.  So $75 billion auctions.  Okay.  The third point, which is about optics, is a little different.  I don’t know what we’re going to come out with in terms of policy.  I know what my preferences are, and I sense what some other people’s preferences are.  I’m a little concerned that we have to be able to express this in a way that doesn’t look as though we see something that no one else sees.  So we need to think about that and the way we articulate it.  The last time we had a disconnect between an action on the fed funds rate and agreeing to something and announcing it internationally, it didn’t really work well.  They read more into it than was there.  We all understood why we were having that time disconnect—it was because we needed to line up our ducks with our foreign counterparts.  Maybe we should think about that as well—whether we should move it up to the same time that we announce the action of this Committee on the fed funds rate.  I don’t know if that is physically possible.  But I wouldn’t want in any way to convey that we see something that other people don’t see, that there is a problem in these particular markets.  Everybody knows that GE is trying to sell a $40 billion credit card portfolio and they are not getting any bidders.  So I can see the devious minds, or the minds of those who don’t necessarily think well of us, linking all these little pieces together and saying that we’re reacting or overreacting to something that may not be there.  I just wanted to put that on the table for you to think about.  I am not against the concept, since we have already gone down this path, of making this subject to the same collateral regime.  But I do think—and I am glad you raised the subject—that, though I have interpreted it differently, we have to be concerned about the optics here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their concerns and raising points for others to consider.


Passage number 27.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher, the timing is dictated by the preference of the Europeans not to be tied into our monetary policy decision and the fact that Thursday is a European holiday.  The problem you were alluding to earlier had to do with the very strong market expectation that we were going to act on liquidity measures.  We disappointed both on that and on the rate.  That was why we got the strong reaction, and there’s no such expectation to my knowledge here.  At the same time, our press release, which we have already looked at in draft, and market expectations are very focused on the LIBOR issue and the interbank issue.  Given that we have done so many steps in this direction, I don’t think that this would be misinterpreted as anything particularly overdramatic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily discusses the timing of a monetary policy decision and the expectations of the market.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 28.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, may I just raise one other point.  I think President Lacker touched on this.  I am concerned, in terms of the eventual optics, about the fact that the TAF is being drawn on predominately by foreign banks.  My numbers here are that the last one was 78 percent foreign bank participation and the previous one was 91 percent.  I think there we may have some political vulnerability.  Again, I just put it on the table for us to consider.  I am almost more worried about a backlash on that eventually than what we are talking about currently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher raises a concern about the TAF being predominantly drawn on by foreign banks and suggests that this could create political vulnerability and potential backlash. This indicates a difference in opinion or perspective.


Passage number 29.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The problem is that European banks are structurally deficient in dollars and they have a time zone shift.  It is a dollar market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply presents a statement about European banks being structurally deficient in dollars and having a time zone shift. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 30.
 MR. FISHER.  It has been well presented.  It’s hard to explain to a politician.  That’s my point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It simply states that the point being made is difficult to explain to a politician.


Passage number 31.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Governor Kohn without providing any information or context that could indicate disagreement or contention.


Passage number 32.
  MR. KOHN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On the last point, I think it is helpful to expand both the swaps and the TAF at the same time.  People understand that there are pressures in these funding markets, and we can address them both at home and abroad.  They do feed back on our market, so I guess I am not too worried about that one.  Also, it is quite logical to do the swaps and the TAF.  I don’t see any issue. On the TSLF, I have been thinking about it less on the Treasury side than on the other side.  I don’t think the TSLF will increase the demand for holding these securities in any major, direct way.  My hope is that, sort of around the margin, it would make dealers more willing to make markets in them and to be on both sides of the market, including the buy side from time to time, because then they would see that they had a place to finance those securities if, at the end of the day, they had more.  So if it helps, it will help the liquidity of those markets rather than increasing the ultimate demand for the securities.  I think it is an indirect thing.  My guess is that it might help at most around the margins.  I don’t see how it can hurt.  There is a certain logic to it.  I don’t think it will help the student loans at all.  The structural issues are just overwhelming any of the other issues in that line.  If somebody asked you, Mr. Chairman, whether this was aimed at student loans, I think you could say that they just were along for the ride in the sense that they were part of the AAA ABS market and that we didn’t have any expectation that expanding that market would help them.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their thoughts and opinions on various topics, but they do not indicate any disagreement or conflict with others.


Passage number 33.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 34.
 MR. BULLARD.  I am the new guy, but I will just put in my two cents here.  Everyone seems to agree that there is no quantitative impact.  I can’t see any quantitative impact.  There are political implications.  I don’t see why we are doing it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Although there is a difference in perspective between the speaker (Mr. Bullard) and others, there doesn't appear to be any direct contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard acknowledges that everyone agrees there is no quantitative impact, but expresses his own viewpoint about the political implications and questions the reasoning behind the action being taken.


Passage number 35.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  To repeat what Bill said, I think it is hard to measure the quantitative impact, but my guess is that there is some.  But the point is well taken.  What I would like to do is go through the first votes, and then we will take a straw vote on the TSLF, and then decide what to do.  Okay.  First, we have to ratify domestic open market operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement of thoughts and plans.


Passage number 36.
   MR. KOHN.  So move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Kohn wants to move.


Passage number 37.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No objection.  Okay.  Now the swap agreements with Canada and Mexico.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 38.
 MR. KOHN.  So move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 39.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Is there anyone who wants a roll call on this.  Okay.  If not, then no objection.  Extend and expand the swap agreement with the ECB.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply asks if there is anyone who wants a roll call and then states that if there is no objection, they will extend and expand the swap agreement with the ECB.


Passage number 40.
 MR. KOHN.  So move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: In the given passage, there is no contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply giving a directive to "move."


Passage number 41.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Is there anyone who wants a roll call on this.  Okay.  Then, without objection.  Expand and extend the swap agreement with the Swiss National Bank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a series of statements and requests, without any clear indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 42.
 MR. KOHN.  So move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by Mr. Kohn is a straightforward instruction to move.


Passage number 43.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Without objection.  Okay.  Now, on the TSLF, the proposal is to include this as part of the package.  There will be no change to the facility except for the increase in the collateral range, to include AAA asset-backed securities.  Are there any further comments on this.  I am going to ask for a straw vote, just to get a sense.  Abstentions are fine.  If there are no further comments, how many people are in favor of this.  I see 10, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No – This passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 44.
  MS. YELLEN.  Are you asking voters only.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states that someone named Ms. Yellen is asking a question about voters.


Passage number 45.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’m sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The phrase "I'm sorry" does not convey any form of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 46.
 MR. FISHER.  Are you asking voters only or the entire table.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher is simply seeking clarification on who the question is directed towards, voters only or the entire table.


Passage number 47.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I would like to get a sense of all participants, if that is okay.  Thirteen participants are in favor.  All right.  All participants against.  Okay.  Let’s go ahead and take a vote on this, then.  Is there anyone who wants a roll call vote.  If not, then no objection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The participants seem to be going through a voting process and there is no indication of opposition or disagreement.


Passage number 48.
 MR. KOHN.  So move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The provided passage does not contain any conflicting or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 49.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No objection.  Thank you.  Let’s turn now to the economic situation.  Dave Stockton.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It consists of a statement of agreement ("No objection") and a transition to a new topic ("Let's turn now to the economic situation"). The mention of Dave Stockton does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 50.
   MR. MADIGAN.2  I will be referring to the package labeled “Material for Briefing on FOMC Participants’ Economic Projections.”  Table 1 shows the central tendencies and ranges of your current forecasts for 2008, 2009, and 2010.  Central tendencies and ranges of the projections published by the Committee last February are shown in italics.  Regarding your monetary policy assumptions (not shown) about three-fourths of the participants envisage a moderately to substantially higher federal funds rate by late next year than assumed in the Greenbook, a path perhaps similar to the one incorporated in financial market quotes.  Most of you conditioned your projections on a path for the federal funds rate that begins to rise either in late 2008 or sometime in 2009, in contrast to the Greenbook path, which remains flat through 2009.  Many of you were less clear whether you differed from the Greenbook path  2 The materials used by Mr. Madigan are appended to this transcript (appendix 2). over the near term; but with a little reading between the lines, it seems fair to say that most of you assumed a slightly higher funds rate over the near term.As shown in the first set of rows and first column of table 1, the central tendency of your real economic growth forecasts for 2008 has been marked down nearly 1 percentage point since January.  Most of you pointed to weak incoming data, tight credit conditions, falling house prices, and rising energy prices as factors that prompted you to lower your growth expectations for this year.  About half of you forecast a decline in economic activity over the first half of the year (not shown), with another quarter of you seeing a flat trajectory over that period.  However, only four of you used the word “recession” to describe the current state of the economy.  None of you has a more negative first-half outlook than the Greenbook.  The downward revisions to your growth forecasts are roughly equal across both halves of 2008, and so the contour remains one of a rising growth rate over the year.  Members’ projections for the speed of the recovery in late 2008 exhibit considerable dispersion, with some calling for a quick return to near-potential growth supported by monetary and fiscal stimulus, and others seeing a prolonged period of weakness owing partly to persisting financial headwinds.  Most of you appear to expect growth to return to near its trend rate in 2009 (column 2) and to move slightly above trend in 2010 (column 3).  The Greenbook forecast for real growth in 2008 is near the low end of the central tendency of FOMC members’ projections, but it is at the high end in 2009 and 2010.  The second set of rows indicates that you have revised up your projections for the unemployment rate throughout the forecast period.  Of those of you who provided estimates of the natural rate of unemployment, most expect unemployment to remain above the natural rate in 2010 with the others seeing a return to the natural rate.  As shown in the third set of rows, your projections for headline PCE inflation in 2008 have been revised up a full percentage point, largely due to the surge in the prices of energy and other commodities.  Incoming information has also prompted a small upward revision to your projections of core PCE inflation this year (the fourth set of rows).  The rate of decline of core inflation in 2009 is essentially unchanged from that in the January projections, presumably reflecting the offsetting effects of the higher unemployment rates in the April projections, on the one hand, and the lagged pass-through of this year’s higher food and energy prices, on the other.  By 2010 the prolonged period of economic slack pushes down core inflation to around the same rates that were projected in January.  Although the central tendencies for headline inflation, the third set of rows, also decline markedly over the forecast period, overall inflation is projected to be about ¼ percentage point higher next year than you anticipated in January.  Nonetheless, by 2010, headline inflation is expected to be in essentially the same range of around 1¾ to 2 percent that you forecasted in January.  Your inflation projections for 2010 are close to their values in January, but more than half of you raised your projections for the unemployment rate in 2010 significantly more than 0.1 percent.  To the extent that the higher unemployment rate projections are viewed as implying an economy operating below its potential in 2010, outside analysts may infer that you expect inflation to edge down further beyond 2010.Turning to the risks to the outlook, as shown in the upper left-hand panel of exhibit 2, a large majority of you regard uncertainty about GDP growth as greater than normal.  The upper right-hand panel shows that most of you perceive the risks to GDP growth as weighted to the downside.  Correspondingly, the risks to unemployment, not shown, are seen as weighted to the upside.  You typically attributed the downside growth risks to the potential for sharper declines in house prices and persisting financial strains.  Overall, the distributions of your views on the uncertainties and skews regarding growth are little changed from January.  However, as shown in the lower panels, your perceptions of the risks regarding inflation have changed noticeably since January.  As shown in the lower left panel, only half as many participants now see the degree of uncertainty regarding the inflation outlook as historically normal, and twice as many see the uncertainties as larger than usual.  As indicated to the right, fewer see the risks to their outlook for overall inflation as balanced, and more see the risks as skewed to the upside.  Your narratives indicate that you see the upside risks to inflation as deriving from the potential for continued increases in commodity prices, further depreciation of the dollar, and an upward drift in inflation expectations.  That concludes our remarks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be seen when the passage states, "Members’ projections for the speed of the recovery in late 2008 exhibit considerable dispersion, with some calling for a quick return to near-potential growth supported by monetary and fiscal stimulus, and others seeing a prolonged period of weakness owing partly to persisting financial headwinds." This shows that there are differing opinions on the speed and strength of the economic recovery.


Passage number 51.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Are there questions for our colleagues.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude and then inviting others to ask questions.


Passage number 52.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Greenbook is aggressive and effective at portraying the U.S. economy as being in a mild recession.  They’ve overcome the statistical evidence, which often prevents us from forecasting a recession since they are mostly surprises.  There’s a nonlinear step-down in the second quarter that begins this recession.  So I’m a little curious as to why you didn’t follow this up by forecasting a jobless recovery.  In the last two recessions, that has been an important element of what followed.  I wonder if it is now a feature of the Great Moderation business cycle.  If you look at equilibrium real funds rates, they tend to bottom out during the period of most troubling joblessness in the aftermath of the recession.  So if we’re going to be relying on a period in which we’re doing something we haven’t done before, like buying a bit of additional inflation credibility, it will be unusual.  I guess my question is why you made that choice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not have any clear contention or disagreement. It is a statement/question made by Mr. Evans, expressing curiosity and seeking clarification on why a certain choice was made.


Passage number 53.
 MR. STOCKTON.  This year certainly is pretty close to a jobless year in terms of a full year of nothing but employment declines and then fairly modest employment gains next year.  But the principal reason we didn’t predict a pattern like the one we saw in the earlier part of this decade is that we don’t think we’re going to get the kind of productivity surprises that were such an important feature of that recovery.  As you may recall, we were stunned by the extent to which, even in a period of cyclical weakening, we kept getting much stronger productivity.  I think it will be years before research is actually able to shed a lot of light on why that occurred.  The part of the story that we still think was probably in play was that there had been an accumulation of technological advances that businesses were able to draw on over this period and that led to a period in which, even as growth was picking up, employment wasn’t.  We don’t see that happening again—although we didn’t see it happening the last time either, so it’s possible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the reasons why the speaker did not predict a certain pattern in the earlier part of the decade.


Passage number 54.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you.  That’s a fair point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Evans simply acknowledges that the previous point made was fair.


Passage number 55.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. This is because the passage only mentions the title or position of "President Stern," without providing any additional information or context. Thus, there is no basis for contention or disagreement.


Passage number 56.
 MR. STERN.  Dave, I have a couple of questions.  One is technical, and one is a little more substantive.  The technical one is that you have a very sharp decline in consumer spending on services in the fourth quarter of this year and then not much of a recovery in the first quarter of next year.  I assume something special is going on there, but I don’t know what it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification and expressing their lack of knowledge on a certain topic.


Passage number 57.
 MR. STOCKTON.  What was going on there was probably—I don’t know if it was rational or irrational—inattention.  But in looking at that over the weekend, it seemed like something that should not be considered as an analytical feature of the forecast.  Just in terms of the falloff in consumption that we expect to follow from the end of the tax rebates, my guess is that the consumption folks were trying just to put it somewhere and some of it showed up in services.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 58.
 MR. STERN.  “Services” seems like the least likely spot actually.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 59.
 MR. STOCKTON.  I think I’m raising the white flag here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing surrender or conceding defeat, indicating a lack of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 60.
  [Laughter] MR. STERN.  Well, sorry.  The more fundamental question is that I have been trying to get comfortable with an outlook that would have core inflation leveling off and maybe declining a bit, and that’s the forecast I have.  But I took your presentation, which I think was certainly on the right topic, to say that the risks around the core inflation forecast seem to be symmetric at this point.  Is that a fair characterization.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Stern, is expressing that he has a forecast of core inflation leveling off and maybe declining, while acknowledging that there are risks around this forecast. However, he is questioning the presenter's suggestion that the risks are symmetric, indicating that he disagrees with that characterization.


Passage number 61.
 MR. STOCKTON.  I think that is a fair characterization.  You know, one thing that we’re struggling with—and I assume you are as well in giving your own views about the uncertainty and the skewness around your forecast—is whether things have changed.  Is the skew large enough for us to argue that, in fact, the risks look unbalanced.  We thought about that and about the potential upside and downside risks.   Clearly, as I indicated, upside risks would be associated with ongoing increases in underlying prices for oil and other commodities that would probably feed through indirectly into core inflation over time.  On the downside, we have been struck with how little upward pressure there has been on labor compensation and labor costs.  Now, if you pinned me down and said draw a fine line on this, I’d probably say that, given the pattern of the past few years, it would look to me as though there’s probably a little more upside risk than downside risk, but I don’t see that skewness as being material in the forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a discussion of the potential risks and uncertainties in the forecast.


Passage number 62.
 MR. STERN.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply shows that someone named Mr. Stern is expressing gratitude. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 63.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage only states the title of "President Fisher" without providing any further information or context, so there is no evident contention or disagreement.


Passage number 64.
 MR. FISHER.  Nathan, both you and Dave expressed the frustration that I think all of us have about relying on futures markets in terms of our forecast of lower prices.  It just hasn’t been very helpful.  Do we know or have a sense of how OPEC itself forecasts.  Do they just look at futures markets.  Second, to what degree do you impute into your own calculations the income elasticity of demand for the rapidly growing countries such as China.  We know it is above 1 on oil.  Third, linking the two, to what degree would, say, the Saudi royal family or the al-Sabahs of Kuwait be thinking about those high income elasticities of demand with those high growth rates offsetting what used to be their fear of a slowdown in their markets.  In 1978, for example, they had only three markets to sell into really:  the United States, Japan, and what we used to call Western Europe.  Now they have hedges against the weaknesses in those markets.  So I’m wondering as we think about alternative ways to wrap our arms around this—and it is a very difficult thing as the current indicator we have has been shifting all over the place and has not been very useful—have we tried to learn how the swing producers look at this and how they calculate and think about where prices are likely to go or whether they just look at the futures markets as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is merely asking questions and seeking information and insights from the other participants in the discussion.


Passage number 65.
 MR. SHEETS.  It is, quite frankly, pretty tough to get a straight and compelling answer out of the OPEC folks about how they think about the oil markets.  A number of us have sat in international meetings and listened to various explanations.  In fact, at one recent meeting in Basel, the representative from Saudi Arabia indicated that OPEC was not prepared to supply any more oil to the market because the market was already well supplied at the equilibrium price.  It is really quite frustrating.  Now, what they say in these meetings is that their analysis of supply-and-demand fundamentals would suggest a price of $70 a barrel, $80 a barrel, or something like that.  Then they blame the residual on speculators and so on, and we spend a fair amount of time looking for such speculative effects in these oil prices, and we wouldn’t want to rule anything out.  I mean, from what we’ve seen, there may be an explanation out there that eludes us, but there are a number of things that we would expect to see if it were speculation—for instance, run-ups in inventories—that we don’t see.  We have also looked at the behavior of noncommercial traders, and it does not seem as though the noncommercial traders are actually predicting prices.  Quite the opposite—they seem to be chasing the price, which is quite different from what we would have expected.  Most recently, in a statement just this week, OPEC’s president linked the run-up in oil prices to the depreciation of the dollar and indicated that, for every 1 percent decline in the dollar, oil prices would rise $4.00 a barrel, which strikes us as being just absolutely extraordinary.  We can see 1 percent on the dollar moving oil prices 1 percent, but to get a coefficient beyond that just seems—I don’t want to say “economically impossible,” but I’d like to see the model that generates it.  Now, about how they actually talk about oil prices behind closed doors, I don’t have any additional insight to provide other than what I’ve heard them say in some of these international meetings. Certainly in our analysis we try to think through the outlook for demand from countries like China and India.  In fact, quite regularly we do a full-blown supply-and-demand balance exercise in which we say, “Here is the price.  What kind of supply-and-demand fundamentals would be necessary to deliver that price.”  We use the IEA, the EIA, and others as input, but we actually do our own separate analyses.  We try to think very granularly about the demand from these emerging market countries and the implications that that has on the price. As to the last part of your question, I think certainly it’s true, at least until recently, that there was a sense on the part of OPEC that, if they allowed the price to stay too high for too long, there would be a significant supply response that would end up driving the price back down.  Now, the fact that they seem quite comfortable to live with the price of $115 or $120 a barrel suggests to me that maybe they have come to the conclusion that there is just more demand out there and, in some sense, they are going to ride the wave of this increasing demand in some of these emerging market economies.  That said, the prices have risen a lot.  They’re up 75 percent or 80 percent over the past year.  A year ago I’m sure that that’s not what my predecessor was forecasting, and it’s hard for me to imagine that we’re going to see oil at $200 a barrel.  Nevertheless, given the income and price elasticities of this thing, our view is that 1 percent greater global demand that’s not met by supply could very well push prices up at least 10 percent.  It isn’t going to take a whole lot of surprise on global demand to have a significant impact on prices.  As I said, I think that OPEC is aware of that and is willing to run the risk that there may be at some point a large supply response that could put significant downward pressure on the price of oil.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is mostly a description of the speaker's frustration with OPEC's explanations and their analysis of oil markets.


Passage number 66.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you for that long and thoughtful answer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement is an expression of gratitude towards the person who provided a long and thoughtful answer. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 67.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 68.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have two questions.  One, in comparing the staff’s forecast with a lot of the private-sector forecasts—what it looks like and its shape—one thing that is striking about the forecast is the very large adjustment swing that occurs in inventories.  My interpretation is that one thing that is occurring in the way you’ve made adjustments to your forecast—or maybe this is more of a question—is that the spending of the tax rebates appears to be occurring out of inventories.  Therefore, there is no production response, or less production response, to the presumably increasing demand that may materialize.  Can you give me some feeling about why you chose that way of treating this. The second question goes back to inflation.  I thought your discussion of the uncertainties around inflation was excellent.  Part of what you talked about in the Greenbook was the uncertainty about pass-throughs of commodity price increases and oil price increases into various measures of consumer price inflation, which you indicated were imprecise and which we don’t really know much about.  I was struck that, if there is more pass-through than the baseline says, we’re going to get more inflation in the near term, and then disinflation will be more rapid when you assume that commodity prices are going to come down.  But if commodity prices only stabilize and don’t come down, then it’s going to be a more complicated picture.  You do have an alternative scenario that says that commodity prices keep rising, but you allow expectations to move up only fairly modestly in the model.  It seems to me that, particularly if expectations become more unanchored than that, the time paths of the funds rate that are implicit in the simulations become much more aggressive on the other side.  I just want to make sure that my intuition is correct here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Plosser is asking clarifying questions and seeking further information.


Passage number 69.
 MR. STOCKTON.  Your intuition on that last point is correct.  Obviously, in that simulation we have inflation expectations deteriorate a little more from where we think they have deteriorated already over the past year or so.  Again, this is really hard to pin down, but we think there has probably been an increase of maybe ¼ percentage point in longer-term inflation expectations over the last couple of years in the context of this step-up in headline inflation and the higher commodity prices that are associated with that increase.  So in the simulation, we’re basically assuming that the process continues:  If you have another year or two of high headline inflation, you may get additional deterioration of inflation expectations on the order of ¼ percentage point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Stockton is simply stating his own intuition and assumptions about inflation expectations.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 70.
  You’re right that, if expectations truly became unhinged and people began to view the entire inflation process as generating some greater upward momentum, it would have implications both for inflation and— MR. PLOSSER.  A lot bigger than just the rise in expectations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is a disagreement between the speakers as indicated by the interruption of Mr. Plosser. He believes the implications of unhinged expectations would be "a lot bigger" than just the rise in expectations, suggesting a difference in perspective or opinion.


Passage number 71.
 MR. STOCKTON.  A lot bigger than just the rise in expectations, and the fed funds rate, of course, would have to rise considerably. On the inventory side of the forecast—again, you put your finger on the principal reason that inventories are as weak as they are in the near term, which is that we think there will be a pretty sizable spending response to the tax rebates but we don’t see that as showing up fully in activity in large measure because we think firms are going to understand that this will be a one-time increase in demand.  So they will be somewhat cautious about responding with higher production to that demand and will, especially in the context of a relatively weak economy, be more content with having that run down inventories than actually with ramping up production immediately.  Now, that’s guesswork on our part.  Again, I feel pretty comfortable with that basic story, but it is going to require some fairly negative inventory figures shortly.  There is a technical factor here as well.  We have occasionally cited a residual seasonality in imports, and in the second quarter that residual seasonality pushes down imports a lot.  But we see no residual seasonality in GDP, so we take it out of inventories.  That has been a standard feature of our forecast for the past few years.  Nathan and his crew have communicated quite frequently with the BEA complaining about the fact that they have a seasonal adjustment process that takes a relatively flat series and creates lots of noise.  [Laughter]  It does not seem as though it is probably the best thing, but it exaggerates the downward movement in inventories.  If I had to cite something that would make me nervous about the weakness in our near-term outlook, I do worry that the inventory liquidation in our forecast is large.  The decline in the inventory–sales ratio in our forecast looks a lot like the decline in the inventory–sales ratio that we saw in 2001 and 2002.  So it’s not out of line with past cyclical behavior, but it’s an aggressive drop.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 72.
 MR. PLOSSER.  In the theoretical literature there is a lot of discussion about inventory modeling now and what the appropriate way is to think about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is a lot of discussion in the theoretical literature about inventory modeling and how to think about it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 73.
 MR. STOCKTON.  I think I can assure you that our models of inventory investment are not very good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Stockton's statement suggests that the models of inventory investment are not accurate or effective.


Passage number 74.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But they don’t take information and convert it into noise.  [Laughter]  Other questions for our colleagues.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The mention of laughter is unrelated to any disagreements or conflicting views.


Passage number 75.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Just to follow that up, Dave, how do you build your assumption on the spending response to the fiscal stimulus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification on how assumptions are made for the spending response to fiscal stimulus.


Passage number 76.
 MR. STOCKTON.  That was based on our reading of the literature, especially of the last episode of fiscal stimulus, which was associated with the rebate package in the earlier part of the decade.  We’re assuming a marginal propensity to consume out of those rebates of about ½—that seems reasonably in line with what the literature suggests—and that they will be spent out over the next few quarters.  But, again, that’s based on one or two data points.  We’re trying to draw some strong inferences from those data points, and it’s our best guess at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the assumptions and reasoning behind the prediction.


Passage number 77.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions President Plosser without providing any information about his actions or opinions, so there is no contention or disagreement apparent in this particular passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 78.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Yes, just a follow-up.  Another way to ask my question is, Given your assumptions about the fiscal policy stimulus and tax rebates, if I took the view that your estimate of spending was not really 50 cents, 40 cents, or 60 cents but really 10 cents—most of it will get saved and not spent—how would that affect your inventory assumptions and, therefore, the path over the next several quarters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting an alternative view that challenges the assumptions made by the person being addressed. This indicates disagreement or contention.


Passage number 79.
 MR. STOCKTON.  Roughly, we’re offsetting about half the spending through the inventory drawdown, so you could basically take that.  If you took away a significant fraction of the spending, we’d take away a significant fraction of the inventory liquidation, and the GDP effects would be moderated considerably.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is explaining a scenario and its potential impact on GDP effects.


Passage number 80.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions.  If not, let’s start our go-round.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply suggests moving on to other questions after an initial topic or discussion has been concluded.


Passage number 81.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I was pleasantly surprised that we have not had any major downside surprises since our March 18 meeting.  So while I still recognize the economy’s downside risks, I’ve become less comfortable about signing onto the Greenbook’s judgment that a nonlinear step-down in activity currently is in train.  On balance, our projection still looks for weakness in the near term and then has growth picking up as we move through 2008 and into 2009.  We see a noticeable output gap opening this year but not one as large as in the Greenbook.  Under this forecast, it is possible that some portion of 2008 might eventually be labeled a recession, but it is not yet conclusive that it will be.  Indeed, given the highly unexpected development that events have proceeded as expected, I think the downside risks to growth have abated some.  Some of the stress in financial markets has been mitigated by our new lending policies as well as actions by banks in recognizing losses and raising capital.  Neither the incoming data nor the reports from my business contacts seem to be consistent with the bleak downside scenarios that I feared might transpire after we saw the December employment report early this year.  In this regard, I will simply note a couple of observations from my contacts.  A national shopping mall developer reported that his tenants experienced a small improvement in April retail sales compared with March.  He was not expecting that.  Similarly, Manpower indicated a small improvement in billable hours for temporary workers over the past month and a half, also unexpected.   Now, I am not saying that I will be surprised if the outlook deteriorates further.  I am saying that the likelihood of that event seems to be smaller today than I expected at our last two meetings.  Accordingly, I think that current real interest rates are appropriately accommodative relative to the baseline forecast for economic growth and the risk to that outlook.  As seen in chart 6 of the Bluebook, the real funds rate is essentially zero.  Of course, this uses a core PCE measure of inflation and thus may overstate the true real rate since headline inflation has been consistently running above this core measure.  There is the additional accommodation that is being provided by the range of new lending facilities we had put in place.  The extra accommodation is appropriate to offset the large degree of restraint still being exerted from financial markets, and our expansion of the swap lines and the TAF adds to this accommodation.  Furthermore, in the event of a nonlinear step-down in economic activity, as in the Greenbook forecast, our policy responses can be adjusted appropriately because we’re well positioned now for that. On the price side, on balance, the recent news has been good.  My forecast has core PCE inflation falling to just under 2 percent in 2010 largely because of the increasing resource slack in the economy.  However, I think there are substantial upside risks to this outlook.  All of my business contacts have noted how high and rising energy and commodity prices are creating cost pressures that many are passing on to their customers.  As Dave Stockton mentioned, with his inflation catechism, without reviewing the past transcripts I will speculate that we have been projecting a leveling-out of energy prices since the price of oil was $70 a barrel.  Weak domestic demand may limit the degree to which producers can pass through these higher costs, but it is unlikely to prevent noticeable increases in some downstream prices.  The depreciation of the dollar also imposes risks even beyond the effects operating through the commodity price channel.  Now, I do agree that labor costs have not been cited as a problem for inflationary pressures, and so that does add somewhat to trimming out the risks there. Inflation expectations were also an issue.  No matter how often we say that core inflation is a more reliable measure of underlying inflationary tendencies, I find it difficult to believe that the public’s inflationary expectations will not be affected by large and persistent increases in food and energy prices.  The past five years have been unkind on this score.  On average over this time, higher food and energy prices have pushed total inflation above core about ½ percentage point, and it is also sizable over the past ten years.  Another challenge for inflationary expectations comes from our policy focus on the downside risks to growth during a time of rising headline inflation.  Rightly or not, this could make the public question our attitudes toward inflation.  We are accepting considerable inflationary risks when we hope that these concerns will disappear quickly with future adjustments to policy that have not yet been signaled.  How we balance these conflicting risks should be an important component of our discussion tomorrow.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own views and opinions but there is no indication of any disagreement or argument with others.


Passage number 82.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement simply expresses gratitude from President Plosser. There is no contention or disagreement evident in this passage.


Passage number 83.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 84.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In looking at the latest Blue Chip forecasts for GDP growth, I noted that the range between the highest and lowest is among the largest on record.  The 10 most optimistic forecasters are predicting over 2½ percentage points faster Q4-over-Q4 growth than the 10 most pessimistic ones.  Such forecast dispersion is indicative of the unusually high degree of uncertainty that we are facing.   The Greenbook presents one of the most pessimistic economic forecasts; yet I find its recessionary projection quite plausible and see downside risks that could take the economy well below that forecast.  Although I found it especially difficult this time to decide on the most likely outcome for the economy, I ended up submitting a forecast that shows somewhat more growth in 2008 than the Greenbook, even though we shared the same assumption concerning monetary policy this year.  My forecast projects 2008 growth of ¾ percent.  This averages no growth in the first half and 1½ percent growth in the second.  The unemployment rate increases to just over 5½ percent by the end of this year, a bit lower than the Greenbook.  In one critical area—namely, the adverse effects of financial sector developments on the real economy—I remain just as pessimistic as the Greenbook.  Although the likelihood of a severe financial panic has diminished, the risks are by no means behind us.  Moreover, credit conditions have turned quite restrictive.  This credit crunch reflects the drying up of financing both for markets that were important sources of business and consumer credit and from banks that are contending with capital-depleting losses and illiquid assets. Among banks, the latest Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey noted a clear tightening of lending standards, and my own discussions with bankers confirmed this point.  They say they are carefully reassessing and significantly curtailing existing home equity lines of credit as well as unsecured consumer loans of all sorts.  Banks are also clamping down on the provision of revolving business credit, even to very creditworthy customers.  For example, the treasurer of Chevron, a highly rated oil company that, as you can guess given energy prices, has a very strong profit outlook, recently complained to me that banks were reluctant to extend even its credit line.  Such reluctance is also evident for lending to students, consumers, and other businesses.  The risk of a deepening credit crunch remains as a weak economy—especially with further sharp declines in housing prices—escalates credit losses, harms financial institution balance sheets, and causes them to scale back lending even further.  My sense from our business contacts is that their perception of reduced access to credit is causing them to manage their firm’s liquidity more carefully and is leading to some deferrals in capital spending projects as a precautionary measure.  Certainly the mood is decidedly more pessimistic and cautious. Amid the gloom of the credit crunch, I do see a possible silver lining in that it may amplify the effects of the fiscal stimulus package, and this is part of the reason that my forecasted downturn is a little milder than the Greenbook’s.  In particular, because of the credit and liquidity considerations, the latest fiscal package could well provide a bigger bang for the buck than the tax rebates in 2001.  First, the current tax rebates are more directly targeted at lower-income households, which are more likely to be credit constrained and to spend the cash once it’s in hand.  Second, given the current tightening of credit availability, households will likely spend an even greater fraction of the tax rebates than they did in 2001.  Of course, there is considerable uncertainty about assessing the potential size of these effects.  But over the next few months as the checks go out and the retail sales reports come in, we should get a pretty quick preliminary read on how things are shaping up. Regarding inflation, the most worrying developments since we met in March have been the price surges for a wide variety of raw materials and commodities, especially the jump in the price of crude oil.  From the U.S. perspective, this run-up in prices represents mainly a classic supply shock, which could threaten both parts of our dual mandate, although the decline in the dollar has slightly exacerbated the severity of the impact.  Like the Greenbook, my forecast for inflation does take commodity price futures at face value and foresees a leveling-out of prices going forward.  Although I must say, after four years of being wrong, I am beginning to feel like Charlie Brown trying to kick that football.  The most recent core consumer price data have shown some improvement, and like the Greenbook, I’m optimistic that core inflation will subside to around 1¾ percent over the forecast period, assuming that the commodity prices do finally level off and compensation remains well behaved. An interesting analysis by Bart Hobijn of the New York Fed as well as my own staff implies that, in an accounting sense, pass-through from the run-up in oil and crop prices may have boosted core inflation as much as 0.3 percentage point over the past two years.  So a leveling-off of these prices could lower not only headline but also core inflation.  My core PCE inflation forecast is a tenth or two lower than the Greenbook this year and next also because we assume lower pass-through of the dollar depreciation to non-oil import prices.  We have been reexamining the data on this issue and find the evidence quite convincing that pass-through has been quite low recently—lower, for example, than embodied in the FRB/US model. With respect to inflation expectations, market-based measures have now edged down.  We took little comfort from this fact, however, because we had viewed the uptick in inflation compensation in recent months mainly as a reflection of a higher inflation risk premium and not a reflection of higher inflation expectations.  I am also somewhat concerned that the median expectation for inflation over the next five to ten years in the Michigan survey has ticked up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: In the passage, Ms. Yellen expresses her disagreement with the Greenbook's economic forecast, stating that she finds its recessionary projection quite plausible and sees downside risks that could take the economy well below that forecast. She also mentions that she submitted a forecast that shows somewhat more growth in 2008 than the Greenbook, even though they shared the same assumption concerning monetary policy this year.


Passage number 85.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage. The passage only states the title of President Fisher without providing any conflicting opinions or contradictory statements.


Passage number 86.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That made me dizzy.  [Laughter]  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a personal statement indicating that something made the speaker dizzy, followed by laughter. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 87.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Without judgmental adjustments, the Boston Fed forecast is somewhat more optimistic than the Greenbook.  As in the Greenbook, our GDP is weak in the first half of this year, though neither of the first two quarters actually turns negative.  Our slightly more optimistic forecast assumes that consumption and business fixed investment are weak, but not as weak as in the Greenbook, and then the fiscal and monetary stimuli are sufficient for the economy to pick up in the second half of this year.  In a sense, the Greenbook represents another mode in the forecast distribution with probability roughly equal to our forecast.  The big risk to our forecast is that the financial turmoil and housing price declines, which are not fully reflected in the Boston model, result in a greater drag on the economy.  Such an outcome would largely close the gap between the Greenbook and our forecast.  In short, the downside risks to our forecast are appreciable.  With a monetary policy assumption similar to the Greenbook’s, we have core PCE below 2 percent in 2009, but the unemployment rate remains well above the NAIRU even at the end of 2010.  If we sought to keep inflation below 2 percent but did not want an extended period in which the unemployment rate was above the NAIRU, our model would require more easing than currently assumed in the Greenbook. Since the last meeting, the economic data have remained weak.  Private payroll employment declined by approximately 100,000 jobs on average over the past three months, and the unemployment rate increased 0.3 percentage point.  In addition, the labor market weakness was widespread across industries.  Such labor market weakness is likely to aggravate an already troubling housing story.  To date, falling housing prices have disproportionately affected subprime borrowers and those who purchased securitized products.  However, if housing prices continue to decline rapidly, that will begin to affect more prime borrowers and a wide array of financial institutions.  Smaller financial institutions that were largely unaffected by the financial turmoil last August are beginning to see increases in delinquencies, and those with outsized exposures in construction loans are now experiencing significant duress.  Commercial real estate loans are also now experiencing increased delinquencies.  Like the Greenbook, I am concerned that commercial real estate may be the next sector to experience problems.  However, the biggest concern remains that rising delinquencies and falling housing prices cause a much higher rate of mortgage defaults than we have experienced historically.  Should these mounting problems become more pronounced, we are likely to see credit availability for small- and medium-sized businesses affected.  That sector has not to date been significantly affected by the financial turmoil. Many financial indicators have improved since the last meeting, as was highlighted in Bill’s report.  The stock market has moved up.  Many credit spreads have narrowed.  Treasury securities and repurchase agreements are trading in more-normal ranges, and credit default swaps for many financial firms have improved.  Nonetheless, several ominous trends remain in financial markets.  The LIBOR–OIS spread has widened, so borrowers tied to LIBOR rates have seen those rates rise more than 25 basis points since the last meeting.  Similarly, the TAF stop-out rate in the last three auctions was higher than the primary credit rate, providing another indicator that banks remain in need of dollar term funds.  Finally, the asset-backed commercial paper market is once again experiencing difficulties.  Rates on asset-backed commercial paper have been rising, and there is a risk that more of the paper will end up on bank balance sheets.  Higher food and energy prices are both a drag on the economy and a cause for concern with inflation.  But despite the extended sequence of supply shocks, I do not see evidence that inflation expectations are no longer anchored.  Labor markets do not indicate that the commodity price increases are causing wage pressures, and such pressures are even less likely if the unemployment rate continues to increase.  Many of the financial indicators of inflation, such as the five-year-forward rate, have fallen significantly from their peaks earlier this year.  Finally, core PCE over the past year has been 2 percent, and most econometric-based forecasts expect that the weakness we are experiencing should result in core and total PCE inflation at or below 2 percent next year.  Overall, the downside risks to demand that I listed in the outset seem the more compelling cause for concern.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their own forecast and expressing their concerns and observations about the economy.


Passage number 88.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude from the speaker to President Lockhart.


Passage number 89.
  MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Our high-level view of current circumstances is that the real economy is quite weak, with weakness widespread.  The financial markets are turning optimistic, and elevated prices and inflation remain a serious concern.  Reports from our directors and District business contacts were broadly similar to the incoming national data and information from other Districts reported in the Beige Book.  Observations from such District input support themes in the national data—for example, employment growth is quite weak.  In this round of director reports and conversations, I heard an increasing number of reports of holds on hiring and expansion plans.  One representative of a major retailer of home improvement goods reported that hiring for seasonal employees will be down 40 percent this spring.  This translates to approximately 45,000 jobs.  Nonresidential real estate development continues to slow in the District, especially in Florida and Georgia.  Of the 18 commercial contractors contacted in April, 15 expect that commercial construction will be weaker for the rest of 2008 than for the same period in 2007, with several predicting even more pronounced weakness in 2009.  On the brighter side, Florida Realtors are anticipating that sales over the next few months will exceed year-ago levels, and builders are signaling less weakness than in recent reports.  This is a level of optimism we have not heard from Florida for some time.  However, housing markets in the rest of the District continue to weaken.  We heard several complaints that obtaining financing is a serious problem for commercial and residential developers and consumer homebuyers.  In sum, the information from the Sixth District seems to confirm what I believe is the continuing story of the national real economy captured in the Greenbook—that is, shrinking net job creation, developing weakness in nonresidential construction, and a bottom in the housing market still not in sight. In contrast, conditions in the financial markets appear to have improved substantially.  As has been my practice, I had several conversations with contacts in a variety of financial firms.  There was a consistent tone suggesting that financial markets are likely to have seen the worst.  This does not mean that no concerns were expressed.  Some contacts had concerns about European banks and credit markets, and concern about the value of the dollar, notwithstanding the recent rally, is coming up in more contexts.  Concern was expressed about the dollar’s disruptive effect on commodity markets, in turn affecting the general price level—in particular, the effect of high energy prices on a wide spectrum of businesses’ consumer products and even on crime rates in rural and far suburban areas related to the theft of copper wiring and piping from vacant homes and air conditioning units.  I worry that a narrative is developing along the lines that the ECB is concerned about inflation and the Fed not so much.  This narrative encourages a dollar carry trade mentioned, again, by some financial contacts that puts downside pressure on the dollar that potentially undermines both growth and inflation objectives.  I remain concerned about the vulnerability of financial markets to a shock or surprise, but overall, my contacts express the belief that conditions are improving.  The Atlanta forecast submission sees flat real GDP growth in the first half of 2008, with gradual improvement in the second half.  We continue to believe that the drag on economic activity from the problems in the housing and credit markets will persist into 2009. On the inflation front, I am still projecting a decline in the rate of inflation over this year.  I’ve submitted forecasts of declining headline inflation in 2009 and 2010, but I should note that my staff’s current projections suggest that improvement to the degree I would like to see may require some rises in the federal funds rate.  It is my current judgment that, with an additional 25 basis point reduction in the fed funds rate target, policy will be appropriately calibrated to the gradual recovery of growth and the lowering of the inflation level envisioned in our forecast.  This judgment is based on the view that, with a negative real funds rate by some measures, policy is in stimulative territory; that a lower cost of borrowing in support of growth depends more on market-driven tightening of credit spreads than a lower policy rate; that further cuts may contribute to unhelpful movements in the dollar exchange rate; and that extension of the four liquidity facilities may allow us to decouple liquidity actions from the fed funds rate target.  In my view, we are in a zone of diminishing returns from further funds rate cuts beyond a possible quarter in this meeting.  That said, as stated in the Greenbook, uncertainty surrounding the outlook for the real economy is very high, and the Committee needs, in my view, to preserve flexibility to deal with unanticipated developments.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is agreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that the real economy is weak and that there is weakness in nonresidential construction and the housing market. They also agree that financial markets have improved.


Passage number 90.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a simple expression of gratitude by someone named President Bullard.


Passage number 91.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The economy of the Eighth District continues to show signs of weakness.  The services sector has continued to soften, and sales of both general and big box retailers are down from the same period last year.  The residential real estate sector has continued to decline throughout the District.  Across major metro areas, sales were about 15 percent below the level from last year, and single-family permits were down about 30 percent.  Employment growth has slowed and is estimated to have turned negative in March for many areas.  Typically, however, employment growth in the District has been stronger than that for the United States as a whole.  Manufacturing has remained roughly flat, despite temporary shutdowns that have affected domestic automobile production.  Also, commercial real estate construction remains strong, and vacancy rates are low; however, there are increases in the number of delayed projects.  Banks in the District are still in good shape, generally speaking.  There have been modest increases in total loans in all categories, including real estate. Contacts in the shipping and trucking industries reported a mixed bag.  In some instances, business seems to be holding up, whereas in others it is down substantially.  These businesses are being critically affected by increases in energy prices.  Similarly, a contact in the fast food industry painted a picture of a business struggling with substantial increases in commodity prices.  On the other hand, a contact in a large technology firm indicated that business is holding up quite well, in part because a large fraction of this firm’s business is overseas.  Contacts in the energy sector reported robust business prospects, as expected.  A contact at a large financial firm suggested that the discovery process concerning asset-backed securities, which has been ongoing for many months, has effectively come to a close.  The idea that the discovery process—and the considerable macroeconomic uncertainty that attended that process—is over is an important consideration at this juncture.  My sense is that expectations of future economic performance are changing rapidly.  The probability that the U.S. economy will enter into a debilitating depression-like state has fallen dramatically.   In the meantime, other risks have increased markedly—in particular, that the FOMC will lose credibility with respect to its inflation goals.  The U.S. economy has certainly encountered a large shock.  Monetary policy can mitigate the effects of a large shock but cannot be expected to completely offset exceptional disturbances.  Attempts to do too much may create more and more-dangerous problems in the future.  Best-practice monetary policy would do well, it seems to me, to avoid setting the stage for future problems.   The problems with the rate structure, which is too low, are threefold.  First, there is the risk of setting up a new bubble.  The exceptionally low rates of a few years ago are sometimes cited as providing fuel for today’s problems.  Some have argued that today’s commodity price increases are exactly that new bubble.  Second, continued unabated reductions in interest rates will bring the zero bound issue into play with unknown consequences.  Third, still lower rates will push the envelope further on inflationary expectations.  Those expectations may appear to be reasonably well anchored today, but that is because the private sector expects us to take actions to keep inflation low and stable.  Should those expectations become unmoored, it will be too late, and an era of higher and more volatile inflation would be very costly for American households.  Much has been done already.  A low rate environment has been created and has been in place only for a short time.  Marginal moves at this juncture are minor compared with the general thrust of policy over the last nine months.  The Committee would do much better at this meeting by taking steps to address eroding credibility.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and analysis about the economy of the Eighth District. There is no mention of differing opinions or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 92.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Why don’t we take a break for coffee and return at 4:45.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude and suggesting a break for coffee, followed by a suggestion to reconvene at a specific time.


Passage number 93.
 [Recess] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Why don’t we reconvene.  President Pianalto, whenever you are ready.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply proposing to reconvene and is addressed to President Pianalto.


Passage number 94.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Regardless to whom I talk with these days, the conversation quickly turns to both the fragile condition of financial markets and the spectacular rise in energy and commodity prices.  I had hoped that one of these problems would have gone away by now, but clearly that is not how conditions have unfolded since our last meeting.  The bankers with whom I talked are paying close attention to their capital and liquidity positions.  They remain concerned about wide bid–asked spreads and low trading volumes in a broad array of securities markets.  Indeed, the repercussions of financial turmoil appear to have touched every channel of credit intermediation.  It appears that a rewiring of credit channels is simply going to take some time to work out. The most significant financial news coming out of the Fourth District is the $7 billion investment of new capital into National City Bank.  National City is the country’s tenth largest commercial bank, and its problems with mortgage-related credits are now well known.  National City still has much work to do to clean up its balance sheet, just as many other financial institutions with impaired capital positions must do before they can stand on solid ground again.  Although the fragile state of the financial sector represents a pretty sizable risk to my economic outlook, the National City situation, along with other stories I’m hearing, suggests that modest progress is being made. With regard to District business conditions, the stories I hear remain downbeat.  Commercial builders are reporting mixed though generally positive first-quarter numbers.  But their expectations for retail sales in the stores that they lease out across the country have deteriorated, and they are fairly pessimistic about 2008 growth prospects.  One large national commercial developer whom I talked with told me that, for the first time in his 45-year career, his company has seen sales declines in March in every retail center that they own across the country.  The manufacturers I talked with indicated moderate first-quarter revenue growth as export markets, especially in Asia and Eastern Europe, are still helping to sustain production despite weak domestic demand.  At the same time, manufacturers report intense commodity price pressures, and they report little resistance as they attempt to pass along the rising cost of commodities to their customers. The projection I submitted for this meeting shows real GDP growth under 1 percent in 2008, with virtually all of that growth coming in the second half of the year.  This is a decidedly more pessimistic projection than the one I submitted in January but not materially different from the outlook when we met just six weeks ago.  I have, however, boosted my headline inflation projection for 2008 compared with what I submitted in January, and it is somewhat higher than what I was estimating when we met in mid-March.  Although I am still projecting that the slack in the economy will be sufficient to bring the core inflation number under the 2 percent threshold sometime next year, I am now anticipating a little more pass-through of commodity prices into core measures than I thought probable six weeks ago.  Indeed, every time I see commodity prices ratcheting up, I become less confident that slack alone will be able to prevent an upward drift in the inflation trend.  To be clear, I think the downside risks that we face in the real economy remain substantial, and I am inclined to believe that some insurance against those risks is probably warranted.  But in taking such a step, I am inclined to judge that the downside risks we face in the real economy will be roughly in balance with the upside risks that we face from a rising inflation trend.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is mainly providing an assessment of the fragile condition of financial markets and the challenges faced by financial institutions. They also discuss downbeat business conditions in their district and their updated projections for economic growth and inflation. The speaker does express some concerns about the potential for inflation to rise, but they also acknowledge the significant downside risks to the economy. Overall, there is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 95.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No+


Passage number 96.
 MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Economic activity continues to be slow in the Tenth District with a soft tone in our residential and nonresidential construction and certainly in our retail sales.  Mitigating this weakness, however, to some extent is continued strength in energy and agriculture exports and, to a lesser degree, manufacturing.  With regard to exports, one interesting development is a shortage of shipping containers domestically and internationally that is limiting the volume of exports of both our agricultural and some of our manufacturing products.  On balance though, the District activity continues to be stronger than the national economy, and this is reflected in better employment growth and firm labor markets in many parts of our region. In my recent discussions with directors at our Bank and in our Branches and the Economic Advisory Council members, several themes have been prominent.  Concern about inflation has escalated to the highest level I’ve been involved with in the last decade.  Businesses across the board are experiencing the largest input cost pressures in recent memory for them.  Many businesses have not been able to absorb these cost pressures and have raised prices to both retail and business customers, and generally speaking, businesses are finding much less resistance to price increases than in the past.  Businesses also report that suppliers are increasingly reluctant to make contractual price quotes very far in the future. We have also been monitoring the effects of credit availability on business capital spending in our area.  Although businesses report some tightening of credit conditions, credit costs and availability are not the primary factors behind reduced capital spending plans.  Bank loans have actually continued to grow.  Instead, businesses cite uncertainty about the economic outlook as the main impediment to investment.  They are in a wait-and-see mode.  So spending is being held back not for financial reasons but just caution.  Indeed, they suggest that uncertainty about whether monetary policy will be eased further is a factor currently inhibiting their capital spending plans.  They want to see when we’re done. Turning to the broader economic output and the national economy, I have revised down my growth estimate for the first half of 2008 but have had few changes to my longer-term outlook.  Compared with the Greenbook, I see somewhat stronger growth this year and somewhat weaker growth next year.  Weaker growth in the first half of this year is coming largely from the effects of higher energy prices on consumer and business spending coupled with the continued weakness in residential construction.  I would say that the effect of high energy prices is now about as large as or even larger than the contraction in residential construction, and I think that the energy outlook constitutes a main downside risk to growth in the period ahead.  In contrast—and contrary to the Greenbook and the views of some—I think that energy and housing perhaps now more than credit problems are holding back economic growth.  Certainly credit conditions have continued to tighten as reflected in the April Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey, and markets for many asset-backed securities, of course, have shut down.  But the availability of credit for good business and household borrowers does not appear to have really been restricted that much.  They are pricing more wisely for risk, and that is probably a positive.  Consequently, the downside economic risks from a pronounced credit contraction appear to have diminished considerably over the past few months. I want to turn to inflation.  In my view, the inflation outlook has worsened considerably.  For the first time in many years, we are seeing significant inflation pressure from goods prices, especially imported goods prices.  Moreover, the recent moderation in monthly inflation numbers is coming mainly from some softness in service prices, which in my opinion, is unlikely to continue.  More optimistic views of inflation, including those in the Greenbook, rely heavily on economic slack and a turnaround in food and energy prices to improve the outlook.  I am skeptical on both counts.  I do not think that there will be as much slack generated in the current slowdown as does the Greenbook, and there is evidence that the effects of output and employment gaps on inflation have fallen, well, actually more than a little over the past two decades.  Furthermore, I have not seen any indication that elevated energy and food price inflation is likely to dissipate soon, as many of these pressures are reflective of international economic developments that we have talked about here, including the weakness in the dollar. I believe that we are entering a dangerous period, if I can use that word, in which inflation expectations are beginning to move higher and inflation psychology is becoming more prominent in business decisions.  In this regard, I also do not take much comfort from favorable readings of labor costs as wages tend to follow prices in my experience.  In these circumstances, I am concerned that maintaining a highly accommodative policy stance for an extended period would greatly increase the likelihood that inflation exceeds our long-run objectives.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is a factual passage providing information about economic activity in the Tenth District and the opinions of the speaker on inflation and credit conditions. There is no contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 97.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information given in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 98.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. This is because the only information provided is the title or position of "President Stern," without any context or statements that could indicate disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 99.
 MR. STERN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, for some time I have been using the headwinds period of the early 1990s as a frame of reference for thinking about credit conditions, economic growth, and inflation prospects for the next several years.  I won’t belabor that comparison much this afternoon, except to say that I continue to find it helpful.  With that, and given that the information we have received since our March meeting hasn’t caused me to change my views about financial conditions or about growth, let me just say that I continue to expect financial headwinds of some intensity to persist well into next year.  I think that the economy will decline—contract in this quarter and in the next quarter—before growth resumes, and that the resumption will initially be fairly mild.  So my outlook for economic growth next year is below that of the Greenbook.  It is a pretty modest outlook. Recent anecdotes from business contacts and from people in financial services firms have not been what I would call overly negative.  If I were to give those anecdotes more weight, I would probably be somewhat more optimistic about the economic outlook than I am.  But I am guessing that those anecdotes are underestimating the weight of the credit constraints that are in train, and people—at least people that I have talked to—don’t fully appreciate that yet. Turning to inflation, on average it seems to me that the inflation situation and its prospects are no better, and possibly worse, than I had been anticipating.  To be sure, the core measures of inflation have not accelerated recently and look to be what I might call close to acceptable, looking at their recent performance.  But we have been warned that some of that better performance is likely to prove transitory.  Meanwhile, headline inflation has been elevated and has tended to surprise on the upside.  Moreover, I worry that the persistence of sizable increases in energy and general commodity prices will have a more pronounced effect on core inflation going forward than they have in the recent past.  Further, I have the sense, both from some estimates of inflation expectations and from the comments and questions I have been getting about inflation and the foreign exchange value of the dollar, that the public’s conviction about monetary policy’s willingness and ability to maintain low inflation is starting to waver.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is primarily a statement of the speaker's views and outlook on credit conditions, economic growth, and inflation prospects.


Passage number 100.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman Geithner.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not contain any statements that could be interpreted as contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude to Vice Chairman Geithner.


Passage number 101.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The given passage does not contain any statements or indications of disagreement or contention. It is a polite expression of gratitude towards Governor Kohn.


Passage number 102.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is simply a statement or expression of gratitude directed towards Governor Warsh.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 103.
 MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As has been described by most around the table, official data on the real economy suggest weakness but haven’t materially changed since we met in mid-March.  Others have talked in more detail about weakening labor markets, poor consumer sentiment, and worrying trends in consumer spending.  Certainly the reports through March that I have received are that consumer spending in March was as bad as anyone who was in the business of retail or credit card spending could have envisioned.  That is certainly disappointing.  Oddly, there are at least some preliminary data through the first few weeks of April of some improvement, but I don’t take much signal from them.  Also, obviously, as others around the table have said, the tone, trading, and expectations of financial market participants have improved markedly.  If only I were as confident.  Whereas market participants only some weeks ago saw fear, they now perceive promise.  Whether that is the triumph of hope over experience only time will tell, but I am skeptical.   Let me talk for a few moments about a couple of positive factors that should be helping and four or so negative factors.  First, on the positive side, I want to give voice to the capital-raising that a couple of others around the table have referred to.  We and the Treasury have been calling for some months for capital-raising across all types of financial institutions.  The questions then were whether financial institutions were willing to take the dilution and go raise capital.  At least equally as important was whether there would be sufficient investor demand.  I think the answer to both of those questions appears to be “yes.”  Investor demand from nearly all sources—including sovereign wealth funds, hedge funds, and traditional long-only managers—has funded virtually all classes of financial institutions—that is, investment banks, money center banks, regional banks, and community banks—across the capital structure—equities, convertibles, and preferred debt—in a huge range of distressed and more-stable situations.  I think that is invariably a very encouraging sign, and we should only be so lucky that those markets remain wide open.  Is this improvement likely to be enduring.  This strikes me as pretty consequential as to whether or not we see the economy respond as favorably in the second half of this year as the Greenbook suggests.  Is the improvement in equity markets, in leveraged loans, and in high-yield markets and the narrowing of CDS spreads sustainable, or is there more bad news to come that is not priced into the market.  My own view is that balance sheets are on the road to repair but that income statements for these financial institutions remain highly challenged.  March was a terrible month for financial institutions’ profitability, which should make it harder for credit to expand, as would be hoped for with any sort of V-shaped or U-shaped recovery. The second positive factor, building on the increase in capital, is really what is going on among the Fortune 2000, particularly the nonfinancial Fortune 2000.  Earnings look pretty stubborn and solid.  Though they have come off their peaks, corporate profit levels are quite remarkable for all of the things that are wrong in this economy, and they look to me to be anachronistic with previous periods of recession.  The balance sheets of those Fortune 2000 companies look excellent.  The investment-grade markets remain wide open.  I think the question is whether those Fortune 2000 will be hiring workers during the next two or three years in the United States, and on that front, I am probably reasonably skeptical. So if those are the positive factors, let me turn to the negative.  First, consumer weakness seems to be spreading.  The largest credit card providers report that credit card spend is deteriorating—again, absent a couple of odd noises in April—and that the strains showing up as delinquency, which were once only in states where housing issues were predominant, now seem to be in other states as well.  Second, credit availability for small business seems under remarkable pressure.  Not only has the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey continued to be disappointing, large money center banks appear to be pulling back from some segments of the small business markets entirely.  Third, interbank funding market problems, as others have discussed, seem inconsistent with the broader improvement in credit markets.  It is a troubling sign that all might not be as well as it appears in this curative process.  A fourth and final negative factor is inflation.  The Greenbook, which has a much more benign forecast for inflation than I do, revised up the forecast for core and headline inflation in the second half of 2008, as David said.  I am still more worried about inflation prospects.  As for inflation expectations and possible second- and third-order effects of these changes in prices, trading and anecdotes over the last several weeks and months continued to be troubling.  I have spent less time in my remarks on inflation than on growth but only because I suppose there is less to say.  The trends are troubling.  The relationships among our policy actions, the foreign exchange value of the dollar, and commodity prices are worth further scrutiny.  In summary, although we should be pleased with the official data on the economy as not deteriorating in the intermeeting period and with financial markets that have certainly exceeded my own expectations for improvement, I remain quite concerned about pressures on both sides of the dual mandate—a discussion that we will take up more in the next round.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Warsh, expresses skepticism and disagreement with the positive outlook portrayed by others around the table. He questions whether the recent improvement in equity markets and financial institutions' capital-raising efforts are sustainable, and expresses concern about consumer weakness, credit availability for small businesses, interbank funding market problems, and inflation.


Passage number 104.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Kroszner.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it is a simple expression of gratitude from the speaker to Governor Kroszner.


Passage number 105.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Mishkin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement simply expresses gratitude to Governor Mishkin. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 106.
 MR. MISHKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My modal forecast is for a mild recession in the first half of 2008 and is very much in line with the Greenbook forecast.  I am more pessimistic, however, than the Greenbook on the issue of recovery.  Again, the issue is that we have had a major disruption to our financial markets and there is a mess, and I think it is going to take a long time to clean up the mess.  The parallel that President Stern made to the episode in the early ’90s is very apt.  I suspect that there will be substantial headwinds coming from the problems in the financial sector for quite a while, and that means that the recovery we would see would be more L-shaped than V-shaped. When I look at where I was at the last FOMC meeting, there has really been a big change for me.  I re-read the transcripts, because you always want to see what things sounded like, and I sounded so depressed then, as though I might take out a gun and blow my head off.  That is the way it read.  But my sunny, optimistic disposition is coming back.  [Laughter]  I think it is very possible that we will look back and say, particularly after the Bear Stearns episode, that we have turned the corner in terms of the financial disruption that we have just experienced.  I should mention, however, that it doesn’t mean that we should be complacent.  I am not sure that is the case.  We have been disappointed before.  But I think there is a very strong possibility that the worst is over.  You can see this in that there is less concern about credit risks in financial institutions.  That is because we had a major institution get into trouble, but because of our actions, it didn’t blow up the world.  There is an issue, of course, of potential cost and moral hazard going forward, but I think it has had the effect of calming down the markets in a very substantial way.   Very important in this regard is that we are seeing that our large financial institutions are able to raise capital now at not too high a cost.  In fact, they are doing so in a major way.  When we think about the long-term solution to the problems in the financial markets, cleaning up the mess and raising capital is going to be absolutely critical, particularly because in the long run the securitization market will come back.  But it is going to very much involve the large financial institutions, which will have to solve the agency problems that were not solved in this recent bout of securitization, which created all of the problems.  So their having enough capital is critical.  I think it is very possible that we are on the path to their sorting out their problems, which in the long run will help sort out the problems in the credit markets. I should mention, by the way, that I still don’t want us to be complacent about this because things could go in the other direction.  There is still the puzzle about what is going on in the money markets.  In particular, we see these very large and actually widening spreads between LIBOR and OIS.  So even though I am starting to become optimistic, I don’t want to be Panglossian in my view.  From my perspective the key issue is that, although my modal forecast hasn’t changed much from March, I see that the tail risks have decreased substantially, and I think that the probability that we will have a severe adverse feedback loop, which really scared me just a little while ago, is going to be much lower.  I still see some downside risks.  Particularly, I am concerned about the issue of housing prices.  They could fall more than we and the Greenbook expect, and that could trigger some problems.  But I do think that the downside risk is much, much lower.  Another thing I should mention is that I think there is very high uncertainty right now.  So I could get depressed again, but we will have to see.  I hope not. On the inflation front, I see that long-run inflation expectations are still reasonably well anchored around 2 percent.  The information in the financial markets on this score is that there has not been a big blowout in that case.  There have been problems regarding some of the surveys, but I am a little less worried about the surveys in terms of households.  I am very skeptical of them because they tend to react very much to current conditions.  Also, if you ask people what TV shows they are watching, they will tell you that they are watching PBS and something classy, but you know they are watching “Desperate Housewives.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing his own views and perspectives, but there is no explicit disagreement or contention present in the passage.


Passage number 107.
”  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  What is wrong with “Desperate Housewives”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The mention of laughter suggests a lighthearted tone, but there is no explicit disagreement or argument being presented.


Passage number 108.
  [Laughter] MR. MISHKIN.  But I do have a concern about the risk to inflation expectations because of the high commodity prices that we see.  This is coming from the very adverse supply shock and the fact that we have had headline inflation so high for so long.  The good news, by the way, is that it is actually quite remarkable, given how high headline inflation has been, how anchored inflation expectations have been.  I think that has to do with confidence in this institution’s doing the right thing.  It is very important that we retain that confidence.  We have to think about that when we decide what we are going to do regarding policy. About where I think inflation is going to be—I have been a 2 percent guy for a long time.  I am not changing that.  I think that inflation expectations are around 2 percent and that there is no expectation that we will have excess demand in the economy.  If anything, it is the opposite of that.  I see the risks as balanced—there are some risks on the upside, particularly because of what is happening with commodity prices.  On the other hand, there are risks on the downside because of the expected slack and because there is some downside risk in the economy.  So on that ground, I basically have the same story that I had before.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses concern about inflation expectations due to high commodity prices and the prolonged period of high inflation. However, they also mention that inflation expectations have remained anchored, which they attribute to confidence in the institution's actions. The speaker then asserts their belief that inflation will be around 2 percent with balanced risks on both the upside and downside. There is no disagreement or conflicting viewpoints presented in this passage.


Passage number 109.
 VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.  Mr. Chairman, I was wondering if Brian or Bill wanted to talk President Plosser out of his concern about MZM at some point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 110.
 MR. MADIGAN.  If you like, I could try to address that tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Madigan offers to address a matter the next day, suggesting a cooperative and amicable approach.


Passage number 111.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We’ll have a special session on MZM.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply mentions that there will be a special session on MZM, without expressing any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 112.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Are there questions for Bill.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude and a request for any questions for a person named Bill.


Passage number 113.
   MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states the speaker's title and addresses the chairman.


Passage number 114.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not mention any specific topic or issue on which there is contention or disagreement. It only mentions "President Fisher" without any context or details.


Passage number 115.
 MR. FISHER.  You emphasized the phrase “reflecting a projected leveling-out of energy and other commodity prices and an easing of pressures on resource utilization.”  Can you just refresh my memory.  For how long have we been using that phrase—just in the March statement, or have we used it before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question seeking clarification.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 116.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I’m afraid I’m not sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "I'm afraid I'm not sure" suggests that the speaker is unsure or disagrees with something that was just mentioned.


Passage number 117.
 MR. MADIGAN.  We must have used that just in March.  It was not here in January.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Madigan, is simply stating a fact about the usage of something in the previous months. There is no opposing viewpoint or conflict expressed.


Passage number 118.
 VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.  Definitely March.  January was minimalist.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "Definitely March. January was minimalist" is a clear assertion and does not present any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 119.
 MR. FISHER.  So not in January—it was just in March that we used that.  Second, let’s say we were to have a rally in the dollar.  If we voted for no change, might that positively affect equity prices or the credit markets in the United States.  Is it possible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a rhetorical question and exploring a hypothetical scenario.


Passage number 120.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I suppose it’s possible, but I guess I would expect that, if monetary policy came out tighter than people had expected, it would lead to at least a modest marking-down of the outlook for the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement from Mr. English speculating about the potential effects of tighter monetary policy on the economy.


Passage number 121.
 MR. FISHER.  For how long.  This is a personal view, but it’s not clear to me that things are that clear-cut on a sustainable basis.  One of the things that seems to be undercutting confidence is the weakness in the dollar, even though in the past few days the dollar has rallied.  I’m just wondering if it’s clear-cut that we would necessarily have a sustained selloff.  I can see an immediate reaction, particularly on the announcement.  But it’s conceivable, is it not, that if we had a dollar rally that we could have a positive effect on equity prices or on the credit markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve contention or disagreement. It is a series of personal observations and questions.


Passage number 122.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I think it’s hard to know how people would read the news.  But as was emphasized earlier, a weaker dollar supports exports and supports the outlook for the real economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their perspective on the impact of a weaker dollar on the economy.


Passage number 123.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Bill Dudley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I cannot provide a response without the specific passage mentioned in the question. Please provide the passage, and I will be happy to assist you.


Passage number 124.
 MR. DUDLEY.  I think you could get your result if people took the action as that the Federal Reserve’s view was that the economy wasn’t as great a risk.  So risk premiums would come down, the dollar would rally, and the stock market would do better.  I mean, it’s possible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It states a possibility or potential outcome if people were to take a certain action.


Passage number 125.
 VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.  This speculation is perilous.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "This speculation is perilous" expresses a warning or caution rather than any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 126.
 MR. FISHER.  Yes.  I just wanted to ask a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only indicates that Mr. Fisher wants to ask a question, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 127.
 VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.  But I think it goes exactly to what both Bills just said, in that it depends fundamentally on whether the disappointment is reassuring or troubling.  We have had two examples of disappointment that have been troubling, and we have had one example of disappointment being reassuring—the most recent one being the latter.  So I think what matters most is what happens to the expected path of the fed funds rate going forward, and that is how you would know.  If you disappoint significantly and the markets lower the expected path going forward, as they did in October and December, you could have the dollar weaken as a result just as easily as strengthen.  We are not very good at speculating about the effect on the fed funds rate expectations of our statements, and it is much harder to speculate about the effect on the dollar in this context.  You can tell a compelling story on both sides.  It sort of depends how plausible it is, particularly if you have language saying that downside risks to growth remain even without moving, that we are signaling greater confidence in the strength of the economy going forward with an action that implies not moving.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement that discusses different perspectives on the effect of disappointment on the expected path of the fed funds rate and the value of the dollar.


Passage number 128.
   MR. DUDLEY.  It is also being significantly driven by the subsequent data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the topic being discussed is being significantly driven by subsequent data.


Passage number 129.
 MR. FISHER.  Well, this just illustrates the point.  It’s not as clear-cut as one might guess.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and acknowledging the possibility that the situation might not be as straightforward as it seems.


Passage number 130.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it is not providing any conflicting or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 131.
  MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a couple of questions, unfortunately.  I am very sympathetic to your point about how difficult it is to understand what the relationship is between the equilibrium fed funds rate and where we are with respect to financial stress.  Actually, my question is for the Greenbook team—if you could remind me again, within the Greenbook-consistent measure, how do you deal with these.  You have add factors in your forecast.  Presumably, they’re related to the financial stress.  I know that they are acting as if there is a higher interest rate at work.  We also have the role of the lending facilities, which perhaps have relieved a bit of that stress.  I am not quite sure how that plays out here, so if you could, please clarify that as best you can.  Again, in chart 6 there is no role for the inflation preference, right.  This is all about how long it takes to get back to potential over three years with this interest rate.  The Board staff was very helpful over the weekend, when I asked a question about chart 7 and the fact that the funds rate took off from a higher level.  If you add that type of analysis in there, it seems as if it comes down a little to what your inflation preference is.  For the 1½ percent inflation rate, you might want to stick where you are; if it’s  percent, you would move down a bit.  Again, that is taking it as given that you can interpret these at face value, if you will. I have another question about the fed funds futures market and Bill Dudley’s chart about how the dealers seem to have slightly different expectations and whether or not that teases out anything about what Governor Kohn was talking about, because that’s a very interesting observation.  You know, there is much more weight below the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of the speaker asking questions and seeking clarification on certain topics.


Passage number 132.
   MR. DUDLEY.  Yes, it’s hard to know what to read into that.  It could be that the forecasts have more inertia to them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Dudley is expressing uncertainty and stating that there could be multiple interpretations of the forecasts.


Passage number 133.
  MR. EVANS.  Oh.  I thought these were the smart guys who really were on top of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 134.
 MR. DUDLEY.  But forecasts don’t change that fast, so it is hard to know; but that could be one factor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Dudley is simply stating that forecasts do not change quickly, making it difficult to determine the exact factor.


Passage number 135.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Dave, did you want to respond.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no explicit contention or disagreement mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 136.
 MR. STOCKTON.  Yes.  First, you are absolutely right.  The equilibrium funds rate calculation has no reference to inflation.  It shouldn’t be viewed as a policy recommendation or where the fed funds rate should be.  In essence, it is one transformation of the IS curve interacting with the supply side of the economy—set the real funds rate at that level, and it is designed to deliver the return of the economy to potential in 12 quarters. Now, as for the way that we have treated financial stress and its effect on the equilibrium funds rate, we have marked down our estimate of the equilibrium funds rate a huge amount since last August.  A couple of those big steps really were putting in add factors for our sense of the extent to which financial turbulence and stress were going to depress aggregate spending going forward.  How do we get that.  We have taken some of these principal component measures of financial stress—in some cases, principal components of the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey—and regressed those on the errors in the spending equations, and observed that there is a pretty high correlation between those measures and our spending errors.  We’ve tried, as best we could, to build that correlation into our spending forecast, so that when we calculate the equilibrium funds rate, it reflects a much weaker level of spending for any given funds rate than you otherwise would have observed.  The adjustments show up as a lower equilibrium funds rate. The second factor that is currently depressing our estimate of the equilibrium funds rate is indirectly related to financial stress.  But in the last forecast, when we shifted to this recession-like scenario, we incorporated additional negative add factors on spending to reflect the observation that, when we are in a cyclical downturn, there tend to be correlated errors across these equations that are related to the cyclical event.  That was a second factor that was leading to the very low estimate of the funds rate.  So those are, as best as we could, incorporated in those measures.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is explaining their views and the factors that have influenced their calculations.


Passage number 137.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Mishkin first, and then President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states the order in which Governor Mishkin and President Bullard appeared.


Passage number 138.
 MR. MISHKIN.  Is yours on this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 139.
  MR. BULLARD.  It’s related to this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage does not contain enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It appears to be an incomplete statement.


Passage number 140.
 MR. MISHKIN.  Then why don’t you take my slot, and I’ll come in after.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a suggestion or offer from Mr. Mishkin.


Passage number 141.
 MR. BULLARD.  Is it a regime-switching kind of model in which you enter the recession state—you call it the recession state—and then add-factor down further.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification about the type of model being discussed.


Passage number 142.
   MR. STOCKTON.  Yes, though that may be putting it too scientifically.  In essence, we were looking at a configuration of data that, at the time of the March meeting, appeared to indicate recession.  Even though we did not have the spending data in hand—and, as Governor Kohn indicated, we still haven’t seen these correlated negative errors on spending yet—we had seen enough other signals in terms of the business and consumer sentiment surveys, the rise in the initial claims for unemployment insurance, and the jump in the unemployment rate that, taken together, suggested to us that there was a likelihood that we were or would be in a recession scenario.  We then added in more negative add factors to account for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is describing a situation and providing evidence to support their conclusion that a recession was likely.


Passage number 143.
 MR. BULLARD.  Then, is that calibrated against the 1990–91 recession or the 2001 recession.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement evident in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification on whether a certain calibration is done against the 1990-91 recession or the 2001 recession.


Passage number 144.
  MR. STOCKTON.  Basically, we did an average of the residuals in recessions since 1970.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Stockton is simply stating a fact about the methodology used for calculating averages.


Passage number 145.
   MR. BULLARD.  Oh, is 1980–82 in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement by Mr. Bullard.


Passage number 146.
 MR. STOCKTON.  Yes, 1980–82 is in there.  Again, the composition of where these residuals are is obviously heavily tilted in this case to housing, some of which is already behind us.  So it isn’t quite as though all of this weakness is prospective.  Some of this weakness we have already had, and so there are very big negative residuals now on housing relative to where you would otherwise have been.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that there are negative residuals on housing compared to where it would have been, due to previous weakness.


Passage number 147.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Mishkin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the given passage "Governor Mishkin" as it is incomplete and does not provide any context or further details.


Passage number 148.
 MR. MISHKIN.  Just to ask Bill a question—first the tall Bill, but the shorter Bill can answer afterward.  [Laughter]  On alternative B, you indicated that this would be very much in line with market expectations and, therefore, shouldn’t have much impact.  I was wondering about the statement aspect, in particular the assessment-of-risk part, because this is not just saying that we are doing 25 basis points; it is also saying that we are now in a different mode of operation regarding the cycle.  So where do you think the markets are concerning where the statement would be in this regard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for the opinion of two different people.


Passage number 149.
 MR. ENGLISH.  In recent days the stories we have been hearing from market participants and observers are that they think there may well be something—maybe not signaling strongly that we’re done but talking about slowing down or possibly a pause.  So I think this really is pretty close to what is built in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply reporting on the stories and opinions they have heard from market participants and observers.


Passage number 150.
 MR. DUDLEY.  Yes, a soft pause rather than a hard pause is the way I would think about what the market is looking for.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage simply presents Mr. Dudley's opinion on how he perceives what the market is looking for. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 151.
 MR. MISHKIN.  Okay.  Good.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement evident in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude and acknowledging the previous conversation.


Passage number 152.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions for Bill.  All right.  Well, we have overnight to reflect.  We will also have the GDP data in the morning.  I’m sure that they will be informative.  We will reconvene tomorrow at 9:00 a.m.  There is a dinner and reception, for those of you who would like to attend, and we’ll see you there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing information and options for the attendees.


Passage number 153.
 [Meeting recessed] April 30, 2008—Morning Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  Why don’t we start with the report from Dave Stockton on the data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply states the date and time of the meeting and suggests starting with a report from Dave Stockton on the data.


Passage number 154.
 MR. STOCKTON.4  We left at your place, and I hope you have found, a GDP advance release for the first quarter.  It came in at plus 0.6 percent versus our Greenbook forecast of 0.4.  It was really very close to our expectations, both for the total and for the individual components.  There were a few small differences.  Nonresidential structures, as you can see about halfway down that sheet, are estimated to have been weaker than we were forecasting.  I think that additional weakness certainly reinforces the story I was telling yesterday about this being an area in which we are now seeing more convincing signs of softness.  Residential investment was not quite as weak as we thought, but I don’t think the difference between a minus 27 and a minus 31 changes the basic tenor of that particular story.  Two small areas for which we had some upside surprises were federal spending and inventory investment, but those surprises were really quite small.  I don’t see anything in this report, quite frankly, on the real GDP side that would cause us to change our basic outlook.  Obviously, when we get the detail, we might make some minor adjustments to the second-quarter forecast.  As for prices, the final two lines of that table, total PCE came in right as we had expected.  Core PCE was estimated by the BEA to be a tenth higher than we had projected, but that is still ½ percentage point below what we were projecting back in the March Greenbook.  So, again, I don’t think that the report that I gave yesterday would be altered by this release.   We also received the employment cost index.  In the release, we get those figures only to one decimal place.  To one decimal place, we are right on for total compensation—wages and salaries and benefits; in terms of the 12-month change, it was 3.2 percent, and that was what we  4 The materials used by Mr. Stockton are appended to this transcript (appendix 4). were forecasting.  Wages were a bit higher than we thought—3.2 versus the 3.1 we projected—but benefits came in a little lower than we were projecting.  There again, I think the data just basically confirm the story that we are not really yet seeing any signs of pressure on the labor cost side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the GDP advance release and employment cost index and stating that they do not see anything in the report that would cause them to change their basic outlook. They mention a few small differences and surprises in the data, but overall, they confirm their previous assessment.


Passage number 155.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any questions for Dave.  All right.  If not, yesterday we had an introductory presentation by Bill English on the alternatives.  You will be pleased to know that there have been no further changes in the proposed statements.  So why don’t we take comments now from the participants.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information about a presentation and inviting participants to make comments.


Passage number 156.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple expression of gratitude by President Evans. There is no evidence of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 157.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, favor maintaining the federal funds rate at 2¼ percent today.  The current real interest rate provides accommodative monetary conditions for an economy that is struggling near recession or is in mild recession.  Our lending facilities are probably doing as much as can be expected to mitigate the serious and necessary financial adjustments that must be accomplished by the private markets.  If the economy takes another serious leg down, our current funds rate setting is well positioned for us to respond promptly, appropriately, and aggressively, if circumstances warrant.  A pause today affords us a unique opportunity to wait and see how our recent aggressive actions are influencing the trajectory of real activity.  Since markets are putting substantial weight on a 25 basis point easing today, a pause will be a relatively small disappointment.  As President Plosser pointed out, that was similar to our March disappointment, which seemed to be all right.  I think it is important for us to understand how the economy will respond to a pause in rate-cutting when it does occur.  With high food, energy, and commodity prices, the extended positive differential of headline inflation over core measures risks an increase in the public’s inflation expectations.  I agree with President Plosser’s discussion of relative prices on that front. From a longer-term perspective, which we don’t really talk about very often, I worry about the asymmetric response of policy to high inflation as opposed to when it is low.  When headline inflation is above core inflation, we take on board the relative price adjustment, and then we are content, I would guess, to bring inflation down to our perceived inflation targets.  But on the downside, when inflation gets low, we become uncomfortable with certain low inflation settings, and so I fear that we would respond more aggressively, as we did in 2003, which really was a positive productivity environment.  If you have an asymmetric type of response, you are going to take on board increases in the price level because of that asymmetry.  That’s one reason that I am concerned about these types of behaviors.  Although I expect emerging resource slack to temper any adverse inflation developments, the risk is simply growing in importance with every additional policy easing, compared with the economic risks, which presumably are abating as we respond to them with such easings. Calibrating the current policy stance against these divergent economic and inflation risks is important and challenging, as you pointed out yesterday, Mr. Chairman.  I think that comparisons to the rate troughs in the previous cycles of recession policy are instructive.  The current real fed funds rate is somewhere in the neighborhood of zero, or it could be lower if you choose a different way to deflate the funds rate by total inflation.  I was very impressed with Dave Stockton’s response to my question about what types of factors from financial market stress are embodied in the Greenbook-consistent real interest rate.  It seems as though a tremendous amount of care has been taken to introduce some of these special factors in innovative ways, and while they may not capture all facets of that, I thought that they did quite a good job.  So I feel a bit more comfortable in making those comparisons, but I do recognize that it is a treacherous period.   That said, this is about the same place the real funds rate bottomed out during the jobless recovery with financial headwinds in the 1990–91 recession, and with the data we had in hand at the time during the disinflation concerns in 2003.  Both periods were unique in suggesting a high degree of accommodation, and the factors that were at work in each of those episodes were unique.  Our attempt to incorporate these factors has been quite useful, and so it’s a reasonable, if not definitive, comparison.  With our current lending facilities addressing financial stress, I think our current policy accommodation, now at 2¼ percent, is appropriately similar to those episodes. My final observation has to do with these end-of-cycle expectations and what they might mean for long-term interest rates.  If 25 basis points is viewed as additional insurance against downside risks, I just don’t think this action is significant enough to have much of an effect.  We expect to take back some portion of the aggressive cuts, especially the ones that have been an attempt to respond to the financial stress.  If the financial stress is mitigated to some extent, we should be expected to take that back.  Expectations, as in the fed funds futures market, should limit the effect of those actions on long-term interest rates.  After all, by the expectations hypothesis, you are going to be averaging these short-term paths into long-term rates.  That is one reason that the Committee injected the language “considerable period” back in 2003, to try to convince people that we would do this for a longer period of time and affect long-term rates.  So if there is an expectation of some type of rebound, these last insurance cuts might not have that large an effect.  Again, I think our lending facilities are better geared for the financial stress.  I think we have clearly demonstrated our willingness to provide appropriately accommodative policies in a timely fashion when the economic situation demanded it.  For me, the public’s expectation of these actions in that event argues against one further small insurance move.  Because we are concerned about inflation risks and have indicated that we must flexibly move toward more-neutral policy stances once the economy and financial markets improve, a pause today is a small down payment on those difficult future actions.  In terms of language, if it came to that, I would be comfortable with the language of alternative B with this particular rate action.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 158.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Lockhart.


Passage number 159.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I must say that I am sympathetic to the “hold” advocates and the view that we are already accommodative.  I think an apt anecdote is a conversation I had in the past six weeks with a cruise line CEO who doesn’t know how to drive his ships but who has in fact been at the helm a couple of times.  He said, “When you turn the wheel and nothing happens for several miles, the temptation to keep turning the wheel is overwhelming.”  [Laughter]  So I do have some sympathy.  That said, I am going to support a reduction in the target rate of ¼ percent, effectively alternative B, as I indicated yesterday.  I think it is pretty clear that we have a tradeoff between “a little more help to the economy” and “enough for now” and really some shift in our focus to combating inflation. So let me lay out my rationale for not holding.  I think there is still substantial downside risk to the general economy, and it may take quite some time for recovery to materialize.  A quarter would help slightly to effect a lower cost of borrowing and, therefore, would stimulate activity, although much of that is really beyond our control.  It will be dictated by market forces.  I think that halting today versus conceivably halting at the next meeting risks some interpretation as a lack of recognition of the real state of weakness in the economy. Regarding inflation, I think the core numbers in the first quarter were not overly discouraging, and I have to believe my own forecasts—in many respects, the forecasts I heard—that inflation will soften in the coming months and be consistent with our working view of expectations.  I would say, however, that I am concerned that, in the minds of the general public, high prices actually translate into inflation, whether or not the rate of inflation has flattened. As I have suggested, I am inclined to pause after this move, provided that the incoming data are not too adverse and too divergent from expectations, but with the caveat that I think a lot of shock risk is still out there and we have to remain flexible to deal with surprises.  Holding or signaling a pause may help the housing market a bit by starting to construct a bottom, as borrowers or buyers begin to perceive that they shouldn’t expect any further rate cuts from us. Regarding the statement, I think the rationale section in alternative B is appropriate to the situation that we face.  Section 3 is a realistic acknowledgement of inflation trends and risk.  I gather that, with the changes in section 4, the question was whether or not to signal a pause or an inclination to pause, and I tend to agree with a more cautious, less committal approach of the proposed language—what yesterday was called a “soft” pause.  So I am, on balance, quite happy with the language in alternative B.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Lockhart, expresses sympathy towards the "hold" advocates but ultimately supports a reduction in the target rate. He also discusses his rationale for not holding and his thoughts on inflation and the housing market. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention with other parties.


Passage number 160.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage merely expresses gratitude towards President Stern.


Passage number 161.
 MR. STERN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, I have given serious consideration to both alternatives B and C, and I think a credible case can be made for either one.  There are, of course, risks associated with adopting either one as well.  On balance, I come out in favor of alternative B, for the following reasons.  First, we are certainly not yet out of the economic woods.  Although my forecast is for a relatively mild recession, I would not be particularly surprised if it turned out to be both deeper and more prolonged, given, among other things, the persistent overhang of unoccupied, unsold homes and the severity of the financial dislocations of the past nine months.  As I have tried to emphasize, I think it could be dangerous to underestimate the effects of the financial headwinds now in train and likely, in my judgment, to get more severe.  Second, and closely related to those observations, financial conditions remain quite sensitive.  Even if improvement is now under way in some markets, I think it will be some time, as I said yesterday, before credit conditions are fully supportive of economic growth.  To amplify a bit, I think we need to be a bit careful about the weight we put on the low level of the real federal funds rate per se for, as Governor Kohn pointed out yesterday, the credit situation is a good deal more complicated than that.   My principal reservation about supporting alternative B has to do with the inflation outlook.  The news here has not been uniformly bad, especially with regard to core inflation, but I am not convinced that inflation will abate in a timely way without policy action.  On the other hand, I take some comfort from the fact that apparently financial market participants do not anticipate further reductions in the federal funds rate target beyond this meeting.  I think the language associated with alternative B should help to reinforce the view that, at a minimum, a pause in the reductions in the target is not that far off, given what we know today.  I think it important that we find opportunities to bolster that view when we can.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their thoughts and considerations on alternatives B and C, and ultimately comes out in favor of alternative B. The speaker mentions the risks and uncertainties associated with both alternatives, but does not argue against or challenge any specific points made by others.


Passage number 162.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply shows gratitude towards President Rosengren.


Passage number 163.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  There seems to be a groundswell of opinion in financial markets, and perhaps around this table, that given the easing to date we are at or close to a point where we should pause and assess the impact of both fiscal and monetary stimulus already provided.  Should we pause at a fed funds rate below 2 percent, at 2 percent, or over 2 percent.  The Greenbook forecast assumes that we pause at 1¾ percent.  With this degree of stimulus, core and total PCE inflation is at or below 2 percent in 2009, but the unemployment rate remains well above the NAIRU, even at the end of 2010.  The Boston forecast generates similar outcomes.  The Greenbook and the Boston forecasts suggest that 25 basis points at this meeting may not be enough.  Both forecasts imply that a significant degree of slack remains in the economy, even with a 25 basis point reduction at both this and the following meeting.  In addition, there are significant downside risks to the outlook.  Falling asset prices in other countries have frequently been accompanied by prolonged periods of weakness.  Finally, given the rise we have seen in the LIBOR rate, for many borrowers a 25 basis point decrease leaves policy no more accommodative than at our last meeting.   The consensus seems to be that we should be moving in smaller increments.  But if we choose option B, it is not at all clear to me that we should pause after this meeting.  In that regard, I was happy to see the revised language in the Bluebook table 1, which does not imply that our easing cycle has definitely ended.  While I hope that the economy recovers sufficiently that further easing is not necessary, we need to remain flexible, particularly given that our models indicate that even with further easing we are likely to experience several years of elevated unemployment rates.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily presents different forecasts and opinions about the need for further easing and the potential impact of monetary stimulus on inflation and unemployment rates.


Passage number 164.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any argument or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude addressed to Governor Kohn.


Passage number 165.
 MR. KOHN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think I can be brief by just associating myself with the comments of President Stern.  This is a difficult decision.  You could make a case for either of these.  But on balance, I think we should be lowering interest rates 25 basis points, as under alternative B.  As President Stern said, I don’t think just subtracting past inflation from the nominal federal funds rate is a good metric for where the stance of policy is today.  It would be if financial conditions were consistent with historical relationships, but they’re not.  We have very tight credit conditions in many sectors of the market, and a zero or negative federal funds rate means a very different thing today than it did even in the early 1990s, Gary, because then you had the banking system broken but the securities markets working.  Now you have the banking system broken and the securities markets not working very well.  So I think we have stronger—I guess Greenspan called them “50 mile an hour”—headwinds.  I would say they are 60 or 70 today, at least for now.   We expect the headwinds to abate; and as they abate, policy will look a lot more accommodative.  But I don’t think we really have insurance right now against the contingency that the headwinds don’t abate very quickly or even get worse, or against the contingency that the staff is right and we are entering a recessionary period in which consumption and investment fall short of what the fundamentals would suggest.  I think that 25 basis points probably won’t buy us much, if any, insurance, but it will get policy calibrated a little better to the situation that we are facing today.  I expect a small decrease in the funds rate to be consistent with further increases in the unemployment rate—and everybody does, I think, judging from the central tendencies of the forecast—which will put downward pressure and help to contain inflation.  I agree that there is an upside risk from continued increases in commodity prices that feed through, as President Plosser noted, into core inflation.   I think that this is a very different situation from the 1970s.  I looked this morning at the Economic Report of the President, at those tables in the back.  The stage for the 1970s was set in the 1960s.  Core inflation rose from 1½ percent in the mid-1960s to 6¼ percent in 1969.  That’s a situation, obviously, in which inflation expectations can become unanchored, and then these relative price shocks feed through much more into inflation expectations.  Looking in the Greenbook, Part 2, page II-32, every measure of core inflation for 2007 was lower than the measure of core inflation for 2006, and half of them—these are Q4-to-Q4 measures of core inflation—are lower than for 2005.  So we are not in a situation of a gradual upcreep in core inflation, which I think was what set the stage for the 1970s. I don’t expect a small decrease in interest rates to result in higher inflation through this dollar–commodity price–inflation expectations channel either.  The decrease in interest rates is already in the markets.  If anything, a statement like alternative B might firm rates a bit; and taking out “downside risks” and “act in a timely manner” reinforces the notion that the Federal Reserve is not poised to ease any more.  I wouldn’t expect interest rates to go down; therefore, I wouldn’t expect the dollar to go down, and I wouldn’t expect commodity prices to go up from this. I think the markets reacted very well over the intermeeting period to incoming data.  They saw the tail risk decrease.  They raised interest rates.  The dollar firmed.  They put a U shape in our interest rate path.  It seems to me that path is very close to what many of us said we expected and thought was appropriate, give or take ¼ point, for the federal funds rate over the coming couple of years.  I don’t see any reason to act in a way that changes those expectations; I think the market expectations are fine.  I wouldn’t lower interest rates ¼ point just to confirm market expectations.  I think it is the right thing to do, and I don’t see any reason to lean against it to change expectations.  I think that expectations are lined up pretty well with our objectives.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 166.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply expresses gratitude to President Fisher.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 167.
   MR. FISHER.  Well, Mr. Chairman, I was listening very carefully to Governor Kohn, as I do the rest of my colleagues.  I noted your comment that it doesn’t buy us much.  I’m worried that it may cost us much.  Had I gone first, I would have made arguments similar to those of President Plosser and President Evans.  I am in favor of a pause.  I think that is pretty clear.  I want to stress a couple of things I mentioned yesterday because I think they’re important.  I am concerned about our costs regarding what I call a different kind of adverse feedback loop, which is the inflation dynamic whereby reductions in the fed funds rate lead to a weaker dollar and upward pressure on global commodity prices, which feed through to higher U.S. inflation and to cutbacks in consumption by consumers and actions by employers to offset the effects of inflation.  I quoted a CEO, whom I consider to be very highly regarded, regarding his company’s behavioral patterns.  This is someone, by the way, who was in the business in the 1970s.  He said, “We’re learning to run a business, once again, in an inflationary environment.”  That quote bothers me because it shows a behavioral response.  This goes beyond the issue, but I thought that comment you made yesterday about relative prices, Mr. Chairman, was very interesting.  But it shows a behavioral response, and behaviors eventually become habits, and habits become trends, and I’m worried about that. There was a period when I felt that we were at risk of a repetition of the 1930s.  I think the liquidity measures that we have taken—which I have fully supported, and I applaud you, Mr. Chairman, and the New York group for thinking these through with the staff—have provided the bridge that we spoke of yesterday.  Don, you mentioned the 1970s.  I am no longer worried about the 1930s, although I think there are tripwires out there that are very, very serious.  You pointed to them in your intervention.  You are right; under Bill Martin these pressures were put in place.  But somebody mentioned yesterday—it may have been Vice Chairman Geithner—that he wasn’t around in the 1970s.  I actually sat by President Carter’s side when he got lectures from a left-wing socialist named Helmut Schmidt and by a right winger named Margaret Thatcher.  Their points were that you cannot risk appearing to be complacent about inflation.  I worry that we risk appearing to be complacent about inflation.  I am speaking within the family here, but I sense that we are giving that appearance on the outside.  The question really is, Is it worth ¼ point.  What is the risk–return tradeoff here.  I don’t think it’s worth cutting ¼ point.  I think it is worth staying where we are.   I know that the markets anticipate X or Y.  We had a conversation about that yesterday.  I made my living in the markets.  The markets come and go, and I am happy to hear Governor Kohn say that we are not influenced by the markets.  I don’t think we should be.  Their reactions are momentary.  But I just don’t feel the risk–return tradeoff makes it worthwhile for a ¼ point cut here unless we saw evidence of substantial downside slippage beyond what we are all discounting for housing, which is very negative.  I have spoken about a price correction of 35 percent from peak to trough, and we’re not there yet.  It would have to be more negative than that to convince me to cut rates further.  So, Mr. Chairman, I respectfully submit that we should pause, and that’s how I plan to vote.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher expresses his concern about the potential costs of a rate cut, while acknowledging that others have argued in favor of it. He disagrees with the idea that a rate cut would be beneficial and believes that the risk of appearing complacent about inflation outweighs any potential benefits. He concludes by stating that he plans to vote against a rate cut.


Passage number 168.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing gratitude towards someone, President Yellen.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 169.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B with the wording that has been proposed.  But I do appreciate that there is a case for alternative C as well, and I understand and appreciate the arguments that have been made in favor of it.  On the pure economic merits, I definitely support a 25 basis point cut.  As I noted in my comments on the economic situation, it appears that the economy has stalled and may have fallen into a recession.  I share the same concerns as Governor Kohn and President Stern.  My forecast is close to the Greenbook.  I think a further easing in financial conditions is needed to counter the credit crunch, and I believe that a cut in the federal funds rate will be efficacious in easing financial conditions. Although the real federal funds rate is accommodative by any usual measure of it, I completely agree with Governor Kohn’s discussion of this topic.  This is a situation in which spreads have increased so much and credit availability has diminished so much that looking at the real federal funds rate is just a very misleading way of assessing the overall tightness of financial conditions.  I consider them, on balance, to be notably tighter than they were in the beginning of August.  I don’t agree that further cuts in the federal funds rate will be ineffective in helping us achieve our employment goal or counterproductive to the attainment of price stability over the medium term.  Given that a 25 basis point cut is what the markets are now anticipating—it is built in—I would not expect this action, coupled with the language in alternative B, to touch off further declines in the dollar or to exacerbate inflationary expectations. That said, I did see arguments in favor of alternative C as well.  I can see some advantage in doing a little less today than markets are expecting as long as we reaffirm that we do retain the flexibility to respond quickly to further negative news with additional cuts.  A case that could be made for pausing is that we will soon get information relating to GDP in the second quarter and get a better read on just how serious the downturn is.  With respect to market and inflationary psychology, I also can see a case for doing less than markets expect.  It is true that some measures of inflation expectations have edged up a bit, and I would agree with President Fisher that perhaps a pause would counter any impression that we have become more tolerant of inflation in the long run.  But I don’t think we have become more tolerant of inflation in the long run, and I did see today’s reading on the employment cost index as further confirmation that at this point nothing is built into labor markets that suggests that we are developing a wage–price spiral of the type that was of such concern and really propelling the problems in the 1970s.  On the other hand, I agree with President Plosser, too.  Wages aren’t a leading indicator.  We have to watch inflationary expectations.  So I don’t think that is definitive.  Nevertheless, I do find it quite reassuring that nothing is going on there at this point. I think doing nothing today might mitigate the risk of a flight from dollar assets, which could exacerbate financial turmoil.  So there are arguments in favor of alternative C, and I recognize them.  But, on balance, I believe that the stronger case is for B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage between alternative B and alternative C. The speaker, Ms. Yellen, acknowledges the arguments in favor of both alternatives and weighs the pros and cons before ultimately expressing her support for alternative B.


Passage number 170.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Thank you" is a polite expression of gratitude towards President Bullard, indicating agreement or appreciation for something they have done or said.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 171.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The FOMC is badly in need of a stopping rule on the federal funds rate.  Continued reaction to bad economic news—and there is likely to be bad news in the coming months—is going to set up serious future problems for this Committee.  The fragile credibility of the Committee is being eroded as we speak, and we will do well to take steps to reassert inflation-fighting resolve at this meeting. The intuition in dealing with the current crisis is that we can use new lending facilities to help return financial markets to more normal operation and that interest rate policy is not that likely to help on this dimension.  But exceptionally low rates can create new problems.  Since lower rates are not really helping directly with the smooth operation of financial markets, I suggest that we put that on hold for the time being and let our past, stunningly aggressive, interest rate moves have an effect through the summer and into the second half of the year.  This would be consistent with alternative C in the policy alternatives. Many participants have emphasized that there will be a long unwinding process.  The Chairman described us as being in the third inning on this, similar to the late 1980s and early 1990s.  During that episode, the Fed went on hold at 3 percent, considered an exceptionally low rate at the time.  That gave financial markets a chance to heal following the S&L problems without creating other problems for the mid to late 1990s.  In retrospect, this policy worked quite well during that era, and it seems to me that something similar could be done today at the current level of the federal funds rate.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Bullard, is advocating for a stopping rule on the federal funds rate and suggesting that the committee should put a hold on lowering rates. He is arguing against the idea that lowering rates will help with the smooth operation of financial markets and instead recommends relying on past interest rate moves. This is in contrast to the current policy of the committee and may spark disagreement among the members.


Passage number 172.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a simple expression of gratitude and a salutation. There is no contention or disagreement present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 173.
 MR. HOENIG.  Mr. Chairman, I’m glad that reasonable people can differ.  I do continue to hold the view that easing policy today is a mistake.  If I were voting on it, I would vote to hold where we are.  With the fed funds rate at the level it currently is, I think that continuing to ease policy in an environment of rising inflationary pressures gives serious erosion to our long-run credibility.  We are seeing increasing signs that inflation expectations are rising.  I see it constantly, as the public’s inflation psychology is changing as well.  This change reflects the large, sustained now, increases in food, energy, and other commodities and accelerating import prices.  I am concerned that maintaining at this highly accommodative policy level for an extended period, while it may bring some short-run stimulus into the economy, increases inflationary risk to an unacceptable level, which will, over the not-too-distant future, begin to distort long-run investment decisions and continue to increase the risk of financial instability and imbalances in the longer-run.  Finally, on the psychology of the markets, holding rates constant, although it might disappoint some on Wall Street, will please many, many on Main Street.  I judge that it will confirm to the world that we are turning our attention to these longer-run issues, and I’m disappointed that we’re not seizing the opportunity to make that statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Hoenig, believes that easing policy today is a mistake and is concerned about the risk of inflation and financial instability. This contradicts the views of those who may advocate for easing policy.


Passage number 174.
  Thank you CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 175.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My concerns about the real economy are similar to those that I had in March.  I continue to believe that residential real estate markets could deteriorate even further than what I have in my baseline projection and could exert even greater downward pressure on business activity.  Financial markets in my view are still fragile, and larger or more-widespread liquidity pressures could quickly present us with an even weaker set of economic fundamentals.  At the same time, I can’t easily dismiss the ongoing escalation of energy and commodity prices.  Although many of us, as we talked about yesterday, have expected these price pressures to abate for some time, they have not; and as I indicated yesterday, I do believe there is a risk that core inflation will not follow the downward path that I submitted as my projection for this meeting.  So like others, I can see a case being made for alternative C.  However, I think a modest reduction to our policy rate today as a precaution against further slippage in the real economy is prudent.  But I also strongly support the language that indicates we’re very close to, if not at, a pausing point in our easing cycle.  So I support the policy recommendation and the language in alternative B.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses concerns and discusses various factors that could affect the economy, but there is no explicit disagreement or conflict stated.


Passage number 176.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement simply thanks President Lacker.


Passage number 177.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I find myself agreeing with my colleagues who have advocated alternative C.  One way to think about our approach to the policy decision today is to look ahead and think about the probabilities associated with two bad outcomes.  Will the economy go into a substantially deeper recession than we expect.  Or coming out of this recession, will the trailing inflation rate be higher than it was when we went in.  Although I hope neither of these occurs, my sense right now is that the chance of an increase in trend inflation is more likely than a much deeper recession, and I think we should alter our policy path accordingly. The incoming data since the beginning of the year have resulted in a more adverse outlook, and that change in the outlook is already, in my view, reflected in the current stance of policy.  I noted yesterday that the real federal funds rate using the Greenbook’s inflation forecast rather than four-quarter lagged core inflation is now between minus ½ and minus ¾ percent.  I think it makes sense to take advantage of information about foreseeable gaps between overall inflation and core, and the stance of policy strikes me as very stimulative, certainly plenty for the recession we now expect, when we look at back historical recessions.  As I noted yesterday, at the retail level for firms and consumers, spreads aren’t out of line with where they’ve been in past recessions.  It is true that jumbo mortgage rates and some other rates have not come down as much as they’ve come down in past recessions, but I just remind people of the secular technology shift.  There’s a sort of level shift in intermediation technology that we’re going through right now that really constitutes a change in the relative prices of different financial assets.   Now, I can’t think clearly about the stance of policy without talking first about the risk-free rate and then thinking about various spreads as really having to do with the relative prices of different financial claims.  So in looking at and through retail rates, that’s informative.  But the risk-free rate is the risk-free rate, and an array of factors affects how those relative financial prices evolve.  The securitization channel that seemed to work very well for a while is now exposed as more costly and less efficacious than once was thought.  Some of these securitization vehicles didn’t exist in past recessions or expansions, and only a couple of decades ago these spreads were as high as or higher than they are now.  So I stick to thinking about the stance of monetary policy in terms of the real risk-free rate. I think our experience between the January and the March meetings with inflation expectations is pretty good evidence of their fragility in the current environment without our having articulated what our long-run objective is for inflation.  I don’t think that the level of inflation expectations is aligned with our objectives; I think it is too high relative to our objectives.  Market participants see a good chance of our dropping the rate ¼ point today and reversing field later in this year and raising rates again.  I suspect they don’t fully grasp how difficult it’s going to be to reverse course while we negotiate the murky waters of the recovering economy later this year.  Indeed, I think that the fiscal stimulus that we’re going to get will make those waters even murkier.  It will be even harder to divine the underlying, ex-fiscal-policy strength of the economy. So for these reasons, I believe that we should leave the fed funds rate alone today.  The upward surprise at our last meeting did not appear to affect financial markets adversely.  Coupled with that statement’s emphasis on inflation risks, it did seem to have the beneficial effect of reversing the run-up in inflation expectations.  I would expect that leaving the funds rate alone today would have a similar beneficial effect in stabilizing inflation expectations.  So I favor alternative C, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker states that they agree with their colleagues who have advocated for alternative C and provides their reasoning for this decision.


Passage number 178.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of a polite expression of gratitude addressed to Governor Warsh.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 179.
 MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I can support alternative B, but I must admit I can’t do it with the conviction that I would prefer to have.  I think market participants will look at our decision today and at the data over the next few weeks and try to measure whether we can hold up to the pause language that accompanies alternative B.  Taking action with a 25 basis point move today, we have to then be prepared to stomach the continued weakness in the real economy that is in many of our projections.  Speaking for myself, I’d say we also have to be prepared when we next meet to hold the line even if we see a retracing of some of the improvements in financial markets.  So in my own base case, the judgment when we next meet will be a harder one.  The economy might look weak; financial markets might look weaker than they are; and trying to signal to the markets in alternative B that we are serious about holding the line at what would then be 2 percent is putting a pretty hard task on us.  I think we’re capable of holding the line there, but we have to hold ourselves to that standard. The 25 basis point move, in and of itself, doesn’t strike me as that consequential.  What strikes me as consequential is the symbolism.  Given the uncertainties that Dave and the team have spoken about, it strikes me that the 25 basis points is not nearly as consequential in effect as what might well happen to the transmission mechanism and the efficacy of this change in federal funds rates on the real economy.  Put differently, if the financial markets can get back to business, they will be helping the real economy, in effect lowering the cost of capital far more than our actions would today. As I said, I think the symbolism here does matter.  By moving 25 basis points today, we’re taking some risks with the dollar.  I think that the dollar improvement we have seen over the past several days and weeks has occurred because there’s an expectation that we are closer to a pause and that this Committee is going to have a tougher decision about whether or not to move than they had anticipated some weeks ago.  Even though the language in alternative B is useful in trying to lay the factual predicate for a pause when we next meet, there will be a lot of folks who will be wondering about our convictions there, and when they do, I think we are assuming some dollar risks.  We are also assuming incremental risks on the inflation front.  Continued easing could well encourage the perception that the FOMC has a greater tolerance for inflation than is prudent, with potential adverse effects on inflation expectations, a further run-up in commodity prices, and a continued decline in the foreign exchange value of the dollar. So this is a tough judgment that we’re making, with significant uncertainty.  I take comfort in believing that the language in the minutes and the remarks that we all offer between now and the next time we meet will suggest not that this is a cut with a dovish pause but that this is a cut with an expectation of holding after our actions today.  We are not barring all events because we can certainly imagine the world turning yet again and we can certainly imagine another let-down, particularly in the global economy.  But this is a statement that we want to hold after our action today and that we are prepared to stomach some additional bad news with respect both to the economy and to financial markets.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses support for alternative B but admits to lacking conviction in that decision. They mention concerns about the potential weakness in the real economy, the need to hold the line in future meetings, the symbolism of the 25 basis point move, the risks to the dollar and inflation, and the overall uncertainty of the judgment being made. Overall, the speaker acknowledges the various risks and uncertainties involved in the decision.


Passage number 180.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Kroszner.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement present in the given passage. The statement is simply expressing gratitude towards Governor Kroszner.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 181.
 MR. KROSZNER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As many speakers before me have said, this is a pretty close call, and reasonable cases can be made for both alternative B and alternative C.  If you look at financial market conditions, you can see your favorite indicator and say whether things have eased or not eased.  One indicator that I look at when thinking about the transmission of monetary policy is the LIBOR–OIS spread, which has gone up very significantly.  A lot of short-term borrowing is priced off of that.  If we wanted just to keep policy where it was six weeks ago, we would actually have to cut more—not that I’m suggesting that we should.  But if you use that spread as the relevant indicator, it would suggest that, if one were to keep the same stance, or potentially the same stance, of monetary policy, you’d have to cut a lot.  It doesn’t seem as though our liquidity facilities have been effective on this particular dimension.  We had been hopeful that they would be, but they don’t seem to be.  Even with some of the things that we voted on yesterday, we’re still going to see very elevated spreads in some of these markets, still making borrowing costs relatively high and so disrupting the traditional monetary transmission mechanism.  So that’s where I would argue for alternative B. Another argument for alternative B is the potentially protracted slowdown.  I agree very much with President Stern.  As I’ve talked about a lot before, this sort of slow burn is related to the housing market.  The repair and recovery of those markets is going to take a long time.  The spreads are still quite elevated in a number of these markets.  So providing more cushion against the downside risk there for those markets and then thinking about how that risk affects the potential for broader downside risks, in which the housing market seems to be a potential trigger point for negative nonlinear dynamics, again suggests that moving down 25 basis points now is prudent. The key, of course, that people have been talking about is inflation pressures going forward—inflation expectations.  Here a case can be made on either side with some cogency.  One challenge we have right now is that we have a lot of differences in the way to read inflation expectations.  Looking at the five-year-ahead versus the five-to-ten-year-ahead, we’ve seen them spread apart quite a bit and now start to come back together, with the next five years starting to move up but the five-to-ten-year-ahead moving down.  We have a number of other measures of expectations, some of which have moved up quite significantly but maybe primarily because of some relative price movements rather than underlying inflation trends. One thing that is comforting for me on the alternative B side is that during the last year to 18 months, when we have had very low—below 5 percent—unemployment rates, we have seen very little evidence of high wage pressure.  I find it unlikely that it is going to increase as the unemployment rate goes above 5 percent, and I think, as many people around the table do, that unemployment may sustain itself above 5 percent for quite some time.  We also haven’t seen some of the real shocks to energy and commodity prices feed through to core.  Now, that still could be coming.  But we’ve seen very elevated prices in these areas for quite some time—six to nine months—and the most recent readings from the PCE index suggest that they haven’t fed through.  Maybe that is still to come, and I think to be worried about that is reasonable.  It is also reasonable to be worried about implications for the dollar if we were to go for alternative B rather than alternative C.   But the language in alternative B can provide some comfort to the markets that we are unlikely to be pushing much further, given what we see and what we expect, but that we are open to that possibility.  We certainly have a very long time between this meeting and the next meeting.  We’re going to be getting two employment reports, GDP, and a lot of other information, so we may need to revisit some of these issues.  But at this point I would come down for alternative B with the language that we have.  I think it gives us the appropriate flexibility, and I don’t see sufficient evidence of an unhinging of inflation expectations or actual inflationary pressures, at least with respect to core, to say that we need to take a pause now.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker discusses the different arguments for alternative B and alternative C and states their own argument for alternative B. They also mention the differing views on inflation expectations and wage pressure.


Passage number 182.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Mishkin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 183.
 MR. MISHKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, I’m in a very uncomfortable position here because I usually like to be very decisive, and I think in all past cases I’ve had a strong view before going into the meeting in terms of what is the appropriate alternative that the Committee should take, at least that I should take.  I’m in a very uncomfortable position because I’m actually sitting exactly on the fence between alternative B and alternative C.  As you know, sitting on the fence and having a fence right in that anatomically uncomfortable position is not a good place to be.  [Laughter]  So let me go through the current situation and argue why I’m in this uncomfortable position. The first point to make is that inflation expectations are actually reasonably well contained.  It is true that I have a concern that high headline inflation could make containing inflation expectations and preserving the nominal anchor more difficult.  But it is important to note that we have been in a situation in which we’ve had very high headline inflation and, in fact, core inflation and inflation expectations have behaved very well.  So it’s very important to emphasize that this is not the 1970s, and I really get disturbed when people point to that as a problem.  We do have to worry about inflation expectations possibly going up, but it’s not a situation that, if we make a mistake, they go up a whole lot.  They could go up, and it might be costly to get them down, but it would not be a disaster. The second issue is that, although we may have turned the corner, we are still in a situation of very fragile financial markets, and we have been disappointed before.  I am getting more optimistic.  I’m hopeful and think it’s very possible that we’ll look back at the middle of March and say that was the worst of it.  But there is a possibility, and it’s not a small possibility, that things could go south again, and that would argue for the need for aggressive cuts in the future. The third thing that I point out about the situation is that the modal forecast given by the Greenbook—and consistent with my modal forecast and with the modal forecasts of most of the participants—suggests that we may have to cut a bit further in the future.  So the problem is that, given the conditions that we face, we need a lot of flexibility to deal with potential downside risks.  I think the downside risks have diminished, but they could go back up again.  So there could be a situation in which we need to ease aggressively in the future.  Of course, we’ve convinced the markets that we are non-gradualists, but so far we’ve been non-gradualists in only one direction, which is to ease.  In fact, we’d like to be in a situation where we could aggressively ease in the future if we had to but not risk having inflation expectations go up.  That’s a very serious problem that many participants have pointed out. So how would I like the markets to perceive us.  Well, I’d like the markets to perceive us as being willing to be very aggressive in terms of easing, if necessary; but I’d also like them to perceive us as having the Volcker characteristics of being six feet, six inches, tall and having a big baseball bat and, if inflation and inflation expectations are starting to unhinge, being willing to take out the baseball bat and do whatever is necessary.  You really would like to position yourself to have those characteristics.   So let me first talk about the case for alternative C of not changing and then go to the case for alternative B.  In the case for C, the advantage of pausing at this point is that it would actually indicate to the markets by our actions that we’re serious about keeping inflation under control and that it’s more likely that we would bring out the baseball bat.  In that sense, it could enhance credibility, and a very important, positive element of that is that it would be easier for us to be flexibly aggressive if we needed to be so in the future.  That is one reason that I think there is a strong case for alternative C.  But I also think there is a strong case for B.  First, the evidence that inflation expectations are unhinged or are likely to get unhinged is not very strong.  I do not put a lot of stock in consumer surveys.  But I tend to look at financial markets as being the canary in the coal mine.  Though being a New Yorker, I actually have been in a coal mine [laughter] – at the Museum of Science and Industry in Chicago.  It’s really cool.  All of you should go there someday when you go visit Charlie.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their own personal opinion and explaining different factors that contribute to their indecision. They are not arguing with anyone or expressing disagreement with another point of view.


Passage number 184.
  MR. KROSZNER.  But he has never seen a canary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states a fact about Mr. Kroszner's experience.


Passage number 185.
  [Laughter] MR. MISHKIN.  I have seen a canary.  But the key is that the canary has not keeled over.  In fact, if you look at what’s going on in the financial markets, the concerns in terms of inflation compensation have dissipated somewhat.  I think the fact that they were moving up is an indication of greater inflation risk.  They’ve come back down again.  I don’t think that should make us complacent, but I do think it tells us that we haven’t seen anything really bad happen at this stage. So the question is why we should cut now and go with alternative B rather than C.  Well, first, I think the modal forecast suggested that a cut is in line with optimal monetary policy, and I think that’s an important argument.  It is particularly so because there is a very strong likelihood that, even though I’m a little more confident that the recession that we’re probably in now will be very mild, if it’s even a recession at all—I think it is likely that we’re in a recession but a mild one—the recovery actually is going to have a lot of the characteristics of the recovery that we had in the 1990s because it’s just going to take a long time to clean up this mess.  That again argues for a cut.  The other issue that I think is important is that there is a very long period between now and the next FOMC meeting.  Given that the modal forecasts indicate that things are likely to get worse in the economy in this quarter, there is an issue that, if we get bad news, then we might regret not having cut now, and I’m not a big fan of intermeeting cuts.  That would be another argument for cutting now. I guess the bottom line is that I’m just in a very uncomfortable position in that I dislike being not very decisive here.  One thing that has helped me a lot in being comfortable with alternative B is that the language has changed quite significantly from the initial wording.  I was not happy with the idea that, if we suggest that there will be a pause in the future, it would be time dependent.  It should be clearly data-dependent.  If it were time-dependent, we would get into exactly the problem that Charlie Evans talked about:  We want the flexibility of saying that what we’re doing is dependent on data, not time, because if people know that you’re going to reverse things later on, it doesn’t have the impact.  I think that is an important change here.  So I’m quite comfortable with the language of alternative B.  I’m willing to support B.  It looks as though that is the consensus, and my view today is that I’m going to go with whatever the consensus is.  Thank you very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is sharing their thoughts and personal position on the issue but does not express any disagreement or conflict with others.


Passage number 186.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 187.
   VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The transcript says, “Mishkin says canary wheezing but hasn’t keeled over.”  [Laughter]  I support alternative B.  I think you could frame this as a modest recalibration of policy with a hawkish soft pause.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It mentions a statement made by "Mishkin" and then states the speaker's support for "alternative B" without any conflicting viewpoints or argumentation being presented.


Passage number 188.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  And a wheezing canary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information or details that suggest the presence of contention or disagreement. It simply states the presence of a wheezing canary.


Passage number 189.
  [Laughter]   VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.  I don’t think the canary is wheezing.  Look, I think there are lots of good arguments on both sides of this.  I think all the good ones have been made.  The markets have been giving us a pretty good test against the concern, which I think we all share, that if we move today we risk some significant erosion of our inflation credibility or inflation expectations feeding through the dollar into a commodity price spiral.  We have had a pretty good test of it.  Over the past several weeks, there has been a very substantial shift in expectations for the path of the fed funds rate, which embody substantial expectations around a near-term cut and very little beyond that and some modest retracing as we go forward.  Expectations have come down despite what has happened to oil prices.  Inflation has come down.  The dollar is stronger on net over that period.  This is pretty good validation that the path that is represented in alternative B does not come with excessive risk that we will be eroding our credibility.  We can’t know for sure.  It’s good to be worried about that risk, but the protection against that risk is fairly good. What strikes me about this discussion is the extent of the gap in this Committee in how we think about the way to measure the stance of monetary policy.  What we could do is use a seminar and a bit of history on this.  It would be nice to run monetary policy back over the past four decades to see, if it had been set with a basic policy regime in which we looked only at the real fed funds rate deflated by headline inflation today, what the outcomes would have been for the economy at that time.  That’s essentially what you guys are saying.  It seems to me that you are basically saying that equilibrium doesn’t vary and that deflating the nominal fed funds rate with some mix of headline and core today is the best way to judge the stance of policy.  But I think it’s worth having a little exercise in it.  It is hard to look back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is mainly discussing different viewpoints and perspectives on measuring the stance of monetary policy, but there is no clear contention or disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 190.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Excuse me.  Make sure that you say you’re speaking for yourself, not for me, in terms of how I think about policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser is simply asking someone to clarify that they are expressing their own opinion rather than speaking on his behalf.


Passage number 191.
 VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.  Okay, but it is a surprising gap.  So I think it would be worth some time to think through that.  Obviously we also disagree about how inflation works in the United States, how relative price shocks take effect, and what we should respond to in that sense.  That would be worth a little time, too.  Again, it is a surprise to me.  We sit here to make monetary policy, and we haven’t talked much about this basic core question:  How should we judge the stance of policy.  It would be worth some attention. I just want to end by saying something about the dollar.  My basic sense about the dollar—and I’m very worried about this dynamic now—is that it has been trading more on concern about tail risk in the economy and in the financial system than anything else.  As I said yesterday, if you look back to when there has been an increase in perceived tail risk, however you want to measure it—credit default swaps on financials or something like that—and the two-year has fallen sharply or we have had a big flight to quality, those have been the periods that have been most adverse to the dollar.  Now, it is not a consistent pattern, but I think it’s basically right; and I think it gives an important illustration that what goes into a judgment about whether people hold dollars and U.S. financial assets has to do with a lot of things.  It has a lot to do with confidence that this Committee will reduce the tail risk in the financial system and the economy to tolerable levels.  It also has a lot to do with confidence in our willingness to keep inflation stable over a long period, but it’s not only that.  Again, we have had a pretty good experiment in that proposition over the past year or so. My sense is that the biggest risk to the dollar, since I’m pretty confident that this Committee is going to make good judgments about inflation going forward, is in the monetary policy of other countries.  The real problem for us now is that we have a large part of the world economy—in non-China, non-Japan Asia and the major energy exporters—still running a monetary policy that is based on the dollar as nominal anchor.  That has left them with remarkably easy monetary policy and a pretty significant rise in asset-price inflation.  The transition ahead for them as they try to get more independence for monetary policy and soften the link to the dollar is going to carry a lot of risk for us because the market is going to infer from that a big shift in preferences for the currencies that both governments and private actors in those countries hold.  As that evolution takes place in their exchange rate and monetary policy regimes the risk for us is that the market expects a destabilizing shift in portfolio preferences, which people might infer is also a loss of confidence in U.S. financial assets.  I think that’s a big problem for us.  It’s not clear to me that it means that we should run a tighter monetary policy against that risk than would otherwise be appropriate because I don’t think it buys much protection against that risk.  I just want to associate myself with all the concerns said about the dollar in this context.  The judgment that goes into confidence and people’s willingness to hold U.S. financial assets is deeply textured and complex, and it has a lot to do with confidence in this Committee’s capacity to navigate the perilous path between getting and keeping down that tail risk and preserving the confidence that inflation expectations over time will stay stable.  So I support alternative B and its language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and concerns, but there is no mention of any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 192.
 MS. DANKER.  This vote encompasses the language of alternative B in the table that was handed out as part of Bill’s briefing yesterday, as well as the directive from the Bluebook. “The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with reducing the federal funds rate to an average of around 2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating the language of alternative B in the table and the directive from the Bluebook. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 193.
”  Chairman Bernanke  Yes Vice Chairman Geithner  Yes President Fisher   No Governor Kohn   Yes Governor Kroszner  Yes Governor Mishkin  Yes President Pianalto  Yes President Plosser  No President Stern   Yes Governor Warsh  Yes  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  I will ask the Governors to join me in the office for the discount rate decision.  Everyone else, why don’t you take a 20-minute coffee break.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the different responses given by Chairman Bernanke, Vice Chairman Geithner, Governor Kohn, Governor Kroszner, Governor Mishkin, President Pianalto, President Plosser, Governor Stern, and Governor Warsh.


Passage number 194.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Why don’t we recommence.  The meeting that we are about to begin is a joint meeting of the FOMC and the Board, so I need a motion to close the meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for a motion to close the meeting.


Passage number 195.
   MR. KOHN.  So move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 196.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Without objection.  The discussion is about interest on reserves.  Let me turn to Brian.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no visible contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Without objection" suggests that there is unanimous agreement among the participants. The discussion then moves on to a new topic without any opposing views being expressed.


Passage number 197.
 MR. MADIGAN.5  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We will be referring to the package of material labeled “Implications of Interest on Reserves for Monetary Policy Implementation.”  Today, the staff will report on work prompted by two changes the Congress made to the Federal Reserve Act in October 2006 and will seek your guidance on further work.  Both changes become effective in October 2011.  As shown on page 2, the first change allows the Board to authorize the Reserve Banks to pay interest on balances maintained by depository institutions at an interest rate or rates not to exceed the general level of short-term interest rates. The second allows the Board to set required reserve ratios on transaction deposits within a range of 0 to 14 percent rather than the currently mandated range of 8 to 14 percent, permitting the Fed effectively to eliminate reserve requirements if it chooses. These two changes will allow the Federal Reserve to make significant improvements in its approach to monetary policy implementation.  They give us an opportunity to reduce distortions and deadweight losses resulting from our current complex system of reserve requirements.  They also give us an opportunity to improve the effectiveness of monetary policy implementation in routine circumstances as well as in conditions of financial stress.  5 The materials used by Messrs. Madigan, Meyer, Clouse, Hilton, and Dudley are appended to this transcript (appendix 5).  While the Congress made important changes in the law, it also left some key statutory constraints in place.  As discussed on page 3, if the Board chooses to retain reserve requirements, the law continues to allow them to be imposed only on transaction deposits, nonpersonal time deposits, and Eurodollar liabilities and only on depository institutions.  In effect, the law continues to enshrine a system of reserve requirements that was designed to facilitate control of M1—an objective that has had little relevance to the conduct of U.S. monetary policy for a quarter-century.  Second, the prohibition against paying interest on demand deposits remains in force and is a significant continuing distortion in the U.S financial system.  We continue to work with congressional committees and staff to seek opportunities for the repeal of this prohibition.  Third, the law retains significant constraints on the assets that the Federal Reserve can purchase in the open market.  Fourth, interest on reserves has potential implications for priced services and for Reserve Bank operations more generally.  Finally, the Federal Reserve remains unable to pay explicit interest on balances held at the Federal Reserve by the Treasury and by foreign central banks.  Page 4 summarizes the steps we have taken to date in our work on interest on reserves.  Shortly after the legislation was passed, the Chairman asked the staff to begin background work.  Last year, a System workgroup undertook a preliminary study of a range of options for implementing monetary policy given the new authorities.  I’d like to recognize the participants in that workgroup, who made remarkable progress during a period in which some of these individuals were experiencing considerable pressures relating to the implementation of monetary policy that day, not just in five years.  These individuals included Jim Clouse, Seth Carpenter, John Driscoll, Sherry Edwards, David Mills, and Travis Nesmith from the Board; Spence Hilton, Leo Bartolini, Chris Burke, Todd Keister, Antoine Martin, and Jamie McAndrews from the New York Fed; Ron Feldman from Minneapolis; Steve Meyer from the Philadelphia Fed; and Huberto Ennis and John Weinberg from Richmond.  Separately, a System workgroup co-headed by Don Hammond here at the Board and Ron Mitchell at the Boston Fed has begun work on the implications for priced services of paying explicit interest on balances.  In February, the Board hosted a workshop on monetary policy implementation; five foreign central banks and the Federal Reserve participated.  As shown on page 5, our briefing today is in four parts.  After this introduction, Steve Meyer will present a summary of the Federal Reserve’s current approach to implementing monetary policy.  Next, Jim Clouse and Spence Hilton will discuss five options for implementing the new legislative authorities.  Finally, Bill Dudley will make a number of concluding comments and present our recommendations.As shown on page 6, we will be seeking your comments on the criteria that we have tentatively adopted for evaluating the options; on the options themselves; and on the process and timeline that we are tentatively proposing for this project.  One of the key issues is whether you would be prepared to see reserve requirements reduced to zero.  Steve will now continue our presentation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the changes made to the Federal Reserve Act and discussing the opportunities they present for improving monetary policy implementation.


Passage number 198.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, let me first congratulate and compliment the staff for a really thorough piece of work, both the presenters and all the other people whom Brian mentioned.  It is excellent work, particularly under very trying circumstances.  I mentioned that in February a workshop was held here at the Board on monetary policy implementation, which brought together people from major central banks around the world.  So there has been a very, very serious attempt to evaluate others’ experience.  Thank you very much for all of that.  Why don’t we take some questions first, if there are any.  Then anyone who would like to make comments can do so.  Any questions.  President Hoenig, do you have a question, sir.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing appreciation and praising the staff's work and the collaborative effort that went into evaluating others' experience. They then proceed to invite questions and comments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 199.
 MR. HOENIG.  Yes.  Option 1 doesn’t seem to be one of your recommendations, and yet it is something that basically people know how to do.  The idea is to eliminate the pack so that you have the system already in place.  It’s simple; you can learn from it.  Why wouldn’t that be one of the options you’d pursue.  I don’t have any real opposition to option 2, but I was just curious because the transition seemed so simple with option 1.  That is the question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is some disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Hoenig, is expressing his disagreement or confusion about why option 1 is not being considered as a recommendation. He argues that option 1, which involves eliminating the pack and using the existing system, is simple and easy to learn from. He questions why this option is not being pursued and expresses curiosity about the transition process being simpler with option 1. Therefore, there is disagreement or contention regarding the choice of options and the reasons for not considering option 1.


Passage number 200.
 MR. MADIGAN.  President Hoenig, I would say that we believe we already have a fairly good sense as to how paying interest on the required reserve balances and on excess reserves would work, at least qualitatively.  We do think it would be an acceptable means of implementing monetary policy.  As Jim noted, it probably wouldn’t be all that different in terms of monetary policy effectiveness from the way things work now.  Of course, as we also emphasized, the current system of reserve requirements has a lot of problems.  Admittedly, paying interest on required reserve balances in some sense solves the first-order problem, but there are lots of costs associated with the system of reserve requirements that we’ve discussed, and we think that those may warrant serious consideration of eliminating reserve requirements.  But to be clear, we’re not suggesting that we rule out option 1 at this stage.  We could certainly view it as a fallback position, for instance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It discusses various options and considerations related to implementing monetary policy.


Passage number 201.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Mishkin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage only provides the name "Governor Mishkin" without any information or context that implies any form of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 202.
 MR. MISHKIN.  I’d like to understand this issue in terms of the voluntary targets.  How are they deciding on these.  Clearly a big part of the issue is whether or not they choose you.  I was just completely confused about what their considerations in choosing these numbers would be and what implications that would have.  Now, there is experience for that one case.  I’m sure you have views on this, but it’s sort of the black box in this proposal, and it’s a really important part of it. The second question regards the corridor approach.  I do not think it is a good model for us because the countries that use it have very few banks.  The issue of using the central bank as a financial intermediary is less of a problem for them because there are fewer guys that they have to look at, and we have to look at a zillion people.  But is it true that they have high volatility.  I’m not sure.  I just would like to know the facts, but as I say, I don’t think it’s critical.  I don’t think the experience there, even if it worked well, really does tell us that we should do something here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing confusion and seeking clarification on certain issues, but there is no disagreement or argument being presented.


Passage number 203.
 MR. MADIGAN.  Maybe I could just take the second question, and Spence or Jim may want to take the first.  On the corridor approach, for other countries that are using it—I’m thinking of the Bank of Canada in particular here—their institutional set-up allows them extremely precise control over the supply of reserves.  Also the demand for reserves—I’m talking about reserve balances—is considerably less uncertain than in the United States.  Part of it comes from the fact that they have only a handful of large banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact about the institutional setup of the Bank of Canada and making a comparison to the United States.


Passage number 204.
 MR. MISHKIN.  It is five or six banks, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking confirmation about the number of banks.


Passage number 205.
 MR. MADIGAN.  So the communication with banks regarding their reserve management is extremely simple compared with what we could expect here in the United States.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that communication with banks regarding their reserve management is simpler compared to what could be expected in the United States.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 206.
 MR. CLOUSE.  The determination of voluntary targets, as Spence mentioned, is a really big issue that we’d have to study much further.  At least in the context of the simple models, banks will face some probability of an overdraft charge if they are operating with very low balances, so they might have an incentive to set up a voluntary requirement on which they receive remuneration.  On the other hand, they may not view even fully remunerated balances as an especially attractive asset, so there might be some balancing between the desire to hold large enough requirements to stay away from overdrafts and the idea of having balances or assets booked that aren’t particularly high earning.  But this is a major uncertainty for these types of models.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker presents different perspectives on the issue of voluntary targets for banks. They mention that banks might have an incentive to set up voluntary requirements to avoid overdraft charges, but they might also see fully remunerated balances as not being particularly attractive assets. This presents a conflicting viewpoint and indicates disagreement or contention.


Passage number 207.
  MR. MISHKIN.  The Bank of England has used a procedure like this.  What has been their experience.  Again, it may not be completely comparable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking about the experience of the Bank of England with a certain procedure, without expressing any disagreement or contradiction.


Passage number 208.
 MR. HILTON.  Well, for the Bank of England, the way the voluntary target rules are set is really very simple.  The bank chooses its own voluntary target.  It can’t be below zero, of course, but they have a cap.  It can’t be any higher than a certain amount, and I think it’s 2 percent of some measure of their liabilities on their balance sheet.  They were extremely worried.  They had no idea what they were going to get.  Their experience was encouraging in that they got an aggregate level and a distribution that have brilliantly facilitated their control over their interbank market.  But it is sort of taking a leap to go into that system, although we have some experience with our clearing balance program.  We do see how banks adjust their participation with reserve-management objectives in mind.  In our case, because there are practical limits—ceilings on the size of a clearing balance that makes sense for any bank to have—we don’t really have a direct observation of what we would get if it were entirely voluntary.  The evidence that I see from our experience of clearing balances and from the Bank of England is encouraging that we would get, even with a very simply designed set of voluntary targets, a good aggregate level and distribution of voluntary targets.  But right now, based on what we know, it is an uncertainty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily discusses the Bank of England's voluntary target rules and the speaker's observations and opinions on those rules. There is no mention of opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 209.
 MR. DUDLEY.  The big risk would be if the voluntary balances were really low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Dudley about a potential risk.


Passage number 210.
 MR. MISHKIN.  So let’s say that actually happened, that they were zero.  Then what.  Let’s say we implemented this and they came out at zero.  What are our options.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply posing a hypothetical scenario and asking what options would be available in that situation.


Passage number 211.
 MR. DUDLEY.  You’d have to change the incentives somehow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage presents a statement made by Mr. Dudley without any opposing viewpoints or disagreement.


Passage number 212.
 MR. MISHKIN.  Right, and that would be the answer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple statement of agreement.


Passage number 213.
 MR. DUDLEY.  But you could.  You could raise the cost of daylight overdrafts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 214.
 MR. MISHKIN.  Right.  You could raise the cost of daylight overdrafts, or you could adjust the interest rate that you pay on reserves to get it right.  That could solve the problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Mishkin suggests two possible solutions to solve the problem, raising the cost of daylight overdrafts and adjusting the interest rate on reserves.


Passage number 215.
 MR. DUDLEY.  As long as you have enough parameters that you can adjust to change the incentives, you’re probably going to be okay in that environment.  But if you have a system in which there aren’t any parameters that you can actually move, then you have a real problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making a statement about systems and incentives without opposing or contradicting any other viewpoint.


Passage number 216.
 MR. MISHKIN.  But in the context of the law, we would have the ability to adjust these parameters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement about the ability to adjust certain parameters in the context of the law.


Passage number 217.
 MR. MADIGAN.  Governor Mishkin, to state the obvious, we’d want to avoid that situation completely.  We want preparation and consultation with banks ex ante as to how they would react under various subparameterizations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Madigan expressing a desire for preparation and consultation with banks.


Passage number 218.
 MR. MISHKIN.  Okay.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Mishkin is being thanked for something, possibly for answering a question or providing information.


Passage number 219.
 MR. CLOUSE.  As Steve noted, we already have $7 billion in required clearing balances with a rate of remuneration that’s only 80 percent of the T-bill rate.  So in all likelihood, we would have a positive number.  How large that number would be is the question mark.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Clouse is simply stating a fact and expressing uncertainty about the specific amount.


Passage number 220.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 221.
 MS. YELLEN.  I have a comment, not a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Yellen simply states that she has a comment, not a question.


Passage number 222.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 223.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Just a procedural question.  You kind of segued into the positions.  Does anyone have a short question of fact.  Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for a procedural question and clarifying what type of question they are looking for.


Passage number 224.
 MR. KOHN.  I actually have a couple of questions rather than positions.  One is a bit more about what we’ve learned in this period of stress.  For example, on page 26, you list a bunch of banks that don’t seem to have taken advantage of primary credit.  I assume that you have talked to them, and I wonder how they had rationalized their concerns about stigma and what they said about that.  Along similar lines about stress, and following up on Governor Mishkin’s question, how did the U.K. system work in this period of stress.  My impression is that they had problems.  Initially the banks wanted to increase their voluntary targets and that required the Bank of England to be a little more flexible than it started out to be.  I’d be interested in how option 2 behaved under stress and then any new insights you have about bank behavior in this period that produced the oscillations that we saw. A second point is that Brian, Scott, and I have been talking about asking the Congress to allow us to pay interest on reserves sooner rather than later.  Are we pursuing that.  If we got that authority, I assume that it would not involve implementing this over four years but that we could implement something in one or two weeks, in the maintenance period after we got that authority.  How would you go about that.  What are you thinking in that regard.  I think I’ll stop there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking for information and clarification on several topics, but there is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 225.
 MR. MADIGAN.  If I may start with the last question, we can work our way up or around the list.  On pursuing legislative authority, the Federal Reserve is interested in accelerating that authority.  We have had some conversations with congressional staff about this.  For instance, the staff of Senate Minority Leader McConnell has asked us recently whether we’d be interested in legislation to accelerate the authority.  Of course, we responded enthusiastically.  We did say to them that it would be helpful if it were clear that we could use that authority in such a way as to be able to pay interest on excess reserves or, rather, to buy federal funds as a way of paying interest on excess reserves, in effect.  Buying federal funds when the rate is falling would help us put a floor under the funds rate.  So we would want to be sure—perhaps Scott wants to comment on this—that the legislation clearly permitted that.  Presumably we would be able to use that authority fairly quickly at an operational level—Bill or Spence may want to comment on this. Paying interest on required reserve balances is, of course, a whole other matter.  That involves complicated systems, and we would simply want to be sure that we made this clear to the congressional staffs, that it would take a longer time before we could implement that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining the Federal Reserve's interest in accelerating legislative authority and discussing the need for clarity in the legislation.


Passage number 226.
 MR. DUDLEY.  We think we could implement it pretty quickly.  Another benefit would be not just addressing the crashes of the funds rate late in the day but also enabling us to actually expand our balance sheet if needed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 227.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information or context to indicate contention or disagreement regarding the Vice Chairman.


Passage number 228.
 VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.  Just to clarify, what are the implications for scoring.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not discussing any conflicting viewpoints or arguments. It is simply asking for clarification on the implications of scoring.


Passage number 229.
 MR. DUDLEY.  It’s pretty small if you just confine it to excess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Dudley about the size of something.


Passage number 230.
 MR. MADIGAN.  My impression is, as Bill said, that it is small and there may not even be positive costs if you confine it to excess.  The issues of paying interest on required reserves are possibly a little more troublesome, but that may be viewed as a worthwhile cost to undertake at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement among the speakers. They appear to be discussing their shared impression and views on the smallness and potential costs of a certain issue. There is no indication of opposition or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 231.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let me interject.  If there’s a sense of the Committee that this is something we should escalate, let’s move it up the ladder and do that.  But anyone who wants to comment on that during the go-around, please feel free.  There was a second part about the United Kingdom, I believe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting that if the Committee believes the topic should be escalated, it should be brought up to higher authorities. They also invite anyone to comment on the matter during the discussion. The mention of the United Kingdom is unrelated to any potential disagreement.


Passage number 232.
 MR. MEYER.  With respect to the U.K. system during the period of turmoil, banks’ initial reaction was to lower their reserve deposits, their contractual commitments.  But they came to their senses and realized that holding more rather than less was a more sensible approach, and the Bank of England accommodated the banks’ desire both to increase their targets and to widen the bands.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply describes the initial reaction of banks in the U.K. system, acknowledges that they eventually realized a different approach was more sensible, and mentions that the Bank of England accommodated their desires.


Passage number 233.
 MR. DUDLEY.  Pretty dramatically, in fact.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The phrase "pretty dramatically" is subjective and open to interpretation, but it does not indicate contention or disagreement. It simply suggests that something happened in a dramatic manner.


Passage number 234.
 MR. MEYER.  Quite dramatically, to avoid the end-of-period spike in rates.  In terms of rate volatility, the Bank of England, the ECB, and the Fed all achieved about the same rate volatility during the period of market turmoil.  For the Bank of England, the spikes just tended to be more on the upside than the downside, but that had to do with their implementation procedures and not getting to the end of the period and being willing to accommodate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing an explanation about rate volatility and the actions taken by the Bank of England, the ECB, and the Fed during a period of market turmoil.


Passage number 235.
 MR. KOHN.  I assume it was the stigma problem as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The phrase "I assume" suggests that the speaker is making an educated guess or noting a possibility, but there is no opposing viewpoint or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 236.
 MR. MEYER.  Though they had a few trades above their lending rate, in fact that was not much of a problem.  Their system worked quite well.  Interestingly, the country with the smallest rate volatility during the whole period of market turmoil was Canada, and that’s because they knew the demand for balances at the end of every day and could adjust the supply by adjusting the government balance at the end of every day.  So they hit it basically every day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 237.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other short questions.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there are other short questions that follow the initial statement about President Fisher.


Passage number 238.
 MR. FISHER.  A very short question having nothing to do with what everybody else has asked about—but going back to page 33, what are the governance issues, and how do you resolve them, in 30 seconds or less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question unrelated to the previous discussion.


Passage number 239.
  [Laughter] MR. MADIGAN.  Well, the governance issues are that the FOMC is in charge of open market operations and setting the target for the federal funds rate, at least under current approaches to policy.  The legislation specifies that the Board is in charge of setting the rates paid on balances to institutions.  For instance, there may be differential rates as in option 1 on required reserve balances and excess reserve balances.  Presumably, if we went with option 1, for instance, one approach would be to simply set them by formula relative to the target federal funds rate.  We don’t mean to say that this is likely to be an enormously large issue, at least in some of the options, but it ought to be handled carefully.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the governance issues related to the FOMC and the Board's roles in setting rates.


Passage number 240.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 241.
 MR. STERN.  My question is about intraday and day-to-day volatility in the funds rate.  I would think that as long as we hit the target on average, that kind of volatility wouldn’t have any significant macroeconomic consequences.  So why would we care.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking a question and expressing their own thoughts, but there is no indication of disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 242.
 MR. HILTON.  That’s our impression, that it doesn’t have macro consequences.  Maybe it’s a tempest in a teapot, but for the participants in that market, the uncertainty and the costs that are borne by borrowers and lenders are an important issue.  But the macro fallout, the effect on longer-term rates, doesn’t seem to be significant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker acknowledges that the uncertainty and costs borne by borrowers and lenders in a particular market are important, but suggests that the macro fallout and the effect on longer-term rates are not significant. This is a statement of the speaker's impression rather than a sign of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 243.
 MR. DUDLEY.  What we don’t know is whether that volatility somehow has consequences for term funding.  How do you know the linkage between the two because they’re happening sort of simultaneously.  But I agree with Spence that we don’t think there’s any significant macro effect.  There may be some marginal effect of volatility creating a greater risk premium in the market, but it’s hard to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no explicit contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Dudley acknowledges the possibility of a linkage between volatility and term funding, but agrees with Spence that there is no significant macro effect. The statement acknowledges some uncertainty but does not involve any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 244.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  There is an effect on swaps, like foreign exchange swaps, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is simply stating that there is an effect on swaps, specifically foreign exchange swaps. It does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 245.
 MR. HILTON.  Well, for a lot of what we seem to get—like the Eurodollar rates and LIBOR and foreign exchange swaps and the way they relate to what goes on in our overnight funds market—the typical intraday pattern is firm in the morning and coming off late in the day.  Those higher morning rates are the ones that are linked to the other rates—Eurodollars, swaps—and so it’s not the average rate over time that seems to get priced into these other vehicles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing an explanation of how certain rates are linked and priced into other financial vehicles.


Passage number 246.
 MR. DUDLEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "MR. DUDLEY" does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 247.
  The high morning rate could conceivably affect other rates in a way that’s— MR. STERN.  It sounds like an obvious arbitrage opportunity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both speakers are discussing the potential impact of a high morning rate on other rates, and one speaker expresses that it could possibly lead to an arbitrage opportunity.


Passage number 248.
 MR. DUDLEY.  Well, we’re not seeing much arbitrage.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Dudley is simply stating a fact or observation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 249.
 MR. HILTON.  We are finding a great reluctance to do intraday arbitrage.  We’re hearing this from the banks that in the past would do that from time to time.  Coming back to one of the other questions that Don had about what we are hearing about stigma from some of the banks, one of our better contacts, Citibank, as Jim mentioned, used to do a lot of arbitraging and using the discount window, the primary credit facility.  On occasion, after they borrowed to re-lend in the market at a higher rate last year or so ago, they would call us in the morning to let us know how it was that they were helping us out with the funds rate.  That has pretty much stopped cold, and they have decided on sort of classic stigma.  They routinely point to the publication of borrowing data in the H.4.1 release, and they are just not interested in the small gain from that kind of activity while taking the risk in the market of being seen as in dire need of liquidity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Hilton, mentions that there is a great reluctance among banks to do intraday arbitrage. He also mentions that Citibank, one of their better contacts, used to engage in arbitraging using the discount window, but they have now decided to stop due to the stigma associated with it. This suggests that there is disagreement among banks on whether engaging in intraday arbitrage is worth the risk of being seen as in dire need of liquidity.


Passage number 250.
 MR. DUDLEY.  The TAF auction results underscored the idea of stigma at the primary credit facility.  It’s possible that we have actually a bit more stigma now than we did before because you can just see very clearly that there would have to be stigma for people to be bidding that much in the TAF auction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states the opinion of Mr. Dudley that the TAF auction results highlight the existence of stigma at the primary credit facility. There is no conflicting view or argument presented.


Passage number 251.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans had a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 252.
 MR. EVANS.  My primary comment in all of this is related to what President Stern, I think, said.  The way the objectives are worded here is “enhanced monetary policy implementation,” and the memo is worded more like, “How do we get our federal funds rate target effectively.” or something like that.  But there is really no discussion that I could find about the transmission of our policy actions to the economy and to inflation.  Under our current regime, we think, quite confidently, that the short-term federal funds rate prices short-term risk-free assets along the yield curve all the way up to the Treasuries and then corporates are priced off all of that.  I associate that with Marvin Goodfriend, who taught me that quite some time ago.  It’s not money; it’s not liquidity; it’s not the reserves per se.  It would be nice if, for each alternative, there were some discussion that we are preserving our understanding of the policy transmission mechanism or that we are enhancing it or whatever.  President Lacker mentioned the Bank of England—maybe we could set the policy rate as they do.  The question is, What will the markets do in terms of actively arbitraging something that helps price these securities.  This may not be an issue for many of these systems, but until there’s some kind of analysis, I’m not so sure.  It’s not just averaging over the maintenance period, and I think that analysis would be useful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, disagrees with the way the objectives are worded and expresses concern that there is no discussion about the transmission of policy actions to the economy and inflation. He questions whether the alternatives considered by the group will preserve or enhance their understanding of the policy transmission mechanism.


Passage number 253.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without further context. The phrase "Governor Warsh" alone does not provide enough information to indicate contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 254.
 MR. WARSH.  Governor Kohn shamelessly stole my question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. This is evident from the use of the word "shamelessly," which suggests that the speaker is accusing Governor Kohn of unfair behavior.


Passage number 255.
  [Laughter]   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Kroszner, do you have a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The mention of laughter and the question being posed to Governor Kroszner suggests a light and friendly atmosphere without any indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 256.
 MR. KROSZNER.  Yes.  In a lot of the discussion you just take as given the stigma associated with the primary credit facility, and you were just discussing that related to the publication of information about the facility.  Is that something that could also be on the table.  That seems to be potentially an instrument for which we might have to consider how much information to provide or about making it less or more attractive, which then would affect which options are more or less attractive.  Is there some reason not to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests that there may be reasons to consider providing less or more information about the primary credit facility, potentially making it less or more attractive. However, it is not clear if there is consensus among the participants on whether or not to do so.


Passage number 257.
 MR. MADIGAN.  I think that’s worth some further thought, Governor Kroszner.  One issue though, as I’m sure you know, is that the Board is required by law to publish weekly information on the individual Banks’ balance sheets as well as the consolidated balance sheet with a certain amount of detail.  I don’t remember the exact legal wording, but at least within the current law, to back away from that might be difficult.  Of course, you could conceivably pursue a change in the law, but I think we would want to think about the pros and cons of that before you went in that direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Madigan is expressing a concern and suggesting further thought before pursuing a specific course of action. He mentions the possibility of changing the law but suggests considering the pros and cons beforehand.


Passage number 258.
 MR. KROSZNER.  For sure, but just thinking about whether there are other things that we could do related to stigma might be worthwhile in this context.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting that considering other ways to address stigma could be worthwhile, but there is no conflicting view or argument presented.


Passage number 259.
 MR. MADIGAN.  Absolutely, we agree.  Of course, when the Board adopted the primary credit program in 2003, we gave a lot of thought before that and did considerable work after that to try to minimize the amount of stigma by trying to make very clear to banks that in our view use of the window didn’t entail stigma.  But the fundamental problem still is that banks are concerned that their use of the window may be detected in the market one way or another, especially in a period of financial stress, and that is just not a cost worth incurring.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they agree with the statement made and provides additional information to support their agreement.


Passage number 260.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser, did you have a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that President Plosser was asked if he had a question. There is no contention or disagreement evident in this statement.


Passage number 261.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Yes, just an implementation question.  One thing you talked about was in periods of stress, the way we’ve conducted policy intraday, you have had firmness in the funds rate in the morning and then weakness in the afternoon causing some intraday volatility.  The difficulty of hitting the target was partly the fact that we were entering the market only once a day, in the morning, and you had to see through that.  With all these other strategies, as they are implemented in other countries, are the central banks doing the same thing.  Are they entering the market only once a day, or do they come in several times a day.  I just wondered if there are differences in their approaches as to how often they interact in the marketplace.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is purely a question seeking clarification and information.


Passage number 262.
 MR. HILTON.  I would say, as a general characterization, that the common practice is to intervene only once a day, in the morning—not unlike what we do.  Where there’s an exception, it’s like with the Bank of Canada.  They have access to information that would allow them to know with precision late in the day what the supply of reserves is in the absence of any further open market operations, and then they make an adjustment accordingly. The fact is that, even if we were to operate late in the day but still before the close—let’s say, 5:30 or 6:00—we really have no more information than we had at 9:30 in the morning upon which to make an estimate of that day’s reserve supply.  We can observe rates, but we don’t know what amount of a reserve adjustment would be needed to bring supply in line with demand.  The risk of just opening up and offering to be one side or the other of the market in that situation late in the day is that we could get the entirety of one side of the market and actually create a reserve imbalance in the other direction between that time and the close of the day.  So simply being willing to operate late in the day isn’t really enough.  You do need reserve information as well upon which to size those operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily an explanation of the common practice and potential challenges of intervening in the market late in the day.


Passage number 263.
 VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.  Just to make this clear, Spence, is it the number of banks that make that information more accessible in Canada, or is it something else.  Is it fundamentally that they have just five banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is seeking clarification on the number of banks in Canada and how it affects the accessibility of information.


Passage number 264.
 MR. HILTON.  No, it is that they know the balance sheet.  They know it by late in the day with certainty.  They have few sources of uncertainty to begin with, and their major source of uncertainty, government balances, is something that perhaps the small number of banks they’re dealing with facilitates.  But it is that they know by late in the day what the supply of reserves will be with real precision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the individuals mentioned have access to accurate information about the supply of reserves.


Passage number 265.
 MR. MEYER.  Basically everything clears through their equivalent of Fedwire, so they know in real time what the balances are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Meyer, is simply providing information about the system in question.


Passage number 266.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Did you have a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple response asking if the person has a question. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 267.
 MR. LACKER.  A comment about stigma.  Every financial transaction that a substantive firm engages in that becomes known is relied upon by market participants to make inferences.  There’s a huge literature on the effect on equity values of the announcement of a bank line of credit; and like through this last crisis, if you talk to funding-desk guys, they’re very aware at the tactical level about what counterparties are revealing by their actions in funding markets.  They take that on board, and they’re very strategic about what they reveal with their market transactions.  We can try to keep it secret, but there’s a broad ability in the market to infer when somebody goes to the window by their behavior before that.  I’m saying that I don’t think we should get our hopes up about ever eliminating stigma.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the potential for stigma in financial transactions and expressing skepticism about the possibility of eliminating it.


Passage number 268.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Let’s take positions and comments, keeping in mind that lunch is being held hostage.  [Laughter]  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is just setting the context for the conversation and there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 269.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Okay.  Just a quick question, which doesn’t have to be answered now—given all of the financial turmoil, it would be interesting to see whether in other countries that have these different arrangements there was a decrease in either overnight or term lending with counterparties.  Given the extent to which you can just work with a central bank rather than counterparties, is there any evidence in these other regimes that interbank lending transaction volume disappeared in some of these countries.  I would be interested in seeing that.  Regarding Governor Kroszner’s comment on the H.4.1 release, it does seem that we could probably have a materiality requirement in our balance sheet.  Under most circumstances, what we are doing at the discount window would seem not to hit that materiality criterion.  I think we could be a little more innovative—I agree with President Lacker’s point—but I think that the H.4.1 does seem to have an effect; and if we will be doing all these other things, taking another look at the H.4.1 and making sure that we don’t have more untapped flexibilities probably makes a lot of sense. I would like a little more discussion of “promote efficient and resilient money markets and government securities markets” as a criterion.  I’m not sure I would weight those criteria equally.  It seems that all these criteria, for the most part, take care of most of the dead weight loss; and given that the banks still have to administrate for daylight credit, I am not sure that the burden is all that different across these various regimes.  But I can imagine that that one might be different, and given we just had financial turmoil—I know this is a bit different from what President Lacker said—I would put a little more attention to that. Overall, I like option 2 and option 5.  I’m comfortable with those two.  I’m attracted to the voluntary balance program.  On net, I would probably prefer a longer maintenance period to a one-day maintenance period, but I don’t have a strong preference and could easily be convinced otherwise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is the speaker expressing their thoughts and opinions on various topics.


Passage number 270.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage "Thank you. President Evans." This is a simple expression of gratitude towards President Evans.


Passage number 271.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I mentioned earlier, I would find some discussion about the transmission mechanism useful—at what rate we think the markets would be picking up the price of risk-free yield curves.  I think that would help.  To the extent that we can align this with other foreign central bank experiences, we might be able to draw on how they view that and what the financial market data look like.  So I am comfortable with focusing primarily on options 2 and 5.  I was thinking along the lines of President Hoenig, which is that the Federal Reserve tends to go slowly.  Vince isn’t here, but he often reminded us of that.  Option 1 is the easiest one.  If we have enough information about it, then that’s fine.  I think that’s all I have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and preferences on the topic being discussed.


Passage number 272.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the statement "President Stern." It is a neutral statement that simply identifies a person.


Passage number 273.
 MR. STERN.  I have only two comments.  I would drop option 1.  I just think it doesn’t do enough to reduce the burdens and dead weight losses.  As long as it’s there, there will be a tendency to fall back to it for all sorts of reasons, given bureaucratic tendencies.  So I would just discard it.  I would not discard option 4, so I would include options 2, 4, and 5.  I was originally attracted to 4.  I read the reservations in the report and thought, okay, it’s not worth pursuing.  But I listened to President Lacker, and he reconvinced me that there are some significant merits there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is sharing their own thoughts and preferences regarding the options discussed.


Passage number 274.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage only mentions "President Yellen" without providing any additional information or context that would indicate contention or disagreement. It simply names a person without any indication of conflicting opinions or differing viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 275.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you.  First, I do really appreciate all the excellent work the staff has done on this topic.  I really learned a lot from these papers.  I thought they were very clear and very comprehensive.  I have just a couple of comments on the questions that Bill and Brian raised in the memo.  The first one has to do with whether or not we agree with the objectives, and I do have a couple of issues.   First, I think that the stated objective of reducing the burdens and dead weight losses associated with the current reserve tax is too narrowly framed in the paper.  My starting point is, about burden, that to cover a given program of government spending, the Treasury has to obtain revenue from some source, and nondistortionary lump-sum taxes are not one of the available options.  So the real question from the public finance standpoint is what to tax and how much.  That means, to my mind, that the issue here is how the magnitude of the welfare gains that would come from lowering the dead weight loss due to the implicit tax on reserves compares with additional dead weight losses that would result from the alternative taxes that would have to be raised to make up for this lost revenue.  Now the answer depends in part on the interest elasticity of demand for reserves, I believe.  I think it is the case that, if the interest elasticity is relatively small, the dead weight loss from the reserve tax is relatively small, and the net welfare gain, taking into account the burdens of raising other taxes to make up for the lost seigniorage, in effect, could easily turn out to be negative. Let me give you an example of where this comes into play.  There is a well-known paper by Martin Feldstein in which he looks at the benefits of moving to price stability, zero inflation, which he favors.  He looks at this issue in that context, and he concludes that there would be net social losses, not gains, from the reduction in seigniorage that would be associated with a move to zero inflation from positive inflation because the dead weight loss due to the shoe-leather cost, also known as the Bailey effect, is smaller than the dead weight losses that would be associated with alternative taxes.  In his analysis they are taxes on labor supply and saving.  I actually think that this is a serious problem with the framing of the objectives in this paper.  It is, in effect, saying, “We think we should give a tax cut.  We think we should give it to banks, and we think that, because there is a welfare loss—a Harberger triangle—associated with that, this is clear welfare gain.”  Now, I am not pretending to know exactly how this would come out, but I do think that’s the issue.  If it were to come out that this is a net loss, not a gain, a possible implication is that if there were a fallback to option 1—I’m not saying that I favor option 1—there could be a case for paying no interest on required reserves rather than paying interest at the federal funds rate but paying interest on excess reserves at some rate that we would determine. There are administrative costs with having voluntary target balances, and it seems to me that the paper, as we come out with it, ought to try to at least estimate what the administrative burdens associated with options 2 and 5 would be. Another comment on the issue of objectives:  If we are coming out with a white paper, it seems to me that the objective that everybody is now discussing and that was just discussed—namely, that paying interest on reserves would enable us to expand the size of our balance sheet in times of financial crisis, like now, and perhaps greatly enhance the scope for liquidity-altering interventions that would be possible without having to push the federal funds rate to zero—is a real improvement in the tool kit that is available to us to address market disruptions.  I would see it as an advantage of paying interest on reserves.  If you are discussing this right now with the Congress and it is much discussed in the press, I think it is kind of odd to come out with a paper that doesn’t even mention it.  Maybe there are disadvantages and not just advantages.  But it seems to me it should be there. Also, I would just say on the question of options 2 and 5 versus options 3 and 4, an advantage that the paper attaches to having voluntary targets is the ability to moderate the volatility in the federal funds rate.  So it does seem to me that—I understand it may be difficult—the possibility of intervening multiple times during the day as an alternative, if it were possible to change the procedures so that there could be multiple interventions to reduce volatility, would mean that 3 and 4 could be on the table, and there might be less burden associated with those.  So I think that possibility deserves at least careful consideration.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In this passage, there is contention or disagreement. Ms. Yellen expresses her disagreement with the stated objective of reducing the burdens and dead weight losses associated with the current reserve tax. She argues that the issue is not simply about reducing burden, but about considering the magnitude of welfare gains compared to the additional dead weight losses from alternative taxes. She also disagrees with the framing of the objectives, suggesting that it is assuming a tax cut for banks is a clear welfare gain without considering potential net losses. She also argues for the inclusion of the objective of paying interest on reserves to enhance the tool kit available to address market disruptions. Additionally, she suggests that options 3 and 4 should be considered, with the possibility of multiple interventions during the day to reduce volatility in the federal funds rate.


Passage number 276.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply expressing gratitude towards President Bullard.


Passage number 277.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This is a proposal for study.  The timeline seems fine to me.  The study period is pretty important in this case because it is not clear to me which option is best, and so I think maybe we should keep more of the options on the table.  One question that I have is, To what extent are current reserve requirements actually binding for depository institutions.  There is a past study by the St. Louis staff—Dick Anderson and Bob Rasche—suggesting that, by and large, existing reserve requirements are not binding.  To me that calls into question whether objective 1 for this study group is really appropriate.  Dead weight losses make sense to me only if there is a binding reserve requirement.  In that regard, I’d like to endorse President Yellen’s comment, which I thought was right on target, about whether you are going to make up for lost revenue from somewhere else and how distortionary that would be.  There is a bit of political risk here that, if this starts to get painted as a handout to banks, maybe it wouldn’t serve us well. I would like to see more emphasis on option 3, which based on the discussion seems to be not too bad a system.  That is the Canadian system.  That is a tested system in an economy that is not too different from our own—certainly, an economy that is closely integrated with this one.  The corridor would be narrow.  There might be more volatility within that corridor, but you still seem to get pretty good results.  I know they have a small number of banks, but it seems to me with today’s technology you might be able to get a good read even for a large economy.  I would like to see it kept in the mix here.  They have had lots of success and very low administrative burden, if that is what you are worried about.  I am perhaps not so familiar with options 2 and 5, which are the favored options in this discussion.  But I am concerned about the language of voluntary balance targets, which seem to be maybe not that voluntary.  It seems to me to create a risk that the systems are really not as market-oriented as I would like to see or that they could be manipulated by market participants, particularly in a time of stress.  Those are some of the concerns I had about this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not show clear contention or disagreement. The speaker raises questions and expresses concerns, but does not directly challenge or oppose any specific ideas or proposals.


Passage number 278.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  On the public finance question, of course, the Congress has acted and they score it to cost.  So in some sense that is moot from our perspective.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating that on the public finance question, Congress has already taken action and determined its cost. The speaker then goes on to say that this is irrelevant or inconsequential from their perspective. There is no disagreement or conflicting viewpoints expressed.


Passage number 279.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me also start by commending the authors of the papers that were prepared on this topic.  I found the material very informative and helpful.  I agree with the objectives established by the staff to evaluate the set of proposals, and I also support the process and the proposed timeline for moving the proposals forward.  I think it is good that the timeline provides for comments from banks so early in the process.  It will be important for us to receive their input at an early stage. I found option 2 to be preferable to option 1 because option 2, as we have discussed, clearly reduces the administrative burdens relative to option 1.  I think that option 3 leaves too much potential for fed funds rate volatility in its corridor.  I was also intrigued by option 4 with caps.  However, I ultimately rejected option 4 out of the concern that it might lead to a less robust interbank lending market.  But given the comments of President Lacker and others, perhaps it makes sense to keep option 4 on the table.  In the end, however, I am comfortable with moving forward with our focus on options 2 and 5.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Ms. Pianalto, expresses agreement and support for the materials, objectives, process, and timeline presented. She also shares her preference for option 2 and her concerns about options 3 and 4, but concludes that she is comfortable with moving forward with options 2 and 5.


Passage number 280.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It only includes a thank you statement and the mention of President Lockhart.


Passage number 281.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Just to answer the questions that were posed, I am comfortable with options 2 and 5, but I thought President Lacker’s presentation made the case that option 4 deserves to remain in the mix.  I think the objectives are appropriate.  The only comment I have—and this is a bit vague, I realize—is to ensure that we are thinking far enough ahead to ensure that we have a durable system that can operate in different mixes of private and public in the payment system.  Certainly, I think it is conceivable that in some years we will be out of the business of retail payments, so I think we have to address different mixes of private and public payment systems. Regarding the timeline, Governor Kohn already asked the question about approaching the Congress to accelerate.  Assuming that we do not approach the Congress to accelerate this, then this timeline seems to me quite comfortable and gives plenty of time for very careful consideration. In the room here is Will Roberds from our research staff, who by chance was at the Bank of England talking about their experiences recently.  I thought I would share a couple of things that are apropos.  They tried maintenance periods other than the intermeeting period, and they found them to be not so effective, apparently because of ambiguity around the target rate.  That is a useful way of thinking—that the maintenance periods would be designed around the intermeeting period.  They apparently tried option 3, and it didn’t work because of too much volatility within the corridor.  Those two tidbits are feedback from the visit of a member of my staff to the Bank of England.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lockhart is providing his input and sharing information from a visit to the Bank of England, but there is no clear disagreement or conflict with any other individual or position mentioned.


Passage number 282.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a polite expression of gratitude from someone named President Hoenig.


Passage number 283.
 MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would look at this meeting as an introduction to this topic, given the breadth of the discussion here, which I found extremely interesting and useful.  I think we will need to come back to another discussion of it—not necessarily with another 100-page study.  I wouldn’t want to put that burden on you—it might negate any savings we get from this project.  [Laughter] To the point of the options, the one that was most attractive to me was option 2.  It is a good transition.  We have some familiarity with it, given the way we do clearing balances now, and I think we can work on it.  The reason that I was a little questioning about option 1 is that in option 2 you are not quite sure what you are going to end up with, given how the banks may choose to target the amount of reserves and so forth.  But with any choice we make, we are going to have to go up that learning curve.  So of those, I prefer option 2.  I am fascinated, though, with President Lacker’s comments on option 4 and will look at it again with that in mind because I thought he made some good points.  But at the moment, I think option 2 is a pretty good path to go down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 


Passage number 284.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Thank you" is a polite expression of gratitude and does not involve any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 285.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This will be very brief.  Option 2 looks very attractive to me.  I think option 1 may be a fallback position, but like President Stern, given our tendency to move slow too quickly, if that makes sense, I would rather take the opportunity to make a larger step.  So I think option 2 is fine.  Option 5 is interesting, but its distinction is that nobody else is really doing that.  So it would be a little more of a wild card in terms of how we might implement it and how it might work.  But I think it has some merit. I had asked Bill Dudley back in the fall, when we were having trouble meeting the end-of-day targets, about why we didn’t set the price.  The answer I got was, “Well, this was a good time to think about that option in the context of paying interest on reserves.”  I was probably a little disappointed that we didn’t see more of what such a strategy might look like and how it would behave.  Thanks to President Lacker, his interpretation of option 4 is pushing us more in that direction.  I hadn’t really thought of option 4 in that context that way, but I like it.  I still have the view that essentially looking at everything as a quantity-based view of how we go about doing this restricts the way we think about what our options might be.  So I would like to see a little more explanation of what a price target, where we buy and sell, might actually do.  How that might interact with option 4 would be an interesting way to enrich the set of options. Another question I had—and I don’t know the answer to this—is that we have instituted a number of new facilities.  There is the TAF, there is the TSLF, and so forth.  I wasn’t quite clear how those facilities would interact or be appropriate or inappropriate within the context of these things, or whether this would substitute for all of those in some sense.  If we wanted to pull those off the shelf again at some future time, how would they interact with these systems.  I think it would be useful to have a little discussion about what those interactions might be. The last observation is related to President Lockhart’s comment.  How we go about paying interest on reserves has implications for other parts of what the Federal Reserve System does—in particular the retail payment system and the way we calculate cost recoveries and our revenues under the Monetary Control Act.  There are some separate study groups that are thinking about this, but we ought to make sure that we tie these pieces together as we go forward so that we know what the domino effects of going this direction might be.  Maybe there will not be a concern, if we get out of retail payments, how it affects the Monetary Control Act requirements on fees for services and things like that.  I would like to see that loop closed somehow before the end of the discussion.  Otherwise, I want to congratulate the staff on a very thorough report.  I was at the conference as well in February.  I thought it was very interesting, and I applaud the staff on some good work.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses his preference for option 2 and his disappointment in not seeing more exploration of setting the price. He also raises questions about how certain facilities would interact with the proposed options and the implications of paying interest on reserves on other parts of the Federal Reserve System.


Passage number 286.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "Thank you" and the mention of President Fisher are simply expressions of gratitude and acknowledgement.


Passage number 287.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, we have been in favor of paying interest on reserves for some time.  This is an excellent paper.  Like everybody else, I learned a great deal from all the papers that were sent and this superb summary that was just presented.  I personally tend toward option 2, but I think it is worthwhile considering options 4 and 5 as well in terms of vetting this under the timetable.  I think that Charlie asked a good question about how this relates to the other facilities, but generally, the optics on this are favorable.  Again, we are moving forward.  The public doesn’t really understand the background of this—where the Congress has stood and what we have achieved so far.  I think it would be just one other good thing for us to be modernizing the Federal Reserve. I asked the question on governance just because I understand that the current plan calls for rates to adjust automatically to changes in target set by the FOMC.  I would want to make sure that was the case.  In other words, I don’t like the potential for vesting all the power in the Board; and, of course, that potential is there.  I think it is worth preserving the federal system of the Federal Reserve.  That is the only reservation I have.  Those are my comments.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their support for paying interest on reserves and their appreciation for the paper and presentation. They also mention considering other options and raise a question about governance, but there is no explicit disagreement or contention.


Passage number 288.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We don’t want it.  [Laughter]  Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no obvious indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The presence of laughter after "We don't want it" suggests that it may be a light-hearted or humorous statement, but it does not necessarily imply disagreement.


Passage number 289.
 MR. KOHN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I thought this was a great piece of work by the staff, and I thank them all.  You did a good job of organizing it and laying out the general principles in a way that people can understand.  Despite President Yellen’s comments, I have no regrets about my testimony in favor of paying interest, perhaps because I bore so much of the administrative costs over the years [laughter]—along with Stephanie Martin and her predecessors in the Legal Division.  Those costs that were borne were considerable, in addition to the dead weight losses.  I think we should consider options 2 and 5 for sure.  On option 4, I think we need to understand a bit—other people have said this—what the third objective, “promoting efficient and resilient money markets,” means exactly, what is entailed, and how that would intersect with option 4.  So I think that needs to be fleshed out a little more.  Because you have planned to get a white paper out soon, I think perhaps including option 4 would be easier than not including it, just to get people’s comments.  Perhaps because of my administrative burden experience, I would like to see reserve requirements at zero, ruling out option 1.  On option 3, I just don’t think, at least with our system and in periods of crisis, that the top of the band would hold, so I don’t think that option would really work very well.  Thank you all for your work.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing his appreciation for the work done by the staff and providing his opinion on different options.


Passage number 290.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 291.
 MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me add my plaudits to those already expressed on the quality of this work, and then let me confine my comments to the timing and sequencing.  First, with respect to the rollout of the white paper, it strikes me that, given that questions have been raised about what our flexibility is around our balance sheet and tools in the event of continued problems in the financial markets, we just need to be cognizant in that paper of how this discussion might be read, not in the context of a long Fed effort to get interest on reserves but perhaps as being solely responsive to what are perceived to be burdens on our balance sheet flexibility.  I am just sensitive to how that white paper will be read and rolled out.  More broadly, on timing—come fall, in the event that we decide collectively to go to the Congress seeking other authority with respect to the PDCF, investment banks, and other things that might or might not be concluded, even though this timeline makes a lot of sense, we might be in good stead to have a fairly good sense of the conclusions to which we will ultimately come, even if our exhaustive Fed rigor isn’t complete by that time.  If there is real benefit to accelerating our new authority from late 2011 to some earlier period, we could put that in the context of some of broader asks from us with an expectation that we might get some traction there.  So as a sort of secondary timeline, having that option value come fall strikes me as useful.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and support for the quality of the work being discussed.


Passage number 292.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Kroszner.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of a simple expression of gratitude followed by the mention of Governor Kroszner's name.


Passage number 293.
 MR. KROSZNER.  Thanks.  Great work, great presentation.  It is impressive to get through fifty-two pages in less than fifty-two minutes, and so I applaud you on that.  Basically I agree with a lot of the stuff that has been said before.  The trick may be thinking a bit creatively about stigma issues, if there is any way to deal with those.  I am not quite sure what you are suggesting putting out in a white paper for comment—options 2, 5, and possibly 4.  Or were you thinking of putting all five out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses agreement with the previous statements and offers some suggestions.


Passage number 294.
 MR. MADIGAN.  Well, I certainly think at this point the three that you mentioned first.  At this stage, if we are going to go to with three, we might want to think about putting all five out, just to flesh out all parts of the spectrum and acknowledge that option 1 could be a fallback.  We have to think about the pros and cons of that, but certainly the three at this point is where the consensus seems to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their thoughts and suggesting a possible course of action.


Passage number 295.
 MR. KROSZNER.  Doing three of them seems perfectly reasonable.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Kroszner simply expresses agreement with the idea of doing three things, indicating that it is reasonable.


Passage number 296.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Mishkin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "Governor Mishkin" does not provide any information or context to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 297.
 MR. MISHKIN.  I am very comfortable with the analysis and the approach, so I don’t have any major comments there.  Although in the white paper you might mention them, I would like to take options 1 and 3 off the table.  Option 1 has just too much administrative burden.  We have enough tsuris already.  Although option 3 may work well in countries with very different structures of the banking system, I don’t think it is a feasible alternative for us.  So I think that we should look at options 2 and 5, and I am certainly comfortable with another look at option 4. One issue that I worry about a bit is that these markets do sort out some interbank credit risk issues.  We don’t want to lose that, so we have to be very aware of it.  I also worry a bit about setting a price when there is a credit risk element to it.  When there is no credit risk element—if you want to set the Treasury bill rate—it is no big deal.  But there may be an issue there, I am not sure, and it should be one of the considerations in this context.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses comfort with the analysis and approach but states a personal preference for options 2, 4, and 5 over options 1 and 3. They also highlight potential concerns with the impact on interbank credit risk and setting a price with credit risk elements.


Passage number 298.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.  Oh, sorry.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The Vice Chairman interrupts to apologize for interrupting the President's comment, indicating a polite and amicable interaction.


Passage number 299.
 MR. LACKER.  Presumably, the rate we pay would be viewed as a risk-free rate.  Presumably, any market rate would be priced relative to that to include a credit premium in the usual way.  If any other dynamics are anticipated by the staff, it would be useful to know that.  But the usual presumption we have is that observed market rates would have our rate plus a credit premium booked into it, or transaction costs, or whatever.  I’d just make that comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply making a comment about how market rates are typically determined.


Passage number 300.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions the position of Vice Chairman without providing any details or context, so it is impossible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 301.
 VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I don’t have a conviction yet on the options, but I agree that we should narrow our focus to options 2 and 4-5.  I think we should design a process that tries to force us to get conviction more quickly on which option we would prefer.  I think it is possible.  You have made a huge investment already.  You know the alternatives.  I think it is worth, again, a goal that gets us conviction more quickly, in part because we do have a brief window now in which we might be able to get the Congress to accelerate and we could implement more quickly.  I would get the Congress to accelerate if I could be totally confident that it would be free, that we would pay no price, and that there would be no risk that anything else would be on the table or that it would compromise any other objective.  It is very hard to have confidence on that.  But if you get confidence on that, then I would go do it.  But I would certainly run a process by which we get conviction early. I would want us to have conviction before we go out for public comment.  The general rule is to figure out what you want to do and design a process that maximizes the chance that you get there quickly.  It also strikes me that a process this drawn out will take much more staff time.  You guys are busy.  We don’t have a lot of time.  We don’t have a lot of excess capital in the Federal Reserve System now relative to the challenges we face.  The longer it is drawn out, maybe the smaller the tax day by day, week by week, but it is just a huge tax.  I would not want to go out for public comment on a white paper in this time frame until I knew two things.  One is, Are we going to get the Congress to accelerate.  If so, on what.  What is the probability.  Are we going to ask for it.  The other is I wouldn’t do it until I knew that we were closer to saying, “If we got it, we would do this in this time frame.” Finally, I think it is hard to have this discussion in public with the Congress now without an answer to what they will perceive to be the larger questions.  What are the larger questions.  I think that you can reduce some of the larger questions simply to, What are we going to do with our role as lender of last resort going forward.  This is a version of President Plosser’s and Governor Warsh’s questions—what the future of our facilities is, in some sense.  The staff has assured me that these options all preserve optionality on any future facility framework.  They don’t prejudice those options, which is very important.  But I think there is a demand now and interest in what our answer is to those broader questions.  It is hard to see the architecture of our role as lender of last resort without having the answer to what the framework will be for restraints on risk-taking by institutions that have access in normal times and in extremis to those lender of last resort facilities.   We can’t get conviction on that in the same time frame that we need to accelerate legislation on this stuff, but—and probably because—I think those things are fundamentally more important than whether we end up with 2 or 4.5 or 5 on the way to 4.5.  I would try to shorten the amount of time and effort we put into this, and I would increase the amount of time and effort we put into that broader set of policy questions, which are going to be essentially about the intersection among the lender of last resort role, our monetary policy regime, the moral hazard consequences of all the stuff we have done, and how we deal with those in the future.  I think that is going to take a lot of time, effort, and care. I don’t know how to reconcile all of what I just said in the context of a practical path forward, except just to repeat it.  Why not try to run a process in which you get conviction more quickly on this relatively small set of adjustments as to how we operate.  Try to get a judgment quickly about whether we can get the Congress to accelerate without any meaningful political cost, then design a process whereby we put ourselves in the position to implement early next year, if the Congress were to accelerate.  And try to have the resources saved by attenuating that process devoted to these deeper questions about our future facilities and the associated constraints we are going to have to put on a broader set of institutions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

This passage does not contain any direct contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and opinions, but there is no indication of disagreement or argument with others.


