Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on July 30–31, 2013 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, July 30, 2013, at 2:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, July 31, 2013, at 9:00 a.m.  Those present were the following: Ben Bernanke, Chairman William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman James Bullard Elizabeth Duke Charles L. Evans Esther L. George Jerome H. Powell Sarah Bloom Raskin Eric Rosengren Jeremy C. Stein Daniel K. Tarullo Janet L. Yellen Christine Cumming, Richard W. Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, Sandra Pianalto, and Charles I. Plosser, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, and John C. Williams, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively William B. English, Secretary and Economist Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel Steven B. Kamin, Economist David W. Wilcox, Economist Thomas A. Connors, Troy Davig, Michael P. Leahy, Stephen A. Meyer, Daniel G. Sullivan, and William Wascher, Associate Economists Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of GovernorsJames A. Clouse and William Nelson, Deputy Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Maryann F. Hunter, Deputy Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors  Jon W. Faust, Special Adviser to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors  Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors  Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors  Michael T. Kiley, Thomas Laubach, and David E. Lebow, Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors  Joshua Gallin, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors  Edward Nelson, Assistant Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Stacey Tevlin, Assistant Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors  Laura Lipscomb, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors  David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors  Marie Gooding, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta  David Altig, Jeff Fuhrer, and Loretta J. Mester, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Boston, and Philadelphia, respectively  Lorie K. Logan, Senior Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York  Todd E. Clark, William Gavin, Evan F. Koenig, Paolo A. Pesenti, Julie Ann Remache,1 and Mark Spiegel, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, St. Louis, Dallas, New York, New York, and San Francisco, respectively  Robert L. Hetzel and Samuel Schulhofer-Wohl, Senior Economists, Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond and Minneapolis, respectively_______________________ 1 Attended Tuesday’s session only.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply providing a list of individuals present at a meeting.


Passage number 2.
Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on July 30–31, 2013  July 30 Session  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good afternoon, everybody.  We will have a more extensive tribute to Governor Duke tomorrow at the luncheon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that there will be a tribute to Governor Duke the next day.


Passage number 3.
 MS. DUKE.  More extensive than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine. The passage does not provide enough context or information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 4.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  More extensive.  [Laughter]  But I thought I should acknowledge that today is, barring any unforeseen emergencies, the last FOMC meeting for Betsy.  In her five years on the Board, Betsy has attended 41 regular FOMC meetings.  Her first, with truly excellent timing, was on August 5, 2008.  In a policy discussion at one of these meetings a couple of years ago, Governor Duke said that her personal objective was to experience “normal” here at the Federal Reserve.  Well, as that well-known student of the London School of Economics Mick Jagger once said, “You can’t always get what you want.”  [Laughter]  So it looks like, Betsy, after five years at the Fed, you’re going to have to search for normal elsewhere.  Betsy, I and all of your colleagues here are certainly going to miss you, your good sense, your energy, your unparalleled institutional knowledge, and your insight.  It may have not been normal around here in the past five years, but you have to admit it was interesting.  So we wish you the very best and thank you for your service.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude and well-wishes for Betsy as she leaves her position.


Passage number 5.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Duke, is expressing gratitude or appreciation.


Passage number 6.
  [Applause] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  And, again, we will have additional opportunities to fete Governor Duke tomorrow at the luncheon.  But let’s turn now to item 1, “Financial Developments and Open Market Operations,” and I’ll call on Simon Potter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 7.
 MS. REMACHE.  Thank you, Simon.  The Committee received a memo ahead of this meeting, prepared jointly by Board and New York staff, outlining details for a potential overnight reverse repurchase agreement (RRP) facility.  The memo described how such a facility might work, drawing parallels to interest on excess reserves (IOER).   In concept, paying interest on excess balances held at the central bank could create a hard floor for relevant market rates.  In practice, the firmness of that floor depends on a number of factors, including whether the central bank rate is offered to a sufficiently wide set of market participants.  In the case of IOER, a number of key money market lenders are unable to access the IOER rate, and we observe that market rates are below, often well below, the IOER rate.  That spread can be attributed both to costs related to arbitrage, such as the FDIC assessment on all bank liabilities, and imperfect competition arising from credit or other counterparty constraints, which limit the extent to which institutions are willing and able to compete away rate differentials.   An overnight RRP facility would expand the range of market participants with access to an overnight risk-free instrument from the Federal Reserve, beyond depository institutions with direct access to IOER.  As with IOER, under the fixed-rate, full-allotment framework, counterparties with direct access to the facility should generally be unwilling to lend to private institutions at a rate below the facility rate.  They may also be willing to engage in arbitrage to pull other market rates toward this rate.  The facility could have a stabilizing effect on money market rates because the facility rate is pre-announced and because counterparties can adjust their participation daily.  This may reduce volatility and tighten the linkage of rates across money markets.  It could also strengthen the bargaining position of market participants with access to the facility in their own negotiations for overnight lending.   While these possible dynamics suggests an overnight RRP facility could be a useful tool in managing overnight interest rates, the memo highlights four important open issues.  First, the appropriate level for the facility rate relative to the IOER rate, the fed funds target, and other market rates is a key determinant of the effect of the facility on money market rates and intermediation flows.  Further staff work is neededto evaluate options in terms of their effectiveness in meeting the Committee’s policy objectives.   Second, the average degree of take-up from the facility and its variation is difficult to anticipate ex ante.  The staff can foresee reasonable scenarios in which the facility has a meaningful impact on market rates but usage would be small—for example, if the facility establishes a strong reservation rate from a key set of money market lenders—and others scenarios where usage would be large—for example, if money market mutual funds are able to pass along more of an increase in their returns to shareholders than banks do to depositors, in which case one might see a notable shift of depositors from banks toward money market mutual funds.   Third, if the facility, or any reserve draining facility for that matter, leads to further declines in brokered fed funds volumes, it could increase the risk that the fed funds effective rate would be dominated by idiosyncratic trading activity and so would become an ineffective proxy for the broader level of overnight market rates.  Such an outcome could raise the need for the Committee to consider an alternative policy target.   Finally, a key issue is whether the current set of RRP counterparties is sufficiently wide to have the desired effect on market rates.  Counterparties have been expanded significantly over the past several years and now include 18 DIs, 4 of the 12 FHLBs, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, and 94 of the largest money market funds, in addition to the 21 primary dealers.  Nevertheless, further expansion could be helpful.   In order to exercise operational readiness, the staff has included aspects of a facility like that considered in the memo in the small-scale, real-value RRP exercise planned for August.  For example, the staff plans to exercise the ability of various systems to accommodate a fixed-rate, full-allotment style operation with same day settlement.  These procedural adjustments are unlikely to garner much attention by market participants or counterparties, as the adjustments either affect aspects of the operation, which are not visible to the public, or are within the scope of normal activities of this kind.  This exercise falls with the current authority to conduct small-scale, real-value exercises and, in addition to confirming the ability to implement an overnight RRP facility like that considered in the memo, would be valuable as part of general RRP readiness because it provides more options within our current RRP planning efforts. Looking ahead, if Committee interest in an overnight RRP facility is high, the staff could pursue a number of additional initiatives to prepare and gain further insight into such a facility.  First, the staff could begin work to identify additional types of counterparties for further expansion.  Second, the Committee may wish to consider other variations of planned RRP exercises, possibly also including ones that may result in larger usage of the facility.  And, third, the Committee may wish to develop a broader communication plan about the facility.  If the Committee would find it helpful, the staff could prepare a memo that would discuss options foradditional exercise and communication strategies for the Committee’s consideration at a future meeting.   At this time, Simon and I would be happy to take any comments or questions regarding the overnight RRP facility or recent market developments.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The memo acknowledges that the effectiveness of the overnight RRP facility in managing overnight interest rates is dependent on a number of factors, including the appropriate level for the facility rate relative to other market rates. It also raises concerns about the potential impact on brokered fed funds volumes and the need for alternative policy targets. These issues suggest that there is contention or disagreement about the implementation and effectiveness of the facility.


Passage number 8.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much, and many thanks to the staff who worked on this project and prepared the memo.  It was very intriguing.  Questions for our colleagues.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It merely expresses gratitude and presents a question to colleagues.


Passage number 9.
 MS. DUKE.  Just some comments on this reverse repurchase agreement facility.  I think this is an extremely important facility and that it could be a very powerful tool because it would let us conduct monetary policy directly through the shadow banking system, in addition to going indirectly through the banks.  One of the hardest things when you start learning banking is to begin to think of deposits as actually borrowed money because that’s what they are.  And, we tend to think of reserves as something different than borrowed money, but that’s all they are.  So unless somebody thinks the fractional reserve system is really working as it was supposed to historically, it would make more sense to begin to think of these reserves as ways to fund our balance sheet and then choose between reserves, term deposits, reverse repurchase agreements, or any other instruments that we can come up with to select the one that seems best suited to meet our policy objectives rather than the typical profit motive that banks use.  And I think we could influence rates both in our role as lender—with the asset purchases or the discount window—and equally through our role as borrowers, using these other facilities.  So I would very much urge the development of the tools and the testing of them, both operationally and for their effect on rates.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their support for the reverse repurchase agreement facility and suggesting that it can be a powerful tool for conducting monetary policy. They also discuss the need to think differently about deposits and reserves, and suggest using various instruments to meet policy objectives rather than profit motives. The speaker concludes by urging the testing and development of these tools. Overall, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 10.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Thank you" does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is simply a polite expression of gratitude.


Passage number 11.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor moving forward with such a facility.  I think it has several potentially attractive features that Julie touched on.  First, Ithink there is a good chance it will enable us to tighten control of the money market rates.  Second, it’s likely to result in cost savings as the interest rate on the facility is presumably going to be lower than the IOER rate.  And, third, because the interest payments will be spread broadly throughout the financial industry, this facility will undercut the argument that through the IOER we are subsidizing the banks. The tricky part is how to move from the small-scale test to the more large-scale, full-allotment test without this being taken as a signal that liftoff is close at hand.  I think one possibility is to introduce this relatively soon as a technical tool designed to reduce our interest payments and broaden participation rather than part of some sort of liftoff mechanism.  I would favor the small-scale test in August, and I’d like to follow that with large-scale testing as soon as possible to learn more about what the demand is for such a facility at a given rate and how the rate on the reverse repurchase facility can affect other money market rates, which we really don’t know.  We really don’t know what the demand is, and we really don’t know what the unintended consequences are if we suck a whole bunch of money through this facility.  How it is going to affect other investor behavior. The facility increases our control of short-term rates and reduces our costs.  It’s also going to reduce the cost associated with having a large balance sheet.  I think this, potentially, would have implications for our appetite for future balance sheet increases should the economic outlook disappoint, and it could affect the urgency we may feel about the need to normalize our balance sheet later.  The better the tool we have available, the lower the cost of a large balance sheet.  And I think it is important to explore and develop this potential tool as quickly as possible.  Finally, the rate on such a facility would be under the governance of the FOMC because this is an open market operation, and I know that would avoid some of the ongoinggovernance issues that we have with the IOER.  It might be very possible if this worked well to actually migrate, and this rate could potentially be the rate that the Committee sets over time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 12.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a polite expression of gratitude and addressing someone with a title.


Passage number 13.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ll try to be brief because I’m going to echo a lot of things Bill said.  This is a very promising potential tool for us, and it should be explored further.  The way we’ve been thinking about doing monetary policy during the exit process is to adjust the interest rate on excess reserves and thereby influence overall credit conditions.  I think there are reasons to be concerned about slippage between that policy tool and overall credit conditions.  We see that even with the fed funds rate.  And the other concern that I have is the governance issue that the interest on excess reserves is set by the Board of Governors and not by the Federal Open Market Committee.  I think that using the overnight reverse repurchase program as our main tool has the potential to forge a tighter connection between that rate, our policy choice, and overall credit conditions, especially if we start to expand the range of counterparties as Julie was describing.  As the Vice Chairman just mentioned, it also has the advantage of being set by the Federal Open Market Committee. I certainly favor going ahead with further study on this.  I’m a little concerned about doing a large-scale experiment soon because of the signaling aspect of it.  I encourage careful work on the communications side to make sure that we don’t fall into that.  Communication though, as we all know, is a challenging exercise.  I certainly do favor going forward and gaining confidence in this, but we have to be careful about not sending too much of a signal.  It is very nice work, a very nice memo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses agreement with the previous speaker's points and suggests further exploration and study of the potential tool.


Passage number 14.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply includes a polite expression of gratitude from President Lacker.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 15.
MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I was left feeling somewhat puzzled by this memo, certainly not for the lack of energy and thought given to it by the excellent New York staff, but I think the body of the memo leaves one struck with the uncertainty about a number of things.  First of all, I think the authors enumerate conceptually some of the determinants of the spread between the IOER and overnight RRP rates but with no quantitative sense of their importance.  I think there is ample evidence of uncertainty about the quantitative effects, particularly the possibility of fairly dramatic shifts between money market funds and bank deposits—shifts that can be quite large for very small errors in our setting of the spread between IOER and the overnight RRP rate.  And then the question is where to set RRP rates.  Now, the puzzling aspect of the memo is that you get to the conclusion, and what it offered as next steps are all operational.  I was eager to hear a proposal to do more research, to actually do some field work to figure out what determines the overnight RRP spread to the IOER.  I would have thought the staff would want to seek a deeper understanding of what’s going on in that market and what determines that spread before undertaking operational experiments.   The broader question here is that it’s not clear to me from this memo what this tries to solve and what you want to control; you want to control something for a purpose.  There’s a reason for that.  We lived for decades with a volatile and variable spread between the target fed funds rates and the overnight RP rate, and it didn’t seem to bother any of us.  Obviously, if that spread widens, we raise the fed funds target rate by more to compensate for it.  And if we think all of the interest rates in the world are keyed off the overnight RRP rate and there’s a spread between that and the thing we control, we can just offset whatever that spread is with the instrument we control.  More broadly, the traditional approach in central banking is to pick a rate and peg it and let the market figure out the appropriate spreads to various other instruments inmarkets where some vagaries of the participants, capital treatment, and the like make the rate slightly different than the rate we’re pegging.  So you’re asking us to go down the road of pegging two rates.  Why stop at two.  And is there some inefficiency about this spread that we’re trying to fix.  I just wasn’t left with a clear picture of the welfare economics of what this is about and what we’re trying to achieve.  I could strongly support further research in this area, but I would discourage going ahead with operational preparations, given what we know about our intervention at this point.  I do see the advantages of an overnight RRP rate as a target to supplant using the IOER as our main instrument for reasons that President Kocherlakota and Vice Chairman Dudley enunciated, but I don’t think we’re ready to move ahead with operations at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. 

Explanation: Mr. Lacker expresses his puzzlement about the memo and disagrees with the proposed next steps. He suggests that further research is needed before undertaking operational experiments and questions the need for controlling the spread between the target fed funds rate and the overnight RP rate. He also expresses skepticism about the efficiency and welfare economics of the proposed approach.


Passage number 16.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Thank you. President Plosser" is a polite acknowledgment and expression of gratitude.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 17.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I share some of the comments that have already been made, so I’ll just be very brief.  I too see the appeal of having an overnight RRP rate as our target.  I think that there are some philosophical as well as other reasons why that might be attractive, and so I, like Jeff, would very much encourage some more research and more exploration. I’m a little bit concerned about moving too operationally in the following sense.  One of the things I thought the memo did was suggest that if we do this, particularly if we start doing this on a large scale, it’s not just the signaling about our policy intentions, but we may do further damage to the federal funds market in terms of undermining its effectiveness and its ability to revive that at some future date.  After all, this Committee has still iterated that its ultimate objective is to use the federal funds rate as our primary target, and if we do something that risks undermining the effectiveness and mechanism of that market, we could find ourselves backedinto a corner if we’re not careful.  So I’m a little bit worried about not doing it in a way that undermines the ability to have a choice later on about which instrument we want to use.  That’s one part where I think we need to be very careful. And the other is the governance issue, which I remain a little bit concerned about.  Right now, we have what amounts to a gentleman’s agreement, if you will, that we will discuss the funds rate target, and that would be translated into IOER.  We need to be a little clearer, though.  It’s not obvious to me that the governance that we have implies that the FOMC would set this rate.  I would think that if that’s not the case that we ought to assure ourselves that that’s the way it would operate before we lock ourselves into a different strategy.  Those would be my two concerns that I think we need to be careful about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses concern about moving too operationally with the overnight RRP rate as a target, as it may undermine the effectiveness of the federal funds market. They also express concern about the governance issue and the need for clarity on the role of the FOMC in setting the rate.


Passage number 18.
 MR. POTTER.  One point—the memo really wasn’t focused on changing the operating target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply presents a fact about the focus of the memo.


Passage number 19.
   MR. PLOSSER.  No, but my point was that if we further destroy the funds rate market, we may not have any choice but to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Plosser is expressing a hypothetical situation and its potential consequences.


Passage number 20.
 MR. POTTER.  I think it’s clear that there are a lot of things going in the fed funds market.  Such a facility could affect those dynamics.  Whenever we get close to normalizing policy, we will face those same set of problems whatever tools that we use.  In terms of research that we could do, it’s clearly an area where there has been a lot of thought.  One of the things we learned from interest on excess reserves is there are a lot of fine market details that don’t appear in the models that we have.  We have a feeling that testing now helps us learn about those details in a time when it’s easier to react than when we’re trying to normalize policy rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the potential effects of a facility on the fed funds market and the importance of conducting research to understand market details.


Passage number 21.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  On the matter of governance, I think we can just get a legal opinion on that, but it seems fairly clear that this would be an open market operation.  It is, therefore, subject to the FOMC.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their perspective and suggesting a course of action for obtaining a legal opinion. They then provide their understanding that the operation in question falls under the jurisdiction of the FOMC.


Passage number 22.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I just wanted to make sure that that’s clearly understood.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage is a statement from Mr. Plosser where he wants to confirm understanding. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 23.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, of course we would verify that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating that the verification process will be conducted.


Passage number 24.
 MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Mr. Chairman" is simply addressing the chairman.


Passage number 25.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the provided passage as it only states "President Lacker." It does not offer any information or statement that could suggest a disagreement or contention.


Passage number 26.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.  The kind of research that I had in mind is, you’ve got treasurers out there who manage their book, and they put deposits with us and they do RPs.  What are they thinking.  Why don’t they bid up the rate.  Just identify a slew of them, and go sit with them.  Go sit with the money markets.  Go talk with those guys.  I’m sure you talk to them often, but it is field research that’s a little more concrete than let’s try a facility and see what the quantities are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This passage discusses the idea of conducting research on treasurers and their behavior with regards to bidding up interest rates.


Passage number 27.
 MR. POTTER.  Completely, and part of the small-scale testing that we would do within the existing authorization would be to have those conversations—and some nod to this within the minutes would make it easier.  And we feel that those would be very important for us to understand some of these other issues.  Ideally, we’d like to resolve as much of that as soon as possible so we can come back to you and say, “This is what we’ve learned.  This is as much as we can learn from this type of field research, and these are the choices that you face now to learn more about the facility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is simply discussing a plan and expressing a desire to resolve certain issues.


Passage number 28.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The given passage only mentions President Fisher and does not provide any information or context to suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 29.
 MR. FISHER.  Actually, Governor Stein seems to be anxious to say something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that Governor Stein seems to be anxious to say something.


Passage number 30.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 31.
MR. STEIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I was going to more or less agree with the point that I think to really understand how this works, you’re going to have to operate it at a scale and just think about it concretely.  Suppose you have a rate of 25 basis points on the IOER and 10 basis points on the facility, and you ask yourself the question of where the rate will settle.  I think the answer to that question is basically the same as asking the question:  How much reserves will be drained out of the banking sector and taken out by the others.  Because the more drained out of the banking sector, the more they’ll push the rate toward the 25.  I think we can ask market participants, but we will only really learn about that quantity in some meaningful way as we start cobbling the rates in that direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Stein expressing his agreement with the point being discussed.


Passage number 32.
 MR. POTTER.  President Lacker is right.  We can learn something from talking to treasurers and other market participants, but then we face the basic issue of introducing a new instrument into money markets and how people will react to that.  That’s one of the reasons that we noted that you could get large changes in money market patterns of behavior by introducing this facility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Potter, agrees with President Lacker and acknowledges that there is something to be learned from talking to treasurers and market participants. They also raise the potential issue of introducing a new instrument into money markets and how people's reactions to it could affect market behavior.


Passage number 33.
 MR. STEIN.  It’s the scale that’s key.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is simply stating that the scale is important without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 34.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  One other way to do research is to look at other central banks, which have similar facilities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply suggesting an additional method for conducting research, which is to examine other central banks that have similar facilities. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 35.
 MR. POTTER.  We have, and that’s referenced in the memo.  You can see they have very idiosyncratic reasons for the operating frameworks they have based on the money market structures they have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Potter is simply stating a fact about the memo and the idiosyncratic reasons for the operating frameworks.


Passage number 36.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context regarding President Fisher that could imply contention or disagreement.


Passage number 37.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to rotate back to this.  But you had slide 19, and I read through the written update of the dealer survey sent out on July 26—whichwe don’t have in front of us—and a sentence caught my eye, which is reflected a little bit in slide 19.  I’m just going to read a sentence to you:  “Since the current asset purchase program was announced in September, the dealers view market functioning conditions as having deteriorated somewhat.”  But then it goes on to say, as you referenced, that dealers noted higher volatility and a reduction of liquidity in agency MBS.  I think that’s probably true in the Treasury market as well, maybe—to a little lesser extent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 38.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. We know this because Mr. Potter is responding affirmatively ("Yes") to a statement or question, indicating a difference in opinion or dispute.


Passage number 39.
 MR. FISHER.  Which then led me to think that unconventional policy is exacerbating the shortage of collateral in the marketplace.  So be it.  That’s where we are.  And that, again, rotates us back to this discussion.  There have been some regulatory changes, and the fact is that if we’re only dealing with DIs, then we’re dealing with about 30 percent of the market or so.  I mean, there are so many other instruments, as you mentioned. But I do think we have to at least acknowledge subconsciously that, in part, this is a problem of our own making.  The question is, what do we do now.  On the “what do we do now,” I just took pages 8 and 9 from Julie’s excellent memo, and I want to basically comment on what other people have already said.  I think it’s important to run small-scale real asset value testing, as you mentioned, Simon.  It’s important for us to identify additional counterparties.  It’s quite a menu you mentioned, Julie, but again, these are big, deep, broad markets.  On the third question of large-scale, real-value testing with some prior communication, obviously it’s a useful exercise, and it’s important in the end.  But I agree with you, Simon—I think I heard you say, or I certainly interpreted it that way—that the market could incorrectly assume something from this if we do it too quickly.  And what I worry about is it might assume, even though I’m not personally against it, that interest rate hikes are imminent.  So I worry, given our communications issues right now, that might be stretching alittle bit.  The idea of communicating the RRP facility in concept without large-scale testing—as you say, useful for refining operational plans, avoiding the risk of the communications issue—is, however, wrapped up with our communications problems.  I don’t think it’s a near-term exercise.  And then, of course, we need to examine operational enhancements.  That’s an ongoing exercise.  I just wanted to answer the five points, Julie, that you raised in the memo, and then point out, again, that we created this in a way ourselves.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any apparent contention or disagreement. The speaker is primarily expressing their own thoughts and opinions on the topic being discussed.


Passage number 40.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 41.
 MS. DUKE.  Just one other thing on the timing of the use of this tool.  It seems to me that when our rate target for fed funds was going up this would be a tool that might help bring the floor up in the range that we have in the fed funds.  Am I right about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Ms. Duke with a question seeking clarification.


Passage number 42.
 MR. POTTER.  That is one of the intentions.  We think the conceptual theory is there for that.  It is clear we want to understand how people would view that facility.  But it is very hard to think of a conceptual reason why, if a wide enough number of counterparties had access to this facility and we used it to firm the floor for the fed funds market on the fed funds target, it would not work—conceptually.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and stating their belief about the effectiveness of the facility.


Passage number 43.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions President Kocherlakota without providing any context or information about him. Without any additional information or statement that could be interpreted as contention or disagreement, it is not possible to determine if there is any contention in the passage.


Passage number 44.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Yes, we are still a ways away from, of course, being in the stage of raising rates.  But it could be that we are all going to have to ask ourselves the question, is the fed funds rate really the right metric to measure how we are influencing overall credit conditions when we get there.  If we are raising this rate that has such broad reach and is not showing in the fed funds rate, maybe there is something wrong with the fed funds rate and not something wrong with this.  But we are long way away from that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 45.
MR. POTTER.  The new data collection that will start at the end of this year will allow us much better insight into that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show contention or disagreement. It simply states that the new data collection will provide better insight into something.


Passage number 46.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher, did you have another comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 47.
 MR. FISHER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 48.
  Not on this subject, but if people want to continue this discussion— MR. POTTER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement indicated in this passage. It is simply stating that the subject of discussion is not related to the statement being made.


Passage number 49.
  On the collateral shortage— MR. FISHER.  Yes, sir.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 50.
 MR. POTTER.  —there is a lot of discussion of that.  We can find very little evidence that it is affecting any of the market dynamics right now.  Going forward, with some of the regulatory changes still to take place, that is definitely a possibility.  And one of the things we have heard from market participants is, if we look at some of the tools we have as draining tools, there will be more capacity there because of the desire to take collateral from it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses the lack of evidence regarding the current impact of a certain factor and mentions the possibility of future changes. Additionally, it mentions feedback from market participants without any conflicting views being presented.


Passage number 51.
 MR. FISHER.  Well, to add one thing to that.   I read through very quickly last night’s Treasury release on expected funding requirements; they are coming down.  Again, I want to make sure that we are not getting into a position where we are taking too much out of the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply someone expressing their thoughts and concerns about the decrease in expected funding requirements.


Passage number 52.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes.  They are definitely coming down, but they are still issuing quite a lot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the situation.


Passage number 53.
 MR. FISHER.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging that they have understood or accepted what was said.


Passage number 54.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: This passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It only mentions "Governor Duke," but does not provide any context or details about what the governor is involved in or who may have a differing opinion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 55.
 MS. DUKE.  Just to jump in one more time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The use of the phrase "Just to jump in one more time" suggests that there may be a disagreement or competition for speaking time between multiple individuals in the conversation.


Passage number 56.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’m sorry—we were not finished.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 57.
   MR. FISHER.  We are not finished with repo, I don’t think, are we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 58.
 MR. TARULLO.  No.  I think Betsy is still on repo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply states that Betsy is still on repo.


Passage number 59.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’m sorry, Governor Duke, please go ahead, and then I’ll come back to you, President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is simply a polite request for Governor Duke to speak before President Fisher.


Passage number 60.
 MS. DUKE.  One last thing on the fed funds market.  As long as they can lend $2 trillion to us, the banks have no reason to lend to each other, and that’s what the fed funds market is.  So I just don’t see, as long as we are borrowing at these levels, where there is going to be a fed funds market.  When we are not borrowing at these levels, the fed funds market will pick it up, and then this tool wouldn’t work.  But it seems to me that we’ve got to come up with some substitute for that sort of mechanism.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is explaining the author's perspective on the fed funds market and discussing potential alternatives. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 61.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher, I’m sorry, I interrupted you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker admits to interrupting President Fisher and apologizes for it.


Passage number 62.
 MR. FISHER.  On a different subject, your slide 16 indicates to me—and correct me if I’m wrong—that maybe the message is getting through that there is a separation between asset purchases and when we increase the base rate.  And as you pointed out, look at the difference between them as we go through time.  There seems to be more of an understanding that these two are separate.  Is that a correct reading.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a statement followed by a question where Mr. Fisher is seeking clarification or confirmation.


Passage number 63.
 MR. POTTER.  If you literally just look at this page, then we are doing a great job.  Everyone understands everything that we are doing, and you wouldn’t be able to understand anything that happened in markets over the past nine weeks.  But, given this, we can communicate to a lot of the former fed staffers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their belief that they are doing a great job and that everyone understands their actions in the market.


Passage number 64.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It works in practice; it just doesn’t work in theory.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It seems to be making a humorous statement about a concept that works well in real-life situations but does not have a sound theoretical explanation or understanding.


Passage number 65.
 MR. FISHER. You know my views on theory, though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any evidence of disagreement or contention. It simply states that Mr. Fisher has certain views on theory, without indicating any opposing views or conflicts.


Passage number 66.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, sir.  Any other questions or comments.  [No response]  Let me again thank the staff for their hard work.  I want to associate myself with Governor Duke and others who supported going forward with this.  I think it would allow us much better controlof rates.  It would align us with practice of other major central banks.  It would increase confidence in our ability to manage our balance sheet and to exit at the appropriate time.  I think it would improve the governance situation.  It would reduce some of the concerns we have about relying entirely on banks and paying banks as opposed to paying interest to a broad range of counterparties.  There is no reason why the funds rate has to be the target.  It may well be that a possible outcome is that we even eliminate the IOER, for example, and make everybody go through the reverse repo.  But in any case, we can certainly determine the target based on what works in practice. In any case, what a number of people have identified is the question of how we test it without testing it because there certainly will be differences between large-scale unlimited operations and small-scale operations.  That will be an issue that we will address as we go forward, but I think the sense of the table was that further analysis of both the operational technicalities as well as how this might work in terms of affecting money market rates are worth pursuing, and we’d like you to go do that and come back to us with further thoughts at subsequent meetings.  Are there any other questions or comments.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their support for a particular action and suggesting further analysis and discussion.


Passage number 67.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a question.  It’s related to the last discussion between President Fisher and Simon.  There is this gap that seems to emerge between the dealer survey and the understanding among maybe a broader range of market participants.  Has the Desk given any thought to how we might be able to go out and gather information from that broader range of market participants.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply describing a question and asking for thoughts on gathering information.


Passage number 68.
 MR. POTTER.  A main part of our job is to try to do that.  That is not as formal as the dealer survey.  We have a project to see whether we can expand the number of people that we survey.  We have carefully looked at other surveys, and I think Bill in his briefing will show yousome other survey results that are out there, which draw in a different set of market participants.  From those surveys, we don’t see that large a difference on these types of questions.  Some of those surveys do not have rigorous questions, so at times it is hard to really understand what the answers are.  The CNBC survey, for example, has some questions you would probably find quite hard to answer, so it’s often hard to interpret it.  But I think trying to get a more systematic read for you of some of the color we get from market contacts might be helpful.  And that’s what we try to do in the briefing a little bit.  What we can’t tell is whether this is market dynamics, and eventually this will win out, or it is something where there is a big gap between the expectations that are really in markets and what we can interpret from these surveys.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and explaining the limitations of certain surveys, but there is no indication of disagreement or contention between individuals or groups.


Passage number 69.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude.


Passage number 70.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  If you have heterogeneity in markets, this of course will never completely solve the problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that if there is heterogeneity in markets, it will not completely solve the problem. It does not present any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 71.
 MR. POTTER.  That’s right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists of a single phrase without any explicit or implicit contention or disagreement.


Passage number 72.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But that’s a very useful observation.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that the observation is useful. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 73.
 MR. EVANS.  Well, the other source of information that we look at carefully every quarter is the financial stability report and all of the market information there.  And I assume that the answer is the same; there is nothing that we can point to in that wealth of analysis that would have tipped us off as to the different market reaction in spite of this wonderful page.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is merely stating that they look at the financial stability report and market information every quarter, but they haven't found anything that would have predicted the different market reaction.


Passage number 74.
 MR. POTTER.  One of the things will be for us to understand some of what the dealers have done, and that’s why we’re working on that right now.  I think integrating some of the confidential supervisory information, which is how we got the VaR utilization, would be helpful.  But it is something we are still working on, so it might have more in there than you know right now because we’ve only been integrating it for a few years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they are in the process of understanding what the dealers have done and are working on integrating confidential supervisory information. There is no conflicting perspective or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 75.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Seeing no other hands, I need a motion to ratify domestic open market operations since the June meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 76.
 MS. YELLEN.  So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 77.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Without objection.  Thank you.  Item 2 is the “Economic Situation.”  Let me call on David Wilcox.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "Without objection" indicates that there was no objection or disagreement to the previous statement or action. Thank you.'


Passage number 78.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Questions for our colleagues.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is a polite expression of gratitude and a request for further information or clarification from colleagues. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 79.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Two questions.  David, you said your conditioning assumptions hadn’t changed much, but the Tealbook did note the changes in the monetary policy assumptions.  There are two pretty significant ones—from $750 billion in purchases to, I guess, $1.2 trillion, and no sales of agency MBS.  Reading the Tealbook, it’s a little hard for me to parse out—apples to apples—if those assumptions on monetary policy hadn’t changed, what effect would that have.  That’s my first question.  The second question is, what are you making of the stubborn level of oil and gasoline prices.  That sort of helped us with supporting consumption in the spring, and now it’s going the other way despite still pretty weak economic activity—how is the staff parsing that in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking two questions and seeking clarification on certain assumptions and factors.


Passage number 80.
 MR. WILCOX.  On the first, if we had done an “all else equals” exercise at the end of the June meeting and said, “Okay, we’re going to shift the purchase assumption from $750 billion to $1.2 trillion,” we would have shifted down the trajectory of longer-term interest rates.  We were confronted with the reality, however, that the world has moved differently, and so we had to figure out how we were going to take that into account.  By and large, what we said was we think that the market has departed from our previous assumptions.  In part, we think that adjustment brings forward changes that would have occurred anyway, for example, in the term premium; we have always had a projection that the term premium would rise from its extraordinarily lowlevels.  And we thought that part of what was going on had accelerated that, but we had it tapering back into our prior assumption about where the term premium would end up.  In addition, what looked to be the case was that the funds rate expectations moved up, and in our assumptions we assumed that the market would eventually learn on our baseline that we were right, not them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an explanation and discussing the adjustments they had to make due to changes in the market.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 81.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I guess I was asking a slightly different question.  If the monetary policy assumptions hadn’t changed, how much bigger would have been the downward revision in the GDP forecast.  Because right now you have a lot of stuff mushed together.  You have all of the economic developments, plus you have the monetary policy assumption change.  It’s very hard, for me at least, to parse out what the forecast would look like if you hadn’t changed the monetary policy assumptions.  I can’t tell how much of the downgrade is being offset by the monetary policy assumption.  Now, maybe you’re saying that the market moves sort of trumped the monetary policy assumptions, so we didn’t really factor the monetary policy assumption changes into the forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is a contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is questioning the forecast and expressing difficulty in determining the impact of the monetary policy assumptions on the downward revision in the GDP forecast. They are unsure whether the market moves or the monetary policy assumptions have had a greater influence on the forecast.


Passage number 82.
 MR. WILCOX.  Exactly.  We had to deal with the reality of the financial market conditions, and I’d factor in there as well a stock market that was higher than what we had assumed would be the case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the financial market conditions and acknowledges that the stock market was higher than expected. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument mentioned.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 83.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Right.  But presumably if we really were only doing $750 billion, financial market conditions would have been a lot tighter than they are today, right.  And the economy would presumably be weaker.  I just felt that was a little unclear in the Tealbook.  I was a little confused by that.  How about the oil price question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing confusion and questioning the information presented in the Tealbook.


Passage number 84.
 MR. KAMIN.  On the oil price, first of all, part of it is just due to the rise in international oil prices, like Brent, in response to a combination of concerns about future supply as a result ofthe issues in Syria and more recently in Egypt, as well as actual supply disruptions in several economies including Iraq, Nigeria, and Libya.  Those are the main factors that have put some upward pressure on international prices, even as a little bit of greater pessimism about the global outlook in China has probably put some offsetting downward pressure.  But all told, Brent has gone up some $4 or so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing an explanation for the rise in oil prices and discussing various factors that have contributed to it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 85.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes.  But my question is more, how is the staff thinking about the effects of that on the consumption path  Because they got this benefit in—what was it, April, May—from gasoline prices falling a lot.  Now gasoline prices are rising quite a bit.  Is that important, or you just viewed it as transitory.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage shows disagreement or contention as the speaker raises a question about how the staff is thinking about the effects of rising gasoline prices on the consumption path. This indicates a difference in opinions or perspectives.


Passage number 86.
 MR. WILCOX.  Yes.  Just two things.  Gasoline margins are now a little high as a result of the run-up, and we think those are going to come back some.  The way we have accounted for this is through our standard mechanism.  It results in, all else equal, a little lower real disposable personal income and, as a result, a little weaker impetus to household spending going forward.  But it is, quantitatively, pretty small.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not have any contention or disagreement. It simply states a view or opinion about gasoline margins and its potential impact on disposable income and household spending.


Passage number 87.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions President Plosser without any mention of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 88.
 MR. PLOSSER.  My question was the same as President Dudley’s about the monetary policy assumptions.  I would like to just push a little harder.  If I remember correctly, in August of last year, the presumptions of the staff memo said that, for $500 billion of additional purchases, you get somewhere between 0.1 and 0.2 percentage point reduction in unemployment after two years and about the same or a little less rise in inflation after two years.  So by adding roughly $500 billion of purchases to your assumption, going out only until the middle of next year, I am presuming that the effects of the additional LSAPs were pretty trivial.  Is that a simple way to think about the fact that other stuff really didn’t make much difference in your forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser is pushing harder on the monetary policy assumptions and suggesting that the effects of additional LSAPs (large-scale asset purchases) were trivial and didn't make much difference in the forecast. This disagreement can be seen in his questioning and statement.


Passage number 89.
MR. WILCOX.  I’m sorry, I lost the train of your question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wilcox simply acknowledges that he lost track of the question being asked.


Passage number 90.
 MR. PLOSSER.  So my presumption is, going back to the memo in August—0.1 to 0.2 percentage point on unemployment after two years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser is stating a presumption based on the memo that suggests a specific range for the effect on unemployment after two years.


Passage number 91.
 MR. WILCOX.  Two or three years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any argument or disagreement. It simply states that someone named Mr. Wilcox spoke during the mentioned period of time.


Passage number 92.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Okay.  Now if I just talk about adding those purchases and asking what the effect is after a year, I’m just going to prorate it out in some sense, it’s going to be less than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Plosser about the potential effect of adding purchases after a year.


Passage number 93.
 MR. WILCOX.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage simply states "Mr. Wilcox." without providing any further information or context. Therefore, it does not present any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 94.
 MR. PLOSSER.  And even after two years or three years it may be 0.2, but nothing really showed up in your forecast as far as I can tell.  Am I right to extrapolate those assumptions to what you used in this exercise to get there.  I’m just trying to figure out how to walk through this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Plosser is simply seeking clarification and trying to understand the process being discussed.


Passage number 95.
 MR. WILCOX.  Again, I think one way to think about it would be as a sort of “as if” experiment.  Coming out of the June press conference, we had a plausible scenario for purchases, and we decided that it was close enough for us, so we built that into our baseline trajectory.  And before we had any other information, all else being equal, we would have, therefore, taken down the trajectory of the unemployment rate by a couple of tenths after about three years and added—it’s about one-third; it’s a much smaller effect on inflation—a few basis points to our inflation trajectory.  So think of that as step one.  But in fact, market conditions have changed.  So step two is we now observe the actual market conditions that show up on the computer screen.  Those are quite different than what we would have predicted based on an all-else-being-equal type of exercise.  And to use President Dudley’s word, that “trumps” what our “as if” experiment would have left us with as a set of conditioning assumptions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining a two-step process of analyzing market conditions and how they may have changed from the initial predictions.


Passage number 96.
  MR. PLOSSER.  That answers my question because I just wanted to be clear that you would continue to use those rough estimates that we had before and that you factored those in.  There was no basis for you changing those—I always thought they were pretty small anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Plosser is stating that he simply wanted clarification about the use of rough estimates, without expressing any disagreement or contrary opinions.


Passage number 97.
 MR. WILCOX.  Correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only states a statement made by Mr. Wilcox, without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 98.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Okay.  That’s fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The response "Okay. That's fine" indicates that there is agreement or acceptance of the previous statement or suggestion.


Passage number 99.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 100.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  A question for Steve.  Could you update our thinking on how China’s slowdown channels through to any real discernible effect on our GDP.  There is, as you know, a great deal of angst out there about what actually is going on and going to happen in China.  Yet I think it’s a reasonable assumption that we’re indirectly affected, although our export channel is not that dependent.  Can you talk about that a bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 101.
 MR. KAMIN.  Sure.  First of all, you’re certainly right in highlighting that we are quite uncertain about the outlook for China, and that our prospects for China are very important to prospects for other emerging market economies.  So even though China per se does not have a huge weight in our exports, to the extent that it affects other countries, it is important.  Because we were concerned about China, and because we’re quite uncertain about its outlook, we actually included an alternative scenario in the Tealbook on that subject in which we looked at the prospect of—what at least used to be called, although it’s not as popular a phrase anymore—a hard landing in China, where instead of Chinese economic growth moving back up toward 8 percent by the end of this year, it falls from its current pace of 7½ percent to around 5 percent for a couple of years.  And in that scenario, basically we had to make some assumptions about how Chinese economic growth spills over to its Asian neighbors and to Latin America.  And we think, more or less, that a little more than one-half of the shortfall in Chinese growth spills overinto affecting the growth of China’s Asian trading partners and maybe other Latin American economies.  Their economic growth may fall by, say, around one-third or so.  All told, for a very substantial decline, maybe 4 percent, in the level of Chinese output relative to baseline, total emerging market output falls about 2½ percent during this period, and then that, in turn, ends up, over a couple of years, reducing the level of the United States GDP about 1 percent.  It raises our unemployment rate—I think it’s around ½ percentage point, I’d have to check on that—and it delays our liftoff of the federal funds rate from the zero lower bound by a couple of quarters.  So for a pretty substantial shortfall in Chinese economic growth, you do get a very discernible negative effect on the United States.  For smaller deviations that are much closer to our baseline, you would get much less of an effect, and you could imagine that being drowned out by the noise of other developments.  But clearly, for very large changes in the trajectory, you would definitely get discernible effects on the United States.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the potential impacts of China's economic growth on other countries, specifically the United States. They mention different scenarios and the potential effects on GDP, unemployment rate, and the timing of raising interest rates. There is no disagreement or differing opinions presented.


Passage number 102.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 103.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  David, I’d like to ask a question about your unemployment rate chart and the uncertainty bands.  In thinking about some of the monetary policy options that we’re presented with and, in fact, the Chairman’s comments at the last press conference, we’ve tended to shine a little more light on a 7 percent unemployment rate.  I think one question that I realize I need to struggle with a little bit more is, what’s the probability that the unemployment rate takes longer than mid-2014 to achieve that level.  I read the transcript a little more carefully last time—and it was really very interesting to read—and I noted that some people who were somewhat supportive of 7 percent actually thought that that might be achieved as early as the end of this year.  That’s a pretty optimistic outlook.  My own is not quite as strong as that.  But my sense is if there was a feeling that reaching 7 percent didn’t play out too long,there might be more support for that.  Maybe not, but could you offer me a little bit on the probabilities  If you tabulated the simulations of the projections, in what percentage of them would 7 percent be past 2014 and mid-2014.  That’s the question—the error bands themselves don’t quite get at that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 104.
 MR. WILCOX.  I can take a preliminary whack at this.  I think you can take a horizontal slice through the confidence bands.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply discusses the possibility of taking a "horizontal slice" through the confidence bands.


Passage number 105.
 MR. EVANS.  The problem with the bands here is they encompass a lot of different shooting paths and it’s mapping out the upper 15 percent sleeve, I guess, whereas what I have in mind is a little more like your alternative scenario.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining different perspectives on the shooting paths.


Passage number 106.
 MR. WILCOX.  I don’t know.  I don’t have a tabulation of the number of times that a path would never have reached 7 and then done a U-turn, but my guess is that that’s a fairly rare occurrence.  I don’t know that for sure.  Simon seems to have something on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wilcox is simply expressing uncertainty about the occurrence of a certain event.


Passage number 107.
 MR. POTTER.  I might, a little bit.  Going straight to 7 without going back up happens about half the time, I think, in some simulations.  Half of the time you go back up a little bit.  There’s noise in the data and so on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Potter is simply expressing his thoughts and observations about the simulations, including the fact that sometimes going straight to 7 without going back up happens about half the time, while other times there is a small amount of upward movement involved. The mention of noise in the data further supports the idea that these are his interpretations rather than a disagreement.


Passage number 108.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  What do you mean by going “up a little bit”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The question is seeking clarification on the meaning of the phrase "going up a little bit."


Passage number 109.
  Do you mean having a— MR. POTTER.  Reversal.  Yes, short-term—well there’s a mixture of short- and long-term in there because shocks can hit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 110.
 MR. EVANS.  Well, these are shocks, right.  So, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage describes a statement made by Mr. Evans regarding shocks. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this simple statement.


Passage number 111.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We just had one, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker simply states that they recently had something, without mentioning any conflicting opinions or discord.


Passage number 112.
 MR. POTTER.  Possibly, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contentious or disagreement as it only states a possibility.


Passage number 113.
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You’re saying how often it goes to 7 and then stays below 7 percent for a reasonable period of time.  That’s really what you’re saying, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is asking for clarification or confirmation, not expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 114.
 MR. EVANS.  Just to clarify the reason why I think this is interesting, if we thought that there was, for example, an 80 percent chance that we were going to achieve 7 percent by the fall of 2014, we might have more confidence than if you thought that 40 percent of the time you would go longer than that.  Anyway, that’s why I asked.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining their perspective and the reasons behind their question.


Passage number 115.
 MR. WILCOX.  I think I want to talk with President Evans offline and get more clear about what you’re asking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses a desire to have a private conversation with President Evans to gain clarity about a specific matter.


Passage number 116.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Any further questions.  [No response]  Would you like to take a coffee break before we start the go-round.  I see some nods.  All right.  We’ll start the go-round at 3:45 p.m.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if anyone has any questions and then suggesting a coffee break. There is a consensus among the listeners, as indicated by the nods, and the time for the go-round is set.


Passage number 117.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Everybody is punctually back around the table.  We’ll start with President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply recounting that everyone has returned to the table on time.


Passage number 118.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thanks.  I would just comment that the discussion of output growth was about output growth sufficient to improve employment.  So productivity would be relevant to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing a comment and explanation regarding the relevance of productivity in improving employment.


Passage number 119.
 MR. LACKER.  I think of the outlook for employment as part of the outlook for labor market conditions, but I take the point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the given passage. Mr. Lacker is simply expressing his perspective on the outlook for employment as part of the outlook for labor market conditions.


Passage number 120.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The term "President Bullard" is a proper noun and does not imply any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 121.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Of course we will discuss the forward-guidance issues, and so on, in our policy go-round as well tomorrow.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a discussion that will take place in the future.


Passage number 122.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The data since the June meeting have prompted Board staff to lower the Tealbook outlook for GDP growth for 2013 and raise the unemployment rate to 7.4 percent for the end of this year.  This continues the unfortunate pattern of hopefully forecasting stronger economic growth in the out quarters only to be disappointed by the incoming data.  While our tendency to overpredict future economic growth over the past several years is certainly one reason to be cautious about our outlook, there are several other potential concerns related to recent events.  First, long-term interest rates have increased significantly during the past two months.  This development is of particular concern because the interest-sensitive sectors have been the major source of growth over the past year, a source we can ill afford to lose.  However, it is too soon to know how much restraint the higher rates will have on these sectors, but it certainly won’t help.  Second, as President Dudley noted earlier, oilprices have risen.  Given weakness in Europe and China, and apparently significant supply and inventory, I do not see a compelling reason for the higher prices.  But if they persist, they may restrain consumption.  Third, the political uncertainty surrounding the budget and debt ceiling has the potential to be disruptive, even if reasonable agreements are ultimately reached.  This highlights why any removal of accommodation should be based on data rather than on expectations of an improved economy. The recent employment report was better than I expected.  While payroll employment of just under 200,000 jobs a month over the past quarter is encouraging, the unemployment rate of 7.6 is the same rate as that of March and well above the 7.2 to 7.3 percent that was the central tendency from the last SEP for the end of 2013.  While the unemployment rate has declined from 8.2 percent since last August, other important labor market indicators have not shown significant improvement over the past year.  For example, the number of those working part time for economic reasons was higher in June than it was last August.  One of the hallmarks of the Great Recession has been the large number of workers employed part time for economic reasons.  Because they are qualified to do the work, but cannot get the hours they desire, this strongly suggests that labor demand has not been sufficiently robust to turn these part-time jobs into full-time employment.  Furthermore, if workers were more confident, one might expect that the quit rate would have continued to increase as it did in the early stages of the recovery.  However, over the past year, there has been no change in the quit rate, and there is relatively little change in the quit rate by industry.  Thus, the decline in the unemployment rate over the past year may overstate overall improvements in the labor market, leaving us short of the gains necessary to qualify as substantial improvement in labor markets.With regard to inflation, both total and core PCE inflation over the past year are close to 1 percent.  A reasonable expectation is that temporary factors holding down inflation will fade, and well-anchored expectations will draw inflation back toward the Fed’s 2 percent goal.  But we should remain cautious on this score, as the reliability of models that assume well-anchored expectations at the zero lower bound draw from a very limited relevant historical sample.  To date, we have observed little evidence that we are clearly on the path to our 2 percent target.  This is another situation in which I would like to see stronger evidence in the data that we are returning to our target before we reduce the degree of accommodation.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply presenting data and expressing caution and uncertainty about the outlook for the economy and inflation.


Passage number 123.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply appears to be a polite expression of gratitude towards President Lockhart.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 124.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The incoming data have caused me to reduce my growth estimate for the year directionally in line with the Tealbook.  Tomorrow morning’s number will tell us if the tracking estimates of various parties, including that of my own Bank, correctly foretold a weak second quarter.  My outlook has real GDP for the year 2013 coming in at or below, but near, 2 percent, similar to the growth record over much of the recovery period.  The downward adjustment for the year is of course just arithmetic.  For now, my forecast continues to anticipate a step-up in economic activity in the second half with increasing momentum in 2014.  The underpinnings of that outlook are an attenuating fiscal drag, recovering Europe, helping net exports, and positive benefits from generally growing business and consumer confidence bolstered by a continued housing rebound and increased household wealth. As I read the data, they present a bit of a puzzle.  By that I mean certain data elements seem difficult to reconcile with others.  President Lacker’s comments drew attention to thisconcern.  Over the past couple of years, job gains at about 1.7 percent a year had been running close to the economy’s trend rate of growth of around 2 percent a year, implying a suppressed trend rate of productivity growth.  The Tealbook captures this notion in the supply-side damage alternative scenario.  But that scenario implies more inflation pressure than is apparent, so I am not yet ready to make that my working assumption.  I think it is more likely that the pace of economic activity will improve than that the rate of employment expansion will slow.  In my baseline outlook, the necessary resolution comes from stronger economic growth consistent with the rate of net new jobs growth sustained around the trend of 190,000 to 200,000 per month. The inflation numbers also strike me as curious.  My staff and I agree with the Tealbook that a variety of special factors have pushed the core PCE measure lower this year.  The most recent CPI report seemed to support the transitory factors hypothesis, but the inflation trend remains well under the Committee’s objective, and I, for one, keep pushing out further my expectation for the timing of getting to target.  It is comforting that inflation expectations appear stable, but, again, I see tension between inflation data elements that seem to call for resolution.  Either inflation numbers have to firm or inflation expectations should adjust downward.  I continue to have inflation firming in my forecast. In conversations with directors and contacts over the recent cycle, we heard mildly positive predictions about the second half.  The outlook of business people was pretty uniformly that the second half would be either a little better or about the same.  It is hard to discern from these conversations whether the 2½ to 3 percent growth rate currently in my projections is supported by business sentiment in my District.  Those contacts able to gauge consumer spending see it advancing only at a modest pace, somewhat at odds with the second-half strength assumed in the Tealbook forecast.  In this cycle, we continued our practice of surveying businessinflation expectations and asking contacts about their pricing power.  These soundings provide little support for the expectation that the downward pressure on prices is likely to ease in the foreseeable future. Regarding the balance of risks, I am going to express some anxiety about the balance of risks.  Even with an optimistic outlook, I have shifted my economic growth balance from neutral to the downside.  I have to admit that this view is partially influenced by my Bank’s growth forecasting track record.  The year 2013 will be the third straight year in which we forecast an acceleration of economic growth over the prior year, only to have to revise downward in response to incoming data.  As I evaluate the record of the SEP central tendencies and the Tealbook, it’s pretty clear to me that I am not the Lone Ranger in that pattern.  Given this experience of growth underperforming my earlier medium-term projection, my state of mind is to be less dismissive of downside contingencies.  The contingencies that concern me include a renewed fiscal uncertainty shock in September, the possibility of sequestration effects still in the pipeline, and a reversal of sentiment in business and consumer circles that has an effect on demand in the second half.  In spite of officially holding to my outlook of improved economic growth, I have to say my confidence that growth is on the verge of accelerating isn’t high.  If someone here, perhaps David Wilcox, wants an over–under bet on a 3 percent growth rate for the next six quarters, I will take the under.  I am also inclined to weigh the risk to my outlook for rising inflation as tilted to the downside.  That means that the bias allows for persistent subpar inflation as a trend without necessarily suggesting accelerating disinflation.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lockhart expresses some skepticism about the data and presents a more cautious outlook, while also acknowledging that others have similar concerns.


Passage number 125.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Fisher.


Passage number 126.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. President Evans is simply expressing gratitude or thanks.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 127.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The incoming data have been mixed.  The news from the labor market has been relatively encouraging.  But outside of autos, consumer spending is looking pretty sluggish, and the sequestration is adding to an already large fiscal drag.  So, like the Tealbook, we expect tomorrow’s second-quarter GDP number will be distressingly weak.  Also, like the Tealbook, we are predicting a pickup in economic growth in the second half of the year to about a 2¾ percent pace.  However, there is considerable room for doubt; this pickup is just a forecast.  There is nothing really tangible in the data at the moment that points to an acceleration in economic activity.  This seems to me to be a forecast of hope again.  The same goes for inflation.  Though it is not yet clearly in the data, we think core PCE inflation will increase a bit from its current disturbingly low level as we move through the year.  However, we do not think it will rise quite as fast as the Tealbook. Nevertheless, our hopeful projection for an improvement in economic activity seems consistent with the reports from my business contacts, which were somewhat more positive this round, and I’d like to dedicate the next comment to Governor Duke.  Directors of my small and medium-sized banks offered some of the most upbeat assessments I have heard in a while.  They noted a lot of new activity and demand from small businesses and multifamily real estate within the last month.  So I was glad we got that in before you left.  The reports from automakers were also good.  They continue to remark that low financing rates have supported sales.  However, myother big business contacts were more tempered.  Their tone was best summed up by a story from my Chicago chairman, who runs Manpower Employment Services.  He said that the CEOs of his big Blue Chip clients were sounding more upbeat, and many indicated a greater likelihood of near-term expansion.   But there is a disconnect.  Usually when he hears such talk, it is accompanied by an increase in orders for temporary workers.  Temporary employment services is, after all, a leading indicator.  When he pointed out to the CEOs that their current orders didn’t reflect the same optimism that they just expressed, they backtracked, right-sized their views, and said they weren’t yet confident enough, even at these earliest stages, to pull the trigger on hiring for temps.  So that is a bit of a downside risk, I would say.  Apparently, they will wait until more customers actually walk through their doors before increasing capacity. Now, of course, this has all occurred at the same time that financial conditions have become more restrictive than they have been for quite a while.  At the margin, this could cause businesses to sit on the sidelines even more than they already are.  More important, our forecasts put a great burden on the household sector to kickstart the virtuous cycle of spending and hiring that is needed to achieve a higher path for economic growth.  And that may be a tall order.  Revised data now give a picture of softer consumer expenditures outside of autos, which is consistent with this year’s tax increases weighing on household budgets.  And many households still face underwater mortgages or other difficulties accessing credit, although that has improved of course.  So I am concerned about the risks to the forecast for consumption and housing, especially now that we have piled on less-attractive borrowing costs and smaller increases in asset prices from here on out. Despite the risks, I still expect that the cyclical repair process will eventually show through to higher economic growth, although continuing strong support from highlyaccommodative monetary policy remains essential to my outlook.  We are forecasting growth will recover to a 2¾ percent rate in the second half of this year and rise to the 3½ percent range over 2014 and 2015.  I guess I could pause at this point and offer the same type of commentary that President Lockhart did because we were similarly hurt in our outlook for being overly optimistic, and I’m trying to temper that.  We still think that economic growth is going to recover.  I think this is a good point forecast, but it is an uncertain one.  Importantly, the data for the third quarter will be crucial for assessing the impact of the long list of factors that are clouding the forecast at the moment.  Somewhat like the comments from President Bullard and President Rosengren, I simply don’t see how we will be able to have much confidence that we have broken out to a higher growth path with a sustainable improvement in the labor market outlook before we see how the economy performs in the third quarter. Accordingly, I think we have to be careful about doing anything further that prematurely reduces monetary accommodation.  The outsized increase in rates that occurred since our June meeting wasn’t helpful for economic growth, even if it had a modest influence on financial stability risks.  Our communications and actions from here need to be extremely careful to not make financial conditions even more restrictive than we inadvertently engineered in June.  And in our monetary policy discussions tomorrow, I will argue for greater explicitness in our strategic direction that should help us in this task.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that there are mixed data and some positive signs in the economy, but they also express doubt and caution about the optimistic forecasts. They highlight the disconnect between CEO optimism and actual hiring practices, the risks to consumption and housing, and the potential negative impact of restrictive financial conditions. They argue for continued accommodative monetary policy and caution against prematurely reducing monetary accommodation.


Passage number 128.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any evidence of contention or disagreement. It consists of a polite phrase expressing gratitude.


Passage number 129.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The data have come in largely as I had expected, so I haven’t made significant changes to my forecast.  I continue to expect a gradual pickup in GDP growth, which will bring the unemployment rate down and pull inflation up toward our 2 percent objective, broadly similar to the Tealbook outlook.My projection of gradual improvement in the pace of recovery is consistent with a range of comments that I have heard from my District contacts.  The recent strength in the auto sector is a hopeful sign.  Contacts in my District have reported that in the face of strong consumer demand, linked in part to pent-up demand, the traditional summer shutdown of auto plants is either being eliminated or shortened.  I have also been encouraged by reports from the bankers in my District.  They indicate that they haven’t been adversely affected by the recent rise in interest rates and that they didn’t observe any sudden changes in behaviors of their retail investors.  My forecast for a pickup in GDP growth is also supported by further progress in employment conditions shown by the most recent report on labor markets.  The average pace of monthly job gains now stands at 196,000 for the past 3 months, 202,000 for the past 6 months, and 191,000 for the past 12 months.  I view this sustained rate of monthly job gains of about 200,000 as substantial in light of the research by my staff, which I reported on in the past, that shows that the downward trend in job flows and labor force participation has reduced the trend rate of job growth. Turning to inflation, I continue to view the current low levels of PCE inflation as temporary and expect PCE inflation to gradually rise toward 2 percent.  I base this judgment on a range of factors, including the following three considerations.  First, the measures of underlying inflation that we produce at the Cleveland Fed, the median CPI and the trimmed mean CPI, have stayed stable at about 2 percent in June.  Second, measures of inflation expectations from various surveys, nominal and real Treasury yields, as well as the model that is maintained by my staff, also remain stable.  And, finally, both the specific measurement issues that were raised in the Tealbook and a longer look at history suggest that there is a pretty good chance that the current estimates of PCE inflation will be revised up over the next few years.  From 1996 through 2011,80 percent of the initial estimates of PCE inflation were eventually revised up.  Analysis done by my staff showed that the upward revisions to PCE inflation tend to be associated with gaps between the CPI and PCE inflation measures, such as we see today. As to the balance of risks around my outlook, I believe that the balance has shifted from downside to broadly balanced for GDP growth and from upside to broadly balanced for unemployment.  I base these changes on the sustained improvement in consumer attitudes and the gradual improvement that we’re seeing in household balance sheets, which is increasingly showing up in stronger auto sales and an improving housing market and is indicative of a more sustainable recovery.  I continue to judge the overall risks to inflation as broadly balanced, with upside risks that our large balance sheet could eventually cause inflation expectations to increase and, in turn, inflation to rise.  The downside risks are that if the recovery were to falter, inflation could decline.  Putting those two together, I do still see the inflation risks as broadly balanced.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 130.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any statement or information that can be analyzed for contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude and acknowledgement.


Passage number 131.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Economic activity in the Third District continues to grow at a moderate pace, and the outlook is positive according to both our business contacts and the Philadelphia Fed’s leading indicator indexes.  Most sectors of the regional economy, including manufacturing, have shown signs of growth in the intermeeting period.  Our Business Outlook Survey showed its second consecutive positive reading in July after being near zero or negative for most of the earlier part of the year.  There was large, broad-based strength in the survey, including a nice rise in capital spending plans and the survey’s employment indicators.  This is consistent with the acceleration in regional employment we have seen over the past three months in our District.  While the regional unemployment rate remains high—it isat 8 percent—it is down 0.7 percentage point since the start of the year.  One notable difference between the region and the nation is that participation rates have been generally rising in our region this year, whereas they have been falling in the nation.  We don’t have a very good explanation for that, but that certainly seems to be one of the things that is going on in our District.  Otherwise, activity in the District seems to be tracking the nation.  Auto sales are strong.  Growth in other retail sales has been modest over the past two months, but contacts attribute this to seasonal softening and some torrential rains we had in the northeast in June.  Area retailers expect sales to pick up for the rest of the summer.  Residential housing continues to recover.  Local businesses reported no impediments to sales, such as credit availability, but some noted shortages of labor and land.  Home sales are advancing, and home prices are rising.  Commercial real estate markets have shown less of an improvement this year.  Overall, business contacts continue to be optimistic that expansion at a moderate pace will be sustained.   My outlook for the national economy has changed little since the June meeting.  After a weak first half, I anticipate economic growth will accelerate in 2014 and 2015 to something slightly above trend.  Recent data on labor markets, including the upward revisions to payroll employment, make me more optimistic than the Tealbook about the decline in the unemployment rate.  I think the recent inflation upticks that we have seen the most recent inflation numbers support the Committee’s view and my own view and the staff’s view that temporary factors are largely responsible for the downturn in inflation.  And I still anticipate that it will return toward its 2 percent target over the forecast horizon.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contentious or disagreeing statements. It mainly provides information about the economic activity in the Third District and the outlook for the national economy.


Passage number 132.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 133.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President George.


Passage number 134.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Since the June meeting, growth in the District economy has been supported by increases in higher average wage job categories, such as the construction and professional and business service sectors.  Manufacturing activity in the region expanded in July at its fastest rate in nearly a year, while expectations for future activity eased slightly, but remained positive, with lower expectations for exports accounting for some of the downgrade.  In a special question, only about 10 percent of firms noted or expected an impact from the recent increases in longer-term interest rates.  Corn production is projected to bealmost 30 percent higher than last year and more than 6 percent higher than the record set in 2009.  Corn futures prices reflect this, and farm incomes are expected to be lower as a result.  Finally, the trend toward more oil and less natural gas drilling continues in the District.  Overall activity remains relatively flat, but at a high level.  Higher prices and the recent narrowing of the Brent–WTI spread helped District producers as infrastructure to move product out of the region continues to improve. Regarding the national economy, I view incoming data related to private-sector demand as generally positive.  Equity prices have risen.  Payrolls increased more than expected.  Consumer sentiment increased.  Vehicle sales surprised to the upside, and house prices continue to rise.  One of my directors, the CEO of a national and international real estate firm, noted that housing inventories are down 10 percent from a year ago and that such low inventories are leading to bidding wars and higher prices in some markets.  While growth in real GDP has slowed considerably in the first half of this year because of fiscal restraint, growth in private final demand has remained resilient.  Over the past year, the increase in real final sales to domestic purchasers has been about 1 percentage point higher than real GDP, and I expect this difference to continue through 2014.  The Tealbook has a similar outlook.  And although I’ve marked down my forecast for the current quarter because of fiscal restraint, my outlook for the next six quarters is unchanged.  Likewise, I note the outlook for the six quarters was also unchanged between the June and July Blue Chip consensus forecasts.  Of course, resolution of the debt ceiling and slower foreign growth pose downside risks to this outlook.   As I look at labor market conditions, I see continued improvement over the past three and a half years, and even as the unemployment rate remains high, measures of labor market slack reported by the BLS have all shown steady decline since 2010.  Likewise a labor marketconditions index recently developed by my staff looks at some 23 variables that measure resource slack, growth in employment and earnings, as well as survey responses by businesses, consumers, and economists.  This index also shows that conditions have improved since 2010 and, in particular, shows that the speed of improvement is strong by historical standards. In terms of inflation, although second-quarter PCE inflation will be low, likely due to transitory factors, I expect to see inflation pick up over time with an improving labor market and stronger growth, as well as anchored longer-term inflation expectations.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 135.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing gratitude.


Passage number 136.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is not mentioned in the question.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 137.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Recent economic data have been a jumble of good and bad news.  Real GDP growth looks to have slowed markedly in the second quarter.  At the same time, job gains have been solid, and production indicators are pointing upward.  Financial market developments have similarly presented a mixed bag.  The backup in interest rates is a negative for economic growth, but equity and house prices have continued to climb, and lending standards have eased further.  So after weighing this information, I have not changed my forecast that economic growth should show renewed vigor in the second half of this year as the effects of fiscal austerity, credit restraint, and uncertainty wane.  Consistent with this assessment, I’m hearing greater optimism from a broader set of my contacts, including from sectors outside of housing and high tech.  With the strengthening economy, I anticipate that we will reach our 6½ percent unemployment threshold in the first half of 2015, and I see the risk to the outlook as broadly balanced. But given that our forward guidance focuses on the unemployment rate, an important issue is whether the unemployment rate is giving an accurate read on where things stand relative to our maximum employment mandate.  Now, President Fisher already referred to the WallStreet Journal article on our forecast accuracy.  For those people who looked at that, you could see that I am particularly challenged about forecasting the unemployment rate.  I could blame the data, but instead I actually will blame the forecast because, in fact, the unemployment rate has a number of advantages as a summary statistic for slack.  First, it closely tracks other indicators of labor market slack, such as the share of households reporting that jobs are plentiful, and the share of small businesses reporting difficulties filling job vacancies.  Second, in the United States at least, the natural rate of unemployment appears to have been reasonably stable and predictable over history.  However, the significant drop in labor force participation and the relatively flat employment-to-population ratio since 2008 that President Kocherlakota already made reference to suggests that the unemployment rate could now be understating the degree of slack in the economy. The current discrepancy between the unemployment and employment-to-population rates is, in fact, highly unusual.  In the past, the correlation between cyclical movements and unemployment in the U.S. unemployment rate and the employment-to-population ratio was very high, and the reason is that the big movements in the participation rate, like the one we’ve seen recently, at least in the past were primarily structural rather than cyclical, driven by factors such as the entry of women into the labor market.  This same pattern is found in international data, in which the signals coming from unemployment and employment-to-population are typically aligned, except when notable disruptions to secular trends in labor force participation have occurred.  So whether one views the unemployment or the employment-to-population ratio to be the better measure of slack depends on to the extent that one believes that this time is different.  For example, based on the historical behavior of labor force participation, the FRB/US model finds that the trend component of labor force participation has declined considerably over thepast few years, and the current participation gap—the difference between the trend and the actual labor force participation rate—is only about ½ percentage point.  In that case, the unemployment rate is actually providing an accurate gauge of labor market slack.  However, labor market disruption during the deep recession and slow recovery has been unusually large.  So this time could be different.  A greater proportion of the recent decline in labor force participation could, in fact, be cyclical.  At one extreme, Chris Erceg and Andy Levin, in their paper, argue that the decline in participation is mostly cyclical, and the current participation gap is 2¼ percentage points, suggesting much more slack than implied by the unemployment rate. There’s been a great deal of research aimed at understanding why participation has declined so much in recent years.  This work finds that, in addition to demographic factors, ongoing structural trends—such as the movement onto permanent disability benefits among prime-age workers, the decline in two-earner households among the working-age population, and the focus on school instead of work among young adults—have played a role in driving down participation.  Although various estimates of trend participation differ somewhat, they generally find that structural factors explain the majority of the decline in participation since 2008.  That said, they also suggest that the cyclical influence on participation has been larger than one would have expected based on history, with estimates of the current participation gap between ¾ and 1¼ percentage points.  My interpretation of all this evidence is that, to some extent, the current period is indeed different, although not to the extent that Erceg and Levin claim.  Extensive layoffs and persistently dismal job prospects appear to have caused unprecedented withdrawals from the labor force, and my current estimate of the participation gap is about 1 percent—in the middle of the range I just mentioned.  So I expect a participation rate that will remain roughlyflat over the next few years as the return of discouraged workers offsets the longer-term demographic trends that are pushing down participation. One lesson from this research in labor force participation is how difficult it is to discern in real time what is causing shifts in participation and whether these movements are structural or cyclical in nature.  A compounding factor is that the trend participation rate can rise or fall for many years, for reasons that are hard to predict beforehand.  For this reason, forecasts of trend participation rates tend to be subject to large forecast errors.  For example, following each of the past three recessions—that includes the most recent recession—the Bureau of Labor Statistics has significantly reduced its estimates of trend labor force participation.  This difficulty in measuring the trend in participation provides a reason to be cautious in putting too much weight on the employment-to-population ratio as a measure of labor market slack. Regarding inflation, while we remain well below our 2 percent longer-run goal, I’m encouraged by the recent data that suggested that declines in inflation that we’ve observed earlier in the year were, indeed, temporary.  And still, I have heard little discussion to date of wage or price pressure from any of my contacts, which leads me to believe that while we are now again on our way back toward our 2 percent target, it will be several years before we get there.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Williams, acknowledges that the unemployment rate may be understating the degree of slack in the economy due to the drop in labor force participation and the relatively flat employment-to-population ratio since 2008. They mention research that suggests the decline in participation is mostly cyclical and estimates of the current participation gap range from ¾ to 1¼ percentage points. However, they disagree with the extreme view that the decline in participation is mostly cyclical and argue that the current period is indeed different, although not to the extent that others claim.


Passage number 138.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. "Thank you. Vice Chairman" is a polite expression of gratitude and acknowledgement, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 139.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consisting of a single sentence, "Thank you. Governor Yellen," does not contain any contentious or disagreeable statements. It simply expresses gratitude towards someone named Governor Yellen.


Passage number 140.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Summertime is travel season.  Some of you may recall that before our June meeting I embarked on a road trip from San Francisco to New York.  I reported reaching Denver in a surprisingly short time, and while fearful of getting stuck there, I expressed my hope that progress would continue with a similarly rapid pace.  Now, I’m sure you must be eager for an update.  So let me say that I considered the June employment report sufficiently encouraging that after its release, I had anticipated that I’d be pulling into Kansas City just about now, where I planned to pay a surprise visit to President George.  Unfortunately, incoming data since then has brought home the reality that the slog across Kansas may well take a considerable time.As I mentioned, the labor market report was reasonably encouraging.  The payroll gains for June and upward revisions to previous months combined to paint a picture of steady job gains of around 200,000 a month since the start of the asset purchase program.  And even though the unemployment rate held steady, labor force participation rose.  But broader measures of underutilization, including discouraged workers and those working part time for economic reasons, rose sharply, reversing all of the declines seen earlier this year.  What is also important is that these stronger employment gains appear to have occurred in the context of sagging GDP growth, and, like others, I see this as a worrisome omen concerning our likely future progress. The Tealbook’s estimate of first-half GDP growth is now ½ percentage point lower than in June, and some outside tracking estimates of second-quarter growth are even lower than the Tealbook.  A sizable fraction of the downward revision is concentrated in private domestic final purchases, the spending component that the staff views as having the highest signal content.  Household spending, in particular, seems to have softened relative to what was expected in June.  The downward revision to first-half output growth, combined with relatively strong employment gains, implies that labor productivity growth was actually negative during the first half of the year, running far below even the most pessimistic estimates of structural productivity growth in the wake of the recession and its aftermath.  For some time now we have clung to the story that this reflects payback for the outsized productivity gains in 2009, but at some point this normalization will surely have run its course and productivity growth will inevitably pick up.  The prospects for further labor market improvement, therefore, rest critically on seeing a sizable acceleration of aggregate demand, production, and income. The Tealbook baseline envisions just such an acceleration beginning in the second half, and I think the staff has laid out a good case.  I agree that the weakness in consumer spending inthe first half may well have reflected an unexpectedly rapid reaction by households to the tax increases legislated at the beginning of the year.  More broadly, and assuming no major debacle around debt ceiling negotiations, then the waning of fiscal drag during the second half of the year should provide a substantial lift to economic growth.  Consistent with the Tealbook assessment, it was encouraging to seek that the Michigan consumer sentiment index has rebounded to its highest level since 2007; motor vehicle sales also came in quite strong.  This increases my confidence that the recovery, thanks in part to our policies, is successfully weathering the worst phase of fiscal drag, and that substantial underlying momentum in private spending will start showing through to economic growth as the year progresses. That said, I was struck by the number of commentators who, following the Chairman’s press conference, remarked on the Fed’s optimistic views.  While I can largely accept the Tealbook projection for real activity as a modal outlook, I see the risks as being tilted decidedly to the downside.  First, the projected acceleration is driven by a substantial step-up in PCE growth, accompanied by a modest but steady decline in the saving rate and a further rise in the share of consumption in GDP.  But there are several reasons why consumption spending could fail to accelerate to such an extent.  For one, with painful memories of the crisis still fresh, households may respond more cautiously to paper wealth gains, as they could easily prove to be transitory.  They are also probably less able now to extract increased housing equity for spending.  Finally, these gains may also have accrued predominantly to higher-income households with a lower marginal propensity to spend.  The alternative scenario labeled “Consumer Restraint” illustrates how strongly the projected GDP acceleration, and thereby the further improvement in the labor market, relies on consumers stepping up once again.  Residential construction has been one of the bright spots over the past year, but there are alsosignificant risks to the Tealbook forecast due to the recent run-up in mortgage rates.  Obviously, monthly data on starts and permits are noisy, and it’s implausible at this early point that the recent weakness in housing starts could be attributable to mortgage rate increases.  But given the still very tight standards in residential mortgage lending, I worry that even modest declines in affordability may have a notable impact on housing demand. Turning to inflation, the CPI release for June at least points to some stabilization in core inflation.  But there are downside risks here, too.  The two key components of core PCE prices that have shown unusually low readings lately are medical services prices and the nonmarket component of the PCE.  But even if these two categories of prices had increased in line with their more normal patterns, the 12-month change through May in core PCE prices would only be about 1¼ percent.  The economy is still sufficiently fragile that a large and sustained miss on inflation to the downside could become entrenched, as highlighted in one of the scarier Tealbook scenarios.  Even setting aside the risk of such a bad scenario, continuing misses on our inflation objective to the downside imply higher real interest rates, which serve to restrain economic activity and make it even harder for stretched borrowers to reduce their real debt burdens. I could continue to elaborate on further downside risks such as those pertaining to global growth and the impending debt ceiling, but I don’t mean to deny that there’s a decent chance that with fading fiscal drag, the recovery will finally pull out of Governor Tarullo’s mud, and I will reach Kansas City in reasonable time.  Before endorsing this conclusion, though, I’ll need to see signals in incoming data that economic growth is strengthening, employment gains are continuing apace, and inflation is, in fact, picking up.  Tomorrow I’ll discuss my views on the implications of the sensitivity to incoming data for our policy decisions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a summary of Ms. Yellen's observations and analysis of the current economic situation.


Passage number 141.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply shows gratitude towards Governor Duke.


Passage number 142.
MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Despite the volatility in rates since our June meeting, the bankers reported a continuation of the trends that they’ve been seeing since the first of year:  slow but steady improvement in the financial condition of their customers and their markets.  Many reported that the improvement that had first been visible only in selected industry segments, product types, or geographic markets was now spreading more broadly.  I thought it was telling that most of them didn’t even mention the intermeeting rate volatility until asked about it, and even then the only business consequence they reported was a reduction in refinance applications.  They said purchase mortgage applications, however, seemed to be holding up.  A few others said that they viewed the volatility as a wake-up call that rates would, indeed, go up someday, and while most still believe they are positioned to benefit from higher rates, they are now paying close attention to vulnerabilities at different points on the yield curve.  It’s a good thing they are paying attention because in the current-quarter earnings calls analysts have focused their questions on how the banks expect their performance to be affected as rates normalize. I was a little surprised at how sanguine even some of the biggest players in mortgage lending were about the drop in mortgage applications.  They pointed out that they always knew the refi boom was temporary, and the increase in rates came just a little sooner and faster than they had expected.  It’s still too early to tell how this volume change will play out.  I talked to one player who expected capacity to shrink rapidly, and another who said they’d never fully staffed for refis in the first place.  Some banks are adding to their purchase mortgage sales force and shifting fulfillment units from refi into purchase mortgage originations, and one banker reminded me that the purchase mortgage battle is fought through the relationships with Realtors and builders rather than directly with borrowers.  Ultimately, the purchase market will get muchmore competitive, but that could play out through more aggressive pricing, reduction in loan standards, or a shakeout in the number of lenders.  However, it will probably be late into this quarter or even into the fourth quarter before reductions in applications actually show through into lower production, as loans with rate locks are still working their way through the pipeline.  And a number of potential borrowers are reportedly still in the money and likely on pause waiting to see whether this is a blip or a turning point in rates.  Still when rates do turn, the mortgage market is likely to be predominantly a purchase market for a long time to come, as most borrowers have already seen the lowest rates they may see in their lifetimes. The prominent factor in the home purchase market right now is still supply.  A banker from a small Florida bank provided a vivid example.  He told me about putting up a bank-owned house for sale with the price of $110,000.  They had 50 bids almost immediately.  They discarded 40 because they had financing contingencies in them and sold it for the top cash bid of $150,000.  Now, I won’t be updating the Yellen index anymore, but I still believe that the housing recovery has a lot of power that hasn’t yet shown through, and that the signals in house prices are flashing bright green. I’d like to end by stepping back one last time to point out that consumers and businesses have largely accomplished the task of deleveraging.  Lower levels of debt combined with refinancing into low rates have brought debt service down to historic lows.  Credit quality, with the exception of the backlog of problem mortgages, is within the range of historic norms, and in many product categories significantly better than normal, as portfolios are increasingly dominated by recent-vintage credit.   Banks are well capitalized, overflowing with liquidity, and anxious to lend.  The scars of the downturn are still fresh enough though to keep most from getting complacent about credit risk, especially in construction and land development, consumeror mortgage lending.  The Credit Card Act has probably tightened standards for credit cards permanently, but, in a way, that’s ultimately healthy for consumers and the economy.  Mortgage standards will be tight, and mortgage loan pricing will be higher than it might have been for many years to come, as lenders adapt to the new regulatory environment, struggle to incorporate the risks of reps and warrants and the cost of default servicing, rebuild origination and servicing platforms, and anticipate the consequences of GSE reform.  But despite tight mortgages, demographics will win out.  Households will form, and housing demand will remain hot for many years. I really had hoped that in my time here the economy would fully recover, that I might experience what it was like to worry about the economy overheating or even to vote to raise interest rates.  But I will have to be content with having witnessed as full a credit recovery as we are likely to see.  When I first arrived here, I was advised to focus on what I knew.  So I focused on credit, and with that in good shape, I’m going to leave the rest to you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily a report on the bankers' perspectives and actions in response to rate volatility in the mortgage market.


Passage number 143.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "[Laughter]" indicates a moment of humor or amusement, which typically suggests agreement or a positive atmosphere rather than contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 144.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The interventions by the rest of you so far have confirmed what I’d come to believe over the past several weeks, which is that the fragile consensus toward which we were moving six or seven weeks ago has now been drawn into question again.  By that, I mean the notion that after the fits and starts to which Janet and others have alluded, there was, I think, an emerging view—not shared by everyone here but by a lot of people—that the headwinds or the mud or whatever metaphor you want to use had sufficiently abated or sufficiently dried that the conditions were present for some real self-sustaining economic growth, and the question was would the fiscal drag keep that self-sustaining momentum from really getting going.  And most of us thought that what we’re going to belooking at this year was just that question of the impact of the payroll tax snapback and sequestration.  I think with Jeff’s intervention last time, which he’s recounted again today as his capitulation to the persistence of a growth trend around 2.1 percent, we actually had a preview of the old set of questions that we had debated for three or four years coming back to us.  And I hope that we’re not back in that realm by the end of the year, but it seems to me, at least, that it’s going to be considerably harder than I had anticipated just a couple of months ago to figure out within the next couple of months whether, in fact, we’ve got that kind of self-sustaining momentum. The Tealbook continues to project a fair-sized uptick in economic growth over the next few quarters, and if forced to take a position, that’s still probably the one I’d choose, although with a slightly smaller increase in economic growth.  But it’s really difficult, as many of you have already said, to survey the information and revisions to the information that we’ve received since the June FOMC meeting without having at least some greater doubt about this proposition and, indeed, the assumption of greater underlying strength in the economy.  In particular, as Janet just said, the weaker PCE is a little hard to explain away solely by hypothesizing that the impact of the payroll tax snapback may have affected consumer behavior a little more quickly than expected.  In fact, the Tealbook doesn’t try to do that; they’ve also marked down the underlying pace of consumer spending.  It’s not clear to me how one would allocate the various proportions of revision between those two explanations.  And with the savings rate having fallen pretty sharply already in the second quarter and with no strong prospect of significant wage increases, the trend in consumption is certainly a lot less clear than it appeared to be just a couple of months ago.  It would have to get a pretty big boost from the wealth effects of equity andhousing market increases, a boost which is presumably less likely to be realized than in the go-go days when people just pulled equity out of their homes at their friendly neighborhood bank. Now back to Jeff’s self-described capitulation.  It’s still possible, maybe likely, that surrender was premature, that reinforcements will be coming around the bend, that the negative fiscal forces will be in a gradual retreat, and together that will produce the turnaround expected by the Tealbook.  But as I said, I suspect it’s going to be hard to figure that out in the next several months, particularly because I think figuring out exactly what impact sequestration is having has proven to be more difficult than we expected.  That is, the notion that you could just plug the numbers into the model and that was going to give you the effect always seemed to me a little bit troublesome, given the nature of the spending and the cutbacks and the furloughs and all the rest.  But I think that has been proven even more so.  It’s really hard to figure out exactly when the effects are going to be felt, even when nominally the cuts by the agencies are taking place in a staged fashion.  Add to that the fact that, all other things being equal, I’d expect some slowing in job growth, lagging the slowdown in GDP growth that we’ve just experienced, and it’s my overwhelming expectation that things are not going to clarify over the next few months. If it turns out that the assumption of more underlying strength in the economy looks increasingly to be ill-founded—again, that wouldn’t be my modal expectation, but it seems to me a higher likelihood than many of us thought not long ago—then more of us are going to have to join Jeff in capitulating to the persistence of disappointing economic growth.  But here I think the terms of surrender become very important.  Jeff explained his own decision by reference to some combination of Bayesian updating, increased skepticism that remaining headwinds will abate, and greater emphasis on possible structural constraints on growth for a number of years ahead—mostly, but I think not exclusively, productivity constraints.  The alternative basis forsurrendering, of course, is the conclusion that there’s not as much self-sustaining underlying strength in the economy anyway because we’re in what roughly, and somewhat imprecisely, one could term a multiple-equilibrium situation.  That is, right now economic growth is stuck at a lower level because demand won’t rise without greater income.  Income won’t rise without some greater combination of business investment and faster job and wage growth.  And these won’t happen without more demand.  So the hope has been that some element in this relationship could be changed through monetary policy stimulus—fiscal stimulus days are long gone.  Income could be boosted, and then the more virtuous cycle might get started, leading us to a different, preferable cycle than the one we may be stuck in right now. I hope that the underlying strength story wins out through the course of this year and we don’t have to figure out how much we attribute to structural damage to the economy, how much we attribute to a continuing aggregate demand shortfall.  But I think we’re just going to have to wait and see, and as I said, to me the most important takeaway from the past couple of months is that clarity seems less likely in the next few months than I would have thought it would have been.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. This is evident in the phrases "fragile consensus towards which we were moving six or seven weeks ago has now been drawn into question again" and "we’ve got that kind of self-sustaining momentum". These statements indicate that there is disagreement over the current state of the economy and whether or not it is experiencing self-sustaining growth. Additionally, the passage discusses different viewpoints on the reasons for the weaker PCE and the potential impact of sequestration, further highlighting the contention in the passage.


Passage number 145.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude towards Governor Raskin.


Passage number 146.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Since the time of the June Tealbook, the economic news hasn’t been extraordinarily encouraging.  Consumers are not spending as rapidly as they did earlier this year, and economic growth remains very slow.  This isn’t completely surprising because figures on household incomes have been lackluster for some time.  Moreover, this lackluster spending news reflects data from June or earlier, before any impact of the recent backup in interest rates likely had much chance to affect the real behavior of households or businesses.  Once these effects on mortgage rates move their way through the real economy,growth may be even less encouraging.  Still, confidence is moving up, and expectations about household income seem to have improved, which is remarkable in light of the drag being imposed on the economy by fiscal policy. Labor market conditions have become a little better, but they’re still far from normal or acceptable.  The unemployment rate has hardly budged since March, and monthly payroll gains have yet to move consistently above 200,000 per month.  Moreover, underemployment is still rampant, with a large share of folks still working at part-time jobs because that’s all they can get.  In addition, we still have more than three-quarters of a million Americans reporting that they’re too discouraged to look for work. At the same time, inflation remains very low.  By almost any measure, 12-month inflation has been falling and now stands well below where it was a year ago.  Some of this is probably transitory movement in a usually noisy series, but there are reasons to believe that a good part of the low inflation news is reflecting an underlying and current trend in the economy.  After all, if businesses aren’t paying much higher prices for their imported inputs, aren’t paying their workers much more, and are seeing only so-so demand for their products, why would they consider now a good time to put through price increases.  As a consequence, low inflation likely could be with us for a while. At this point the economy is continuing on its slow and steady path of improvement.  In the absence of bad shocks, spending is likely to continue to increase, the labor market to improve, and inflation to stay somewhat below target.  But I see considerable downside risks surrounding this outlook.  Chief among these is the possibility that policymakers, both of the fiscal policy and monetary policy persuasions, will cause confusion and uncertainty and may even tighten policy over the second half of this year, unnecessarily curtailing the pickup ineconomic growth that might otherwise occur.  In particular, there’s a risk that our pre-tapering announcements could take off the table the possibility of faster growth.  If markets think we are telling them that economic news, even marginally better than what we’ve seen, is cause for beginning to normalize, that normalization process can, in turn, reduce the odds of improved performance.  Here the operative word is “marginally” better, which markets understand is different from substantially better.  We really need improvements that are substantially better, not merely marginally better, if we don’t want growth adversely affected by the reduction in purchases.  In other words, communicating our own impatience to end purchases could itself pose a threat to the pace of growth in the economy if the economy is just marginally better, and then we could see that the economy is in a position in which the loss of accommodation has been premature.  Disingenuous tapering is a downside risk.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is providing an analysis of the current economic situation and expressing concerns about potential risks and uncertainties.


Passage number 147.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Governor Stein is expressing gratitude or thanks.


Passage number 148.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, may I ask a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Fisher wants to ask a question.


Passage number 149.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage because it only mentions President Fisher without providing any information or context to suggest disagreement or contention.


Passage number 150.
 MR. FISHER.  Governor, is it possible that our having taken so much out of the market might be exacerbating this volatility and amplifying the impact of this recruitment aspect that you mentioned earlier, because inventories are low, not just in mortgage-backed securities, but they’re low in other issuance as well.  And the dealer capacity to deal with market volume, evenin high-yield or investment-grade securities, has declined.  I’m just curious if that’s what you’re talking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fisher is simply asking a question to clarify a point made by the governor.


Passage number 151.
 MR. STEIN.  Yes, I think there was a separate effect.  In other words, I was holding fixed in my mind dealer capacity for absorbing and was conjecturing—I mean, it’s no more than a conjecture—that aggressive policy increases the temptation of others to invest alongside of us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 152.
  So when those guys move for any fixed dealer capacity, you’re going to get— MR. FISHER.  But if there’s limited capacity, it could exacerbate the movement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is making a statement about the potential impact of limited dealer capacity on movement. There is no contradictory or conflicting information presented.


Passage number 153.
 MR. STEIN.  Potentially, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as the word "potentially" indicates that there is a possibility for disagreement or contention, but it is not explicitly present in the passage itself.


Passage number 154.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply expressing gratitude.


Passage number 155.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to answer this question without the passage in question. Please provide the passage you are referring to.


Passage number 156.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, Bill.  Are there any questions for Bill.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of a simple exchange of thanks and a question for Bill. President Rosengren's response is not provided, so there is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 157.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  On the wording for paragraph 5, what do you think the cost would be of not changing the wording from the last meeting at all.  If the goal of this meeting is to convey that we’re not changing policy, do you think the changes in the words in both 5 and 5′ are worth the possible misinterpretation of those changes in the words.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, MR. ROSENGREN, is questioning the cost of not changing the wording from the last meeting. They are suggesting that the changes in the words in paragraphs 5 and 5' may lead to misunderstandings. This implies a contention or disagreement about whether the changes are worth the potential misinterpretation.


Passage number 158.
 MR. ENGLISH.  We agonized some, in the preparations for this meeting, over the extent to which the words should be changed to reflect a little bit of the communication over the intermeeting period, and the extent to which they should be left unchanged because you think expectations are basically where you want them.  This was a compromise of sorts.  It did seem, particularly early in the intermeeting period, that there was some real confusion on this point and that the purchases and information about the purchases seemed to cause movements in the funds rate path that required some pushing back against.  So we thought it was worthwhile putting at least a little of that in the statement to make sure that that point is really clear, but it’s a judgment call for sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This passage simply discusses the considerations and discussions that took place in preparing for a meeting and making changes to reflect recent communication and expectations.


Passage number 159.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any specific vice chairman or any contention or disagreement related to a vice chairman.


Passage number 160.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But you could argue that the primary dealer survey, if that’s accurate, shows there’s not a big problem to solve right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It states a possible argument but does not engage in any disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 161.
MR. ENGLISH.  I agree.  The chart at the bottom right shows that, at least in the dealer survey, these things are separated.  I think the question—this was raised earlier—is, does the dealer survey really capture what market participants are thinking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. English is expressing agreement with the idea that the chart in question separates certain things in the dealer survey and raises a question about its accuracy in capturing market participants' thoughts.


Passage number 162.
 MR. POTTER.  I think that’s an important consideration for everyone after the last few weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states an opinion by Mr. Potter regarding an important consideration.


Passage number 163.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only mentions Mr. English without any further context, so it is impossible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 164.
   MR. EVANS.  My question was on that point, if I could.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage does not provide enough information to determine the nature of the contention or disagreement, but it is implied that Mr. Evans has a question or concern related to a specific point.


Passage number 165.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the word "okay." It is a neutral response that does not express agreement or disagreement.


Passage number 166.
  MR. EVANS.  On that chart, I’m intrigued by Governor Stein’s delineation of these two different ways of thinking about it, the Fed recruitment model and the Fed direct.  And I’ve been trying to figure out what the signaling channel of our asset purchases might mean through this.  Would anybody like to speculate as to whether or not, if the recruitment effect is right—and maybe we’ve knocked out some of that effect, and so then we’re back to the Fed direct at this level of interest rates—then is it more likely that the dealers have got this right, that they’re separating it.  Simon, your comments suggested that markets are thinking very differently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing intrigue and seeking input or speculation from others.


Passage number 167.
  So I’m wondering if that interplay helps resolve it MR. POTTER.  One thing is, we didn’t run a complete experiment from the June meeting, because we had the communications later to try to deal with the confusion and keep some of the recruitment effect there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is pondering whether the mentioned interplay helps resolve a certain issue. They then explain how they did not conduct a complete experiment in a previous meeting due to subsequent communications aimed at addressing confusion and maintaining the recruitment effect.


Passage number 168.
 MR. EVANS.  That’s true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 169.
 MR. POTTER.  And I think that’s what President Rosengren’s question was about.  How much do you have to reaffirm, during the intermeeting period, what was said in the statement if you’re pretty happy where we are right now.  Bill and I can try to help you with this, but wedon’t have that much confidence.  So you should probably ask yourself, which error would you like to make right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

There is disagreement in this passage between Mr. Potter and President Rosengren about how much they should reaffirm during the intermeeting period. Mr. Potter expresses his lack of confidence in their ability to help and suggests that President Rosengren should consider which error he would prefer to make.


Passage number 170.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher, did you have a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question being asked by someone named President Fisher.


Passage number 171.
 MR. FISHER.  I’m not sure this has been answered, but, in the opinion of the staff of the Desk, is there likely to be any different market reaction between 5 and 5′ in B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher is simply seeking clarification or confirmation from the staff of the Desk regarding market reaction.


Passage number 172.
 MR. POTTER.  We agonized.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that "we agonized," indicating that they went through a difficult decision-making process, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 173.
 MR. FISHER.  I know you agonized, but what did you come down on.  Is there much difference in terms of how you think the market might react.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking for an opinion or perspective on the market's potential reaction.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 174.
 MR. POTTER.  I think that, given what we got in the dealer survey, people weren’t expecting changes in this part of the statement.  We saw four dealers expecting something about the contingent plan and four expecting something about the forward guidance.  Not all, but many of them expect something in the first paragraph.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: There is contention or disagreement in this passage as it mentions different expectations from dealers regarding the content of the statement. Some dealers expect something about the contingent plan while others expect something about the forward guidance, resulting in differing opinions.


Passage number 175.
 MR. FISHER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage based solely on the provided information.


Passage number 176.
  Right—just updated  MR. POTTER.  I think that both 5 and 5′ try to back up the message that the Chairman gave, and the issue for you is whether you need the explicit backing up or whether, just by printing off the same statement, you’re basically telling them, “Everything is okay—we’ve understood you, and you’ve understood us.”  As I said, I don’t think there’s really anything more we can add than to tell you what the facts are now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is simply explaining the situation and offering an opinion.


Passage number 177.
 MR. ENGLISH.  President Fisher, was your question about 5 versus 5′.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is a straightforward question being asked by Mr. English to President Fisher.


Passage number 178.
 MR. FISHER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the statement "MR. FISHER. Yes." The speaker simply confirms or agrees with something that was previously said or asked.


Passage number 179.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I think both would be read as providing a little reinforcement of this idea.  In some sense, it’s a matter for the Committee.  Paragraph 5 uses some words that were used successfully, I think, over the intermeeting period.  They were noted, and they wereunderstood.  So that might be a simpler approach.  But some of you expressed concern about having to manage “foreseeable future” as time passes and maybe it becomes foreseeable.  And in that case, you may want to avoid introducing those words and instead go with something like 5′.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different options and considerations, but there is no explicit disagreement or conflict present.


Passage number 180.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  I’m going to call on anybody who wants to speak, but let’s not have the whole debate.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they will allow anyone who wants to speak, but without engaging in a full debate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 181.
   VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I’m going to comment on the very narrow question of how the market would interpret 5 versus 5′.  My own view is that 5 is probably viewed slightly more powerfully, because the “foreseeable future” is going to be read as, “Why did they put those words in there.  They put those words in for emphasis.”  Paragraph 5′ does essentially the same thing but in more words—a little bit more complicated, a little bit less visible.  I certainly agree with Bill that one of the problems with “foreseeable future” is, when is it no longer the foreseeable future.  So I think 5 is probably a little bit stronger than 5′, but it has a few more problems in terms of, where do you take it from there over time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses their own view that 5 is slightly more powerful than 5'. However, they also acknowledge that there are some problems with both options, such as the ambiguity of when the "foreseeable future" ends. So, while the speaker agrees with Bill on one point, they disagree with him on the overall strength of 5' compared to 5.


Passage number 182.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of a simple expression of gratitude and a mention of President Kocherlakota.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 183.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  One concern that we had in Minneapolis about the “foreseeable future” language is that some might interpret it as the Committee saying that it has  a poor outlook for at least many months to come, if not many years to come.  “Foreseeable future” has a very long time line in front of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. Mr. Kocherlakota expresses concern about the interpretation of the "foreseeable future" language, suggesting that it may be seen as a negative outlook for a long period of time.


Passage number 184.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 185.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a question for Bill and Simon.  I raised this point at the last meeting.  We communicated about asset purchases, and we seem shocked that they pulled forward interest rate increases.  By saying something about asset purchases we are also saying something about our outlook for the economy.  And it just seems asthough the natural interpretation is that they carry that forward.  In other words, they’re rational forecasters, and they’re looking ahead.  And if they say, “Well, 2014 is going to be stronger than I expected; I’ll bet 2016 is going to be stronger than I expected,” they’re going to pull everything forward.  From that point of view, it seems less urgent to push against that.  I’m wondering, what evidence is there against that view.  You certainly said some things that were consistent with that notion—that it’s just this latent inference they’re making about the strength of the economy that drove the correlation between those two moves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a question being posed to Bill and Simon, seeking clarification and evidence to support a certain view.


Passage number 186.
 MR. ENGLISH.  If that were the right interpretation—they didn’t judge that the Committee was more hawkish than they thought; they judged that the outlook was better—then you would have expected to see a change in the outlook that they were reporting in the dealer survey.  We didn’t see that.  So I think that’s what you’re trying to tease apart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply analyzing a possible interpretation and stating their observation of the dealer survey.


Passage number 187.
 MR. LACKER.  Wait.  It’s our outlook.  They don’t have to change their outlook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. It simply states that the outlook belongs to the speaker and that the other person does not need to change their outlook.


Passage number 188.
 MR. ENGLISH.  No, they do, because there are the thresholds.  They should be looking ahead, saying, “Here’s my outlook for the economy.  Given the thresholds, that’s what that implies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker (Mr. English) is simply stating a fact about the existence of thresholds in some context.


Passage number 189.
”  If their outlook hasn’t changed, you wouldn’t have thought that they would have changed their assessment of the timing for the first increase in the funds rate VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But this could be partly the distinction between the people who respond to the survey and other market participants.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating that there could be a distinction between the people who respond to the survey and other market participants, which could explain why their assessment of the timing for the first increase in the funds rate has changed.


Passage number 190.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Absolutely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage as the word "absolutely" is an agreement or confirmation of a statement made previously.


Passage number 191.
 MR. LACKER.  And the dealers move less, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply presents a fact, stating that the dealers move less.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 192.
   MR. POTTER.  Talking to participants who don’t put contributions into the survey, we learned they’d be closer to Governor Raskin’s viewpoint of why we did what we did in June.  They’d be saying, “I’m looking at the data.  It doesn’t look as though my forecast got stronger. They’ll have these data as well.”  “So why would you make that change.  There must be some other reason that you were making that change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is highlighting that there are participants who have a different viewpoint from Governor Raskin regarding the decision made in June. They believe that the data does not support the change and question why the decision was made. This suggests disagreement or contention between different perspectives on the issue.


Passage number 193.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Just for the record, we did anticipate that problem, and there was a lot of language in the press conference statement on how we were talking about asset purchases; we were not talking about rate policy.  That didn’t get through initially, and, after a bit of additional communication, eventually it seemed to get through.  The idea behind this—and again I don’t think we should debate it; you can think about it overnight—was just to reinforce the point that, while, for various reasons, asset purchases were meant to be a time-limited program at some point, we do intend that the rate guidance be a separate tool of policy, not perfectly correlated—in fact, it would be inversely correlated—with the asset purchases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining their intention and clarifying that there should not be a debate about it.


Passage number 194.
  MR. LACKER.  It’s the general point Woodford made—that when we communicate about anything, we communicate about our views on the economy.  And maybe it didn’t show up in the dealers’ economic forecasts, but certainly market participants could be forgiven for that.  Meeting to meeting, our outlook doesn’t change when we communicate something.  We had the same outlook whether we communicated something or not.  So it’s natural for us to think, “Well, yes, the interest rate path—it doesn’t change if I just communicate.”  Well, everyone else is sifting through it for evidence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining a general point made by Woodford and acknowledging that market participants may not have fully taken that point into account. However, the speaker agrees with the idea that their outlook doesn't change based on communication.


Passage number 195.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, they can be forgiven, certainly.  And if these two tools were essentially perfectly correlated, then that would be the right inference.  But they have different costs and efficacy, so they’re not perfectly correlated.  Any other questions for Bill.  [No response] If I could ask your indulgence for just two more minutes.  As we’ve already got a flavor here, the discussion tomorrow will not just be about tomorrow’s statement.  Governor Duke, youwere never here when policy meetings used to be about that day’s policy.  [Laughter]  So I’m sure there’ll be a lot of interest in discussing our strategy going forward, which, in a way, is really what we’re supposed to be doing.  Following up on what Bill said, I was hoping that, in your policy go-round tomorrow, you would consider three questions, and that you might be willing just to give some indication of your views.  They’re not lengthy questions.  The first one is, could you give a sense of whether or not you’re broadly comfortable with the contingent plan for asset purchases that I laid out and others laid out in the intermeeting period—that is, the plan about, assuming the data cooperate, reducing purchases later this year and, assuming data continue to cooperate, reducing in measured steps until 7 percent, et cetera.  Are you broadly comfortable with that.  And one of the reasons I ask is—of course, we’d like to know the answer to that question—that I think it would be useful for the minutes to have some sense of where the Committee is on that general question.  The second question I’d ask you to consider is, assuming you are comfortable with that plan, or even if you’re not, do you think that at some point we should try to convey more about that plan in the statement.  There are some examples of that in the language in A(4) and C(4) that you have seen just.  I don’t think we have to decide tomorrow exactly how we would do that, but because the staff will be working on these things, it would be nice to know if there’s any interest in doing that at some point.  If so, any insight you have into whether or not we should would be useful.  And then, finally, the third question is, are you interested—and if so, under what circumstances—in changing or strengthening the forward guidance on rates.  President Bullard already made reference to that today.  Again, I’m not looking for a detailed analysis necessarily.  I just would be interested in your general inclination.  It would be a great help to us in thinking about this going forward.So, are you comfortable with the broad contingent plan for asset purchases.  If so, should we, at some point, say something about that in the statement, or should we leave it to the minutes and the press conference as our main communication vehicles.  And, finally, do you envision a situation where it might be useful to change the rate guidance, and if so, what’s the situation.  Of course, the bulk of your discussion will be about your broad policy views and anything else you want to talk about.  But I thought it would be useful to have a little bit of commentary on those three issues in particular. Any other comments or questions.  [No response]  Okay.  We’ll recess now, and a reception and dinner are upstairs.  We’ll start tomorrow morning at 9:00 a.m.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a speaker addressing a group and providing information and asking for their views on certain topics.


Passage number 196.
 [Meeting recessed]July 31 Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning.  Could I turn it over to David Wilcox to report on this morning’s data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement about handing over the reporting task to David Wilcox.


Passage number 197.
 MR. WILCOX.4  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think that it would be safe to say that this is one presentation that will not have been over-rehearsed.  We obviously have not had the chance to dig through the details of this rather lengthy report.  You should have a table, I believe, in front of you that summarizes a couple of the very top-line, headline numbers.   It looks to me like a mixed picture.  GDP growth over the first half of this year is unrevised from what we had expected.  Economic growth in the first quarter is down 0.6 percentage point relative to BEA’s earlier publication, and it came in 0.6 stronger than we had expected in the second quarter.  The revisions are across a range of areas.  I guess I’d point to two compositional effects that make me a little cautious about the interpretation of this report in terms of its signal for the underlying strength of the economy.  One is, on a very cursory inspection, more of the downward revision, especially in the first quarter, looks to have come in final demand.  Specifically, PCE contributed 0.3 percentage point less to GDP growth, nonresidential structures contributed 0.5 less, and E&S contributed 0.1 less; inventories contributed 0.4 more.  In the second quarter, the big surprise was that federal spending was revised up by enough to contribute 0.6 percentage point more to GDP growth.  We don’t know what’s going on there.  I spoke with Glenn Follette, who heads our Fiscal Analysis Section, and he said that the BEA gets additional information about deliveries that can inform its judgment about purchases over and above what it knows from the Monthly Treasury Statement.  He’ll try to find out a bit more what’s going on there.  But I’d say that cumulatively—again, this is very  4 The materials used by Mr. Wilcox are appended to this transcript (appendix 4). “first blush”—the sense I have is that maybe the underlying thrust of economic activity is a little weaker despite the fact that first-half growth is exactly what we had expected. I would say that, looking back, historically, it’s interesting that cumulatively, over the five-year period from 2008 through 2012, the level of real GDP was revised up over that period by 1 percentage point.  So the recession now appears, in historical perspective, to have been just a little less deep, and the recovery just slightly faster, than previously shown.   Interestingly, GDI was revised up by 1.8 percentage points cumulatively over that period.  GDI had already increased faster than GDP over that period, and now that growth gap is a little greater than it was before.  In concept, GDP and GDI are measuring exactly the same underlying economic idea.  So we’ve been shifting toward taking a bit more signal from GDI than we have historically. The inflation picture is substantially unrevised.  Inflation rates early in the revision period were revised down a couple of tenths of 1 percentage point, and there were some very small upward revisions more recently.  Relative to what the BEA has done with inflation in the past, this is pretty modest stuff.  These revisions look to have come in the so-called nonmarket components of the PCE price index, where they’re imputing prices.  This is a pretty noisy category of inflation. I think that about summarizes what I know at this highly preliminary stage.  Bill Wascher has a brief rendition for you on the ECI.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a description of the speaker's preliminary analysis of a report, but there is no indication of any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 198.
 MR. WASCHER.  I can be very brief.  The ECI for private-industry workers rose at an annual rate of 2.4 percent in the three months ending in June.  That’s exactly what we were expecting.  Wages and salaries rose a little bit more than we were expecting, and benefits a little bit less, but I don’t think there’s anything in this report that is of consequence for our inflation projections.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their expectations and observations without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 199.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  There was an ADP report as well—200,000.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 200.
 MR. WASCHER.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is indicated by the word "Okay" which suggests the speaker's response might not be in agreement with the previous statement or question.


Passage number 201.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Any questions for Bill or David.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrases "Thank you" and "Any questions for Bill or David" are polite and neutral statements. The mention of a "Vice Chairman" does not imply any disagreement but rather suggests that Bill and David may be available for questions or discussion.


Passage number 202.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes—two questions.  First, how much of the first-half revision reflects the new methodology.  To really compare “apples to apples,” you have to adjust for the methodological changes, which I understand lifted GDP growth over the last few years by something on the order of 0.2 to 0.3 percentage point.   And question 2:  Q2 had a big inventory miss relative to the consensus forecast, but I guess I don’t remember what the Tealbook assumption was on inventories.  Inventory accumulation rates for Q2 were quite a bit higher than expected.  What does that mean for the forecast in Q3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of two questions seeking information and clarification.


Passage number 203.
 MR. WILCOX.  I don’t think the conceptual change to include a broader range of intangibles had a big effect.  Doing an apples-to-oranges comparison of the new equipment and intangibles category with the old equipment and software category, growth in those somewhat noncomparable categories was revised down in the first quarter.  The contribution to GDP growth was revised down by 0.1 percentage point in the first quarter and by 0.2 in the second quarter compared with our forecast, so I don’t think that’s a major player.  Indeed, as I said, the composition of economic growth looks a little less favorable.  Inventory investment contributed 0.4 percentage point more to GDP growth in the first quarter, and 0.5 more to GDP growth in the second quarter, than we had expected.  That, combined with the significantly bigger contribution to growth from federal purchases, I think, sets up a little softer tone for the second half than what we’d said earlier.  But this is all based on a few minutes of looking at the data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their observations and analysis of the data.


Passage number 204.
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I understand.  We should use the latest available data, though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not display any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests that using the latest available data is beneficial.


Passage number 205.
 MR. WILCOX.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only mentions Mr. Wilcox without providing any context or information to suggest the presence of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 206.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The staff was telling me that one effect of the changed methodology was to increase the personal saving rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states a fact about the effect of the changed methodology, as told by the staff.


Passage number 207.
 MR. WILCOX.  Yes.  There, the BEA changed the method of accounting for defined-benefit pension plans from a cash basis to an accrual basis.  That happened to have the effect of raising personal income over the past several years, and, because spending is whatever spending has been, the higher personal income translates into a higher personal saving rate.  Now, this is another area where we have not yet worked through the new information.  My guess is that, at the end of the day, we will decide that, despite the substantially higher saving rate, there’s an invariance theorem for our outlook for consumer spending.  The reason is that, in theory, households have been operating in the environment that they’ve been perceiving for the past several years, and this is the spending that has resulted.  I think there’s an interesting behavioral hypothesis test as to whether a cash-based income, which is what the BEA was using before, or an accrual-based income, which is what it’s using now, is more informative for personal consumption expenditures.  My guess is that we’ll decide in the end that the higher level of the personal saving rate probably doesn’t have great implication for the thrust of consumer spending going forward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their own analysis and making a prediction, but there is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 208.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions.  [No response]  Okay.  We’re about ready to start our monetary policy go-round.  If I could do two things—first, remind you from yesterday that it would be helpful for our planning, for the minutes, and for thinking about the rest of the year if you could address the questions I mentioned yesterday regarding the generalstrategy for asset purchases and whether or not we should consider putting explicit guidance on asset purchases or enhancing the guidance on rates in our statement going forward.  It would be useful to have views on that, although I hasten to add that I’m not looking today to come to decisions or have extensive discussions of the details of those questions, which are many. Also, before starting, I would like to very briefly give you a sense of a couple of things that we were trying to accomplish with the language that you got, both informed by the communications and the reactions over the intermeeting period.  First, one reaction that we got was that markets seem to think that our assessment of the economy was overly optimistic.  I thought what I heard yesterday was not particularly optimistic, I thought.  In any case, what we want to do, obviously, as we think about our statement for today, is to align the statement with our current views of the economy, and, in particular, I think it is important that we pay appropriate attention to inflation.  There was a sense—in some quarters, at least—that we’re a little too complacent about low inflation.  If in fact we are concerned about low inflation, it would be worthwhile putting that in somehow.  So the first objective, I think, is just to align the statement better with our actual views on two key areas:  economic growth and inflation.  The second objective of some of the language changes was the following:  Despite pretty strenuous efforts, at least early in the intermeeting period, the markets had difficulty distinguishing between changes in the plans for asset purchases and potential changes in the plan for rate increases.  As you know, we made a substantial effort to try to explain that the two are separate tools and that, in particular, there would be a considerable period between the end of asset purchases and the beginning of rate increases.  I think we made progress on that.  My personal view is that it would be helpful to reinforce that if we could find a way to do it in the statement.  And that, finally, leads to a question that we’ll want to address in this go-round, which is, if it isin fact the case that we are approximately satisfied with current market views of our intentions and our thinking, should we leave the statement essentially unchanged, or should we try to make changes that reinforce and enhance that view.  I think, expressing my own view, that it’s a little bit puzzling to make no changes, because that seems as though we’re not paying attention or that we haven’t acknowledged all that’s happened in the intermeeting period. So, I think it would be important for us, first, to think actively about what we can do to better align our own views of the economy with the statement and, second, to the extent that that’s what the Committee wants to do, to try to differentiate between the asset purchases and rate policy.  Having said that, let me now get ready for the go-round, and I have, first, President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing some information and setting the agenda for a meeting.


Passage number 209.
   MR. FISHER.  Oh, that kind of booty.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher is simply expressing gratitude for the clarification provided by the speaker.


Passage number 210.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, I offer that clarification for you, President Fisher.  And I think we should welcome their support at this stage.  There is an issue that once we get close to the exit, these troops are going to be quick to leave.  They’re not in it for the goals that we’re after.  That volatility during exit is inevitable.  President Lacker talked about it at the last meeting—that we’re going to face that kind of volatility.  I think that speaks to offering these troops, these volunteers, as much as we can right now through forward guidance and managing that volatility at a time when the economy is strong enough to deal with it.  President Williams’s estimate of the cyclical component of labor force participation was 1 percent.  That’s about 50 basis points above what you would normally think the cyclical component of labor force participation would be.  That translates as, the unemployment rate, adjusted for that cyclical component, is really still above 8 percent, something close to 8.3 percent.  At this point, we still need all of the help we can get from these other troops.  We will face volatility during the exit.  There’s no doubt about that.  The challenge is to manage that process when we get to that point.  And the right time to have to manage that is not when the unemployment rate, adjusted as I described, is above 8; it’s when the unemployment rate is at 5½. To summarize, Mr. Chairman, I would recommend that, in September, the FOMC statement include a two-stage forward guidance for the fed funds rate.  For the second stage of the forward guidance, you would communicate that, as long as inflation is under control, theCommittee anticipates keeping the fed funds rate low when the unemployment rate is between 5½ and 6½.  To enhance credibility, I could see it being desirable to have a lower inflation threshold for the second stage when the unemployment rate is between 5½ and 6½.  I have not spoken about an inflation floor.  I’m open to that possibility.  I didn’t want to take longer in my statement than I already have.  I view my recommendation as being appropriate regardless of what the Committee decides about the future flow of purchases.  The point is that there’s considerable public uncertainty about the nature of our reaction function.  The recommendations that I’ve made in this round are designed to reduce that level of uncertainty.  And I see that reduction in policy uncertainty as being desirable regardless of what policy choices we choose to make in terms of reducing or increasing the flow of purchases in September.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement made by Mr. Kocherlakota expressing his recommendations and opinions on forward guidance and managing volatility during the exit of troops from a certain situation.


Passage number 211.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude towards President Fisher.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 212.
  [Laughter] MR. TARULLO.  I think it’s already dead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker's statement implies that something is already dead, while the use of laughter suggests that others may hold a different opinion.


Passage number 213.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude from someone to President Lacker.


Passage number 214.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude to President Williams.


Passage number 215.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is not provided. Please provide the passage in order for me to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 216.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Bullard.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 217.
 MR. BULLARD.  President Williams, could I get you to expand a little bit on this last sentence in paragraph 2:  “The Committee . . . anticipates that, with appropriate policy accommodation, . . .”.  You said you didn’t like parts of that sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The passage indicates that Mr. Bullard disagrees with certain parts of the sentence mentioned in paragraph 2.


Passage number 218.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 219.
 WILLIAMS.  I would have said simply, “The Committee also anticipates that inflation will move back toward its 2 percent objective over the medium term.”  I think that’s stronger than what we currently have that says “at or below,” which does suggest to me that we’re a little—I don’t know about “complacent”—but that we’re okay with inflation being below 2 percent.  In my view, if we say that we anticipate that inflation will be moving back toward 2 percent, that’s a strengthening.  I just found that saying “with appropriate policyaccommodation” twice in the same paragraph seemed a little funny, but that’s the only concern I had with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Williams is expressing his belief that the language about inflation in the current statement suggests complacency with inflation being below 2 percent, whereas he thinks it should be strengthened to indicate the anticipation of inflation moving back toward 2 percent.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 220.
 MR. EVANS.  You’re not really explaining why you’re expecting it to go up, though, in the statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The use of "though" in the statement suggests that Mr. Evans is expressing disagreement or contention with the explanation provided. He implies that the explanation given does not adequately justify the expectation that it will go up.


Passage number 221.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage "MR" because the passage is incomplete and lacks sufficient information to determine any stance or disagreement.


Passage number 222.
 WILLIAMS.  Well, in the beginning of the paragraph, it says that, with appropriate policy accommodation, we expect inflation to come back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a belief that with appropriate policy accommodation, inflation is expected to return.


Passage number 223.
 MR. BULLARD.  I would be a little concerned about being nonchalant about inflation.  “Don’t worry; it’s going to go back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no explicit contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses concern about being nonchalant about inflation, but there is no indication of a disagreement or conflicting opinion.


Passage number 224.
”   MR. TARULLO.  I think that’s the risk of the way you’ve done it, John.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Tarullo is expressing his opinion about the method being discussed, without any opposing views or arguments being presented.


Passage number 225.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 226.
 WILLIAMS.  Would the “appropriate policy accommodation” deal with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 227.
 MR. EVANS.  Could I ask what “appropriate monetary policy accommodation” is meant to convey in this.  I meant to ask that yesterday.  Does it mean more accommodation than we currently envision.  Well, I tried that in my SEP projections, and I had a pretty optimistic path, but the additional policy wasn’t exactly conveyed in that to my satisfaction.  But anyway, those are the rules of the game.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Evans is expressing his dissatisfaction with the level of additional policy accommodation and implying that he does not agree with the rules of the game.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 228.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think the concern here is that that could also be read also as a complacent statement—that we think it’s going to be fine, given our current policy path.  So one attempt to try to convey at least some doubt was this language at the end about monitoring inflation, which you suggest cutting.  Just because we’re not sufficiently confused here at this point, another possibility would be to say something about the risks to inflation; that would be another way to deal with this.  But I think this is a question we need to address seriously, because there was some concern about whether we were taking the low inflation sufficiently seriously.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The passage presents different perspectives and suggestions regarding the concern of whether low inflation is being taken seriously enough. The phrases "I think the concern here is" and "Just because we’re not sufficiently confused here at this point" indicate a potential disagreement or difference in opinion. The mention of different approaches to address the concern also suggests potential contention.


Passage number 229.
MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, the passage does not contain contention or disagreement. No people or parties are presented as having conflicting opinions or viewpoints, and the information provided does not suggest any conflicting ideas or arguments.


Passage number 230.
 WILLIAMS.  And I agree with that.  I guess I didn’t want to turn the dial so much that it sounded as though we are worried that inflation is going to run below 2 percent.  There’s that risk of highlighting it so much that people think that’s what we expect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker agrees with the previous statement, showing alignment of opinion.


Passage number 231.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No, that’s fair.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, that's fair. There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. It is an agreement or acknowledgment of fairness.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 232.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Yes.  I’m with John on this a little bit.  I do worry that “with appropriate policy” is likely to be interpreted as saying that we’re going to act in some additional way that we haven’t specified, and it’s going to feed into the notion that somehow we are going to take action in the very near future.  I think I’d prefer a different way of trying to say that.  It’s important that we acknowledge inflation is low, and that we commit to our inflation objective.  I actually agree with that.  But I want to be careful that the language doesn’t get interpreted as stating that it’s going to either prevent us from moving along with asset purchases or suggesting that we’re actually about to do more asset purchases in response to that, because I don’t think that’s what we want to signal at this point.  That’s my concern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage shows disagreement between Mr. Plosser and someone named John on the interpretation and implications of the phrase "with appropriate policy". While Mr. Plosser agrees with the acknowledgement of low inflation and commitment to the inflation objective, he expresses concern that the language may be misinterpreted as suggesting additional action in the near future, specifically more asset purchases. This disagreement indicates contention within the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 233.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  To make my suggestion concrete, we have this current statement:  “The Committee sees the downside risks to the outlook for the economy and the labor market as having diminished since the fall.”  We have that now.  We could add, comma, “but the risks of persistent low inflation have increased somewhat”—something like that.  I’m just putting that out there.  I think the best thing to do is to have our go-round, and we can address each of these points in a systematic way and then take straw votes, and so on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The passage suggests that there is contention or disagreement by presenting the idea of adding a statement about the increased risks of persistent low inflation. The speaker is proposing this addition, indicating that they have a different perspective or opinion than the previously stated statement.


Passage number 234.
 MR. EVANS.  Could you just repeat your suggestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Evans is simply asking the person to repeat their suggestion.


Passage number 235.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The suggestion I made was to add to the risks statement “but the risks of persistent low inflation have increased somewhat.”  We have to find some wayto signal concern.  That may not be right, but we will go through each of these things at the end of the go-round.  So don’t feel as though we have to solve it now. Anyone else.  If not, President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting an addition to the risks statement and acknowledges that it may not be the right solution. They also mention that they will discuss each topic later, indicating open and non-confrontational communication.


Passage number 236.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  When I received Book B of the Tealbook, I was interested to note that the language “continuing purchases until the unemployment rate is about 7 percent” appears in alternatives A and C but not in alternative B.  It puts me in the rather unusual position of agreeing with Presidents Fisher and Lacker on monetary policy.  [Laughter]  This new benchmark for quantitative easing was conveyed in the last press conference, but it was not included in the statement last time, in part because of time pressures.  I am concerned how markets might interpret the absence of such language in this statement.  Some might wonder whether such language is no longer consistent with the Committee’s view and, if so, why the Committee’s view changed from the last meeting.  Such confusion may reduce the effectiveness of our communication. While entering open-ended QE was quite effective in stimulating the economy last fall, for some of the reasons discussed by Governor Stein and recently amended by President Kocherlakota, some of that efficacy has eroded the more we talk about exit and tapering, perhaps contributing to the perception that we are no longer willing to do what it takes.  In effect, it encourages the army looking for booty to switch sides.  These somewhat mixed messages risk generating more market volatility than would be desired, potentially adding another drag to the economy.  While I would actually prefer alternative A, I would support alternative B at this meeting.  I would have preferred the language in paragraph 4 from alternative A to be adopted for this meeting.  However, I believe it should be used in the statement at the next meeting, when theChairman will have an opportunity to fully explain the new language in the press conference and subsequent speeches.  In terms of paragraph 5, my preference would be to go back to the language from the previous meeting.  We should minimize the changes to paragraphs 3, 4, and 5 unless there’s a clear message we want to convey.  We have a poor track record in forecasting market reactions to new language in the statement.  The insertion of language to increase or decrease the pace of purchases, which was interpreted by many in the market as more-accommodative language, was in contrast to our discussion of the potential of tapering, which appeared in the minutes.  Thus, I think the Committee should set a high hurdle for language changes from the previous meeting unless we intentionally want to signal a policy change. Finally, as we prepare for the meetings in the fall, I do think we should clarify at those meetings whether potential tapering is due to the perceived costs of such rapid expansion of the balance sheet or whether the strength of the economy no longer justifies the same degree of accommodation.  Currently, the strength in the second half is in our SEP forecasts, but our SEP forecasts are more optimistic than forecasts of many private forecasters, and the strength is not yet clearly evident in the data.  If the primary reason for tapering is that we are worried about perceived costs, we should consider using other tools to clearly convey that highly accommodative policy is still justified based on economic forecasts alone.  This could be done by lowering the unemployment rate threshold for lifting short-term interest rates to 6 percent, as in alternative A; considering some modest reduction in interest on reserves; or possibly even considering alternative ways that the interest on reserves could be administered, such as changing the policies that only banks that were expanding lending would receive interest on excess reserves.  My own view is that tapering in September may be premature.  Currently, my view of the economy is somewhat weaker than at the last meeting.  The financial conditions aretighter, and many of those effects have yet to show through.  And inflation remains stubbornly low.  We will not have seen inflation improvements by the September meeting.  We will have only some early indicators of the impact of tighter financial conditions, but it’s unlikely that the readings will be clear enough to make a clear call for tapering.  Unless incoming data are strong enough that we expect the unemployment rate to fall to 7.2 to 7.3 percent at the end of the year, consistent with the central tendency of the last SEP, we should continue with the current program.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their opinion on the language and decisions made by the committee, but there is no direct disagreement or argument presented.


Passage number 237.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 238.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude from someone named President Bullard.


Passage number 239.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  I think the “foreseeable future” may be considered dead by acclamation.  It’s wonderful to see the Committee in agreement.  [Laughter]  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and humor, indicating a positive and harmonious atmosphere.


Passage number 240.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Seize on it when you can, right. CHARIMAN BERNANKE.  I take what I can get.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It simply shows a conversation between two individuals discussing the potential opportunity to seize something.


Passage number 241.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ll start with some comments regarding today’s decision.  As I indicated yesterday, the incoming data have continued to suggest to me that we’ve seen substantial improvement in labor market conditions and in the outlook for the labor market since we launched the asset purchase program last September.  The Tealbook’s forecast of private payroll gains in 2013 has risen by about 50,000 jobs per month since last September, and, as of our last meeting, the central tendency of the SEP forecast of the unemployment rate is about ½ percentage point lower than it was last September.  In light of this progress in the labor market, and as long as the incoming data support a forecast of PCE inflation gradually rising toward our 2 percent objective, I continue to believe that it will be appropriate toslow the pace of asset purchases sometime soon.  While I think the progress of labor markets has been sufficient to warrant slowing our purchases now, I know that such a move would surprise markets, so I support waiting until the September meeting to take action.  The September timing would be consistent with market expectations that our communications have established, and waiting until September will also give us some additional data.  We will get data on the July and August labor markets and more data on the trend PCE inflation. Under these circumstances, I support alternative B.  The latest Survey of Primary Dealers and the Blue Chip financial forecasts indicate that respondents expect a statement largely similar to the one we issued in June, and they expect some slowing in purchases in September.  So I would prefer a version of the statement that introduces relatively few changes at this time.  Minimizing the changes would reduce the chances that we cause a shift in expectations of market participants regarding the likely timing of a reduction in asset purchases.  And as we discussed earlier and yesterday, we’re just not certain how markets are going to react to wording changes.  Around this table, we have different interpretations of the wording changes, and, as President Rosengren pointed out earlier, our experience with predicting how markets are going to react to wording changes has not been great.  So, accordingly, I would prefer that we use the same language from our last statement in the last sentence of paragraph 2 in alternative B and paragraph 5 in alternative B. Turning to the broader strategy questions that you raised yesterday, Mr. Chairman, first, consistent with my view that we should start to slow purchases sometime soon, I am comfortable with the broader plan of beginning to slow purchases sometime later this year—my preference would be at our next meeting—and then taking measured steps to gradually slow and eventually stop purchases when the unemployment rate is about 7 percent.  So I am comfortable with theplan that you’ve laid out.  Responding to your second question, once we have agreement on a plan, I would support conveying the plan in our statement.  I think that kind of communication is important to our credibility and to the transparency of policy, and it will also help, obviously, to stabilize market expectations as best we can.  In responding to your third question, as long as the path of economic activity and inflation evolves more or less as we currently expect, I would not support changing the forward guidance on short-term interest rates, for a few reasons.  One is that I don’t believe additional easing of policy would be warranted, given our current outlook.  Second, I think it would be difficult to credibly commit to guidance for a period any longer than we already have.  Given that our current guidance has already raised questions about whether we are tying the hands of future Committees, I think going out any further or giving any further guidance would be challenging.  And then, finally, changing our current guidance, as others have already commented, could raise questions about our willingness to stick to any guidance, and therefore raise some questions about our credibility.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Ms. Pianalto discussing her views and preferences on the timing of asset purchases and the broader strategy.


Passage number 242.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage shows gratitude and appreciation towards President Lockhart.


Passage number 243.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B today.  I’ll comment first on the statement and then offer a few thoughts on communication strategy. In my view, the Chairman’s press conference after the last meeting, the Chairman’s congressional testimony, and our collective communications have been effective in clarifying the Committee’s asset purchase policy framework.  Both internally and publicly, we’re positioned for decisions to step down over the next several meetings and, ultimately, phase out the LSAP program without having provided a detailed road map.  That’s where we are today.  I think that recent communications have accomplished enough for now, so I accept the case for a minimalist approach to the statement coming out of this meeting.  That said, I can support the language ofB(5′) because it explicitly reaffirms and reinforces messages recently and already communicated that I think need reinforcement.  It doesn’t introduce new information.  I think the description in paragraph 5′ of what is a highly accommodative stance for monetary policy does reflect the Committee’s consensus.  Those are my comments on the statement. Looking ahead to answer the first question posed by the Chairman yesterday, I am comfortable with the contingent plan for adjusting the asset purchase program discussed at the last meeting.  I think an initial adjustment in the pace of asset purchases could be justified in September if the next two employment reports follow the recent trend and a disinflationary pattern does not reemerge in the inflation data.  I hope the data cooperate and this is the way things play out, but I believe we have to contemplate a situation in which incoming data and economic conditions, along with the outlook that they support, do not alone justify reductions in asset purchases.  And I’ll comment a little bit more in a moment on that thought. The Committee and the Chairman have—for valid reasons, I think—positioned the stopping criteria as purely grounded in economic conditionality.  I’m concerned that the Committee could, in the future, face a quandary at later decision points, and that quandary is that the Committee, on balance, wants to proceed with the phaseout of the LSAP, but it cannot clearly or without qualification claim economic justification based on recent data and the updated outlook.  I fear a form of persistent ambiguity.  The comments of Governor Tarullo yesterday—he made the point that conditions may not clarify—are similar to my ongoing concern.  So I think we would be well advised to think about options—a sort of decision tree—if the data don’t cooperate and deliver a completely compelling case one way or the other.  I understand that pressing on with the current pace of asset purchases is an option and may be the only option if employment gains slow materially or the inflation picture deteriorates.  But ifincoming data are mixed, the situation is ambiguous, and the Committee is, on balance, inclined to wind down the program, we may have to evolve the message about stopping criteria while maintaining or even strengthening the level of policy accommodation.  There seems to be no appetite for that in the Committee at this point, but, to develop the thought a little further, I think there is a good case to be made that we have seen considerable progress accomplished since the launch of the LSAP in September 2012.  I also think that a case can be made for the relative efficacy of extending or modifying forward guidance versus continuing purchases if we view the economy as requiring additional support.  This positioning would, in effect, say that quantitative easing is useful and is having some effect, but we have multiple tools to use tactically, and the question is, what combination is best in the context of evolving economic conditions.  I appreciated the memo “Some Possible Adjustments to the Committee’s Forward Guidance for the Federal Funds Rate,” and I thank the staff members for their thinking on this subject.  I don’t think the quantification of welfare gain has to be accepted as definitive to see the potential usefulness of a spectrum of forward-guidance options that could serve to preserve or even increase accommodation if and as the LSAP is phased out.  So, to sum up, I lean toward continuing on with the plan for winding down our asset purchase program that was suggested by the Chairman at the last meeting.  If the data continue to present a mixed picture—and I fear that they will—I prefer a bias toward moving toward the wind-down and a move in the direction of strengthening our forward guidance if more policy accommodation is called for. On the three questions posed by the Chairman, I’m comfortable with the basic wind-down plan, as I’ve already suggested.  As I understand it, that would involve starting in September, perhaps more later in the year, with a conclusion by midyear.  I have to say that I’m a little confused about whether we’re talking about highlighted A(4), which includes a 7 percentmarker as part of this contingent plan, or whether we’re excluding that notion.  I distinguish between the two.  The basic plan, as I just laid out—September, later this year, and midyear—I’m comfortable with.  I’m not so comfortable with elevating the 7 percent to something closer to being a threshold, as opposed to a coincident marker that would accompany what we think is the basic plan and the basic rollout of the economic conditions.  Also, I’m not comfortable with putting a very explicit, road-map-like plan out there quite yet.  I prefer laying out an explicit road map when there is more-tangible evidence that the economy is on the desired track.  We could do that after the first move—which may be in September, in my mind—or later in the fall.  When the Committee is ready to embrace a timetable and a step-down plan, then I favor putting it in the statement.  I think the statement is the strongest of our communication tools; it speaks for the Committee.  And I would suggest that there could be awkwardness in the fall, around succession and so forth, which would make the Committee speaking all the more important.  On changing or strengthening forward guidance on the fed funds rate target, I’ve already said that I welcome this broad concept as a complement to our tool bag, although we might strengthen guidance in some way early on to counter accommodation that has been lost with the introduction of the tapering idea.  We could do that.  I actually favor, on balance, holding this tool in reserve to potentially add stimulus as needed as the wind-down in quantitative easing is in progress.  Those are my thoughts.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Lockhart, expresses his support for alternative B and offers his thoughts on communication strategy. He also discusses his concerns about the potential ambiguity in the Committee's decision-making process and suggests considering different options in case the data does not provide a clear justification for reducing asset purchases. Overall, there is no clear disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 244.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement expressing gratitude towards President George.


Passage number 245.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ve incorporated my answers to each of the questions in my statement. Over the course of this year, I’ve expressed my concerns about the open-ended approach to our asset purchases and aggressive monetary stimulus.  With ongoing improvement in labormarket conditions, along with the potential costs and uncertain benefits of LSAPs, I would like to see the Committee include in this statement a more explicit signal that the pace of asset purchases will be reduced this year, as early as September.  The stated goal of the open-ended program was to promote a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market in the context of price stability, not to achieve maximum employment.  I believe our projections point to such an outlook.  As President Pianalto noted, the Summary of Economic Projections from last September shows that the unemployment rate was expected to be about 7¾ percent in the fourth quarter of this year.  The most recent set of projections now foresees an unemployment rate of about 7¼ percent—that is, ½ percentage point lower than last September.  In terms of employment gains, the Survey of Professional Forecasters last September anticipated net employment gains of about 150,000 per month four quarters ahead, and their most recent survey now anticipates about 185,000 per month four quarters ahead. Following the June meeting, the press conference provided a road map for the future of asset purchases.  In my view, the data have been sufficiently positive to continue with this plan.  Given this backdrop, and as the primary dealer survey indicates, market participants now expect a reduction in the pace of purchases in September.  Deviating from the direction laid out at the press conference could potentially confuse markets regarding our reaction function and result in another bout of asset price volatility.  Alternative B as written does not provide a clear statement of intention about asset purchases that would be consistent with the communication since the last meeting.  A clear statement is important, in my view, because it would acknowledge that the economy has continued to heal and is sufficiently stronger to warrant small steps toward normalization.  My preferred approach would recognize in a prudent manner that we do intend to remain highly accommodative even as we begin to retire our use of this unconventional policyinstrument.  I would support including language in this statement along the lines of an earlier draft of the policy options that says, in a more general way, “The Committee anticipates moderating the pace of its security purchases later this year, contingent on the outlook.”   In terms of forward guidance, I question whether adjusting the existing threshold is appropriate.  The use of this unconventional tool is not yet well understood in practice.  Changing it poses risks to our credibility and potentially to the stability of longer-term inflation expectations.  In addition, announcing a lower threshold will likely require, as shown in the Board staff’s memo, a rather rapid rise in rates once liftoff begins.  I would be concerned that, after such an extended period of near-zero rates, moving rates up quickly could be destabilizing for financial markets and pose risks to financial stability and sustainable economic growth.  Instead of adjusting thresholds, I would prefer to signal that increases in the fed funds rate after liftoff are likely to be gradual as we assess the economy’s response.  And I would agree with President Williams that the SEP gives us a vehicle to do so. I do feel compelled to make one comment about Governor Yellen’s cross-country trip, and that is to thank her for making us stop in Kansas City.  I am quite familiar with that long slog across Kansas, although I can tell you that it beats taking the Yellow Brick Road.  [Laughter]  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker, Ms. George, is expressing her concerns and preferences, but she does not explicitly dispute or oppose any specific viewpoints or statements.


Passage number 246.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no passage provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 247.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’d almost forgotten that I also had a comment on Governor Yellen’s trip.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply thanking the chairman and mentioning that they have a comment on Governor Yellen's trip.


Passage number 248.
 MS. YELLEN.  Uh-oh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. "Uh-oh" is an expression of surprise or concern, but it does not indicate disagreement or contention.


Passage number 249.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  This might be a good time for coffee.  We’ll start again at 11:10 a.m.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any elements of contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement and suggestion unrelated to any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 250.
  [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Why don’t we recommence, and I’ll start with Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The person suggesting to recommence the conversation and start with Governor Yellen implies a desire to continue the discussion without any conflicting opinions being expressed.


Passage number 251.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 252.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I was tempted to follow the lead of Don Kohn and simply state that, for the 41st time, I support alternative B.  [Laughter]  But you gave me an opening to talk about communications strategy and what I think this Committee should do after I’m no longer here to vote, so I’m going to take that.  Starting with the language that is in B, I had all of the same comments about paragraph 2 that President Williams already made, but I like A(2), and I think that may be a better alternative.  I also had the same thoughts about “foreseeable future,” but I’m not going to deliver any postmortem blows to that phrase.  I think the clarification in 5′—that the term “highly accommodative stance of monetary policy” refers to continued low rates and maintaining the size of the balance sheet—is important   In some of the coverage of the Chairman’s comments in his various intermeeting statements, every time he said “an ongoing need for highly accommodative policies,” they would assume that that was walkingback the expectation to reduce asset purchases rather than referring to what was going to happen with short-term rates. In terms of the questions, I want to start by saying clearly, for the minutes, that I fully support the strategy you outlined in the press conference.  And I think markets heard pretty clearly the message about asset purchases, but some seemed to miss the distinction between asset purchases and the threshold for short-term rates.  So it’s appropriate that we do change paragraph 5, rather than paragraphs 3 and 4, to reemphasize the message that, even when we start reducing asset purchases, that doesn’t pull forward the liftoff of the fed funds rate. In response to the questions about paragraphs 3 and 4 and forward guidance, I want to caution against the temptation to oversteer communication, especially with the first reduction in purchases.  I was really worried when I read the language of 4′ in the first policy drafts that were circulated for this meeting, and I see that the language is still in alternative C, which presumably functions as a staging ground for the time when it is appropriate to reduce the pace of purchases.  I think it tries to set out too many conditions for the ultimate stopping of purchases, which, at that point, may be at very low levels.  Even if you don’t share my concerns about the cost of a very large balance sheet, I think you can agree that stopping or substantially slowing purchases before we can declare victory could be very damaging to our credibility, and that credibility is key to the effectiveness of forward guidance.  So I wouldn’t set out so many hurdles to clear all at the same time.  Save the triple toe loop for the conditions necessary to start tightening policy.   Along the same lines, even if you do hit 7 percent as expected, I think it would be very difficult to communicate that a 7 percent unemployment rate in paragraph 4 is a stopping rule, while the 6½ percent unemployment rate in the next paragraph is a threshold.  If you stop purchases when you get to 7 percent, why wouldn’t markets then expect that you’d begin raisingrates when you get to 6½ percent.  So I would urge that you consider leaving 7 percent as a soft target in the Chairman’s remarks and something to talk about, but that you not convert it to a hard target that’s contractualized in the statement.  I think there’s a real opportunity, as I’ve said before, to rehearse your approach to ultimately raising short-term rates in your approach to adjusting the pace of purchases, and I would urge you to leave yourselves the option to make adjustments in small enough increments that their value is largely through their signaling and to demonstrate that you can move quite slowly and deliberately and in a data-contingent way. I also hope that you’ll save the option to reduce the 6½ percent threshold for one of two conditions where it might be needed—either (1) as a way to compensate if you’re stopping purchases in response to cost concerns rather than because they’re no longer necessary or (2) as a way to push back on expectations for higher rates if, as you get closer to the threshold, market expectations for higher rates start to build before you’re actually ready to pull the trigger.  I firmly believe that this time, stronger economic growth is just over the horizon, but we haven’t actually seen it yet.  And as badly as I want to see this Committee take the first step, I hope you won’t take too many steps until you’re certain that there won’t be any required backtracking. Someone said yesterday that it appears that the surveys show that we’re very good at communicating with former Fed staff [laughter].  Soon I’m going to find out how good you are at communicating with former Fed Governors.  In any case, know that I will be watching and pulling for you and our economy every step of the way.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement with alternative C and the language in paragraph 4'. They also express concern about setting too many conditions for stopping or slowing asset purchases and argue against converting the 7 percent unemployment rate into a hard target.


Passage number 253.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you for that final summing up.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply expressing gratitude.


Passage number 254.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  A Solomonic solution is to cut the sentences in half.  [Laughter]  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply suggests a solution, which is met with laughter.


Passage number 255.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude addressed to Governor Stein.


Passage number 256.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite and appreciative message.


Passage number 257.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will support alternative B at today’s meeting.  I look forward to the opportunity to one day support a descendant of alternative C when the data justify doing so.  As far as the statement language is concerned, I have two quick comments.  First, with the hope of clarifying, but at the risk of some other result, I offer this at the end of paragraph 2.  The last sentence would read as follows:  “The Committee also anticipates that inflation will move back toward its 2 percent objective over the medium term, but recognizes the risks of persistent low inflation to economic performance.”  So it incorporates the language from A(2) that Governor Duke mentioned.  I offer that as an alternative.  As far as paragraph 5 is concerned, I have already signed off on 5′.  I am fine with it, although I have to say that I, too, am taken by the logic of “Less is more,” “Keep it simple, stupid,” and all of those expressions.  And I probably would have a modest preference for the existing 5.  Having said that, I hereby tender my proxy on the statement. Turning to your three questions, first, I am comfortable with the asset purchase strategy as articulated by the Chairman in the June press conference and as amplified in subsequent public statements.  I think that reductions in purchases, when they come, should be pro rata in the absence of an overpowering reason to differentiate between MBS and Treasuries, which I do not currently observe.  As far as including the new stopping rule in the statement is concerned, Iwould start by pointing out that the operative section of the Chairman’s press conference, in which he carefully articulated the new rule for reducing purchases and then ultimately stopping them, runs to one-half of a typed page here, not including my many marginal notes.  And my growing body of data suggests that it will be very difficult to incorporate that into a couple of sentences in the statement.  I do agree with Governor Tarullo—we’re probably going to have to say something one way or the other in September.  My view would be that we do no harm today and not attempt to incorporate it, but that we just understand that it’s quite likely we’ll have to say something one way or the other in September, and leave it at that. On the third question, for the foreseeable future, I guess I see limited or no attraction in changing the thresholds, except in a few very unlikely cases.  For example, if we saw strong evidence of a deterioration in the cost–benefit tradeoff or if we found ourselves in the middle of a really sharp, unwanted tightening cycle, then I think you put thresholds on the table.  For reasons that others have articulated, I wouldn’t do so now.  We need to let this whole process—that of getting the path of asset purchases clarified going forward—really run its course for a while before we start messing around with thresholds.  Yes, it’s appropriate to clarify our existing objective function, but I think we should stay away from the other ideas that were in the staff memo—for now for reasons of confusion in the marketplace and, as others have mentioned for reasons of undermining our own commitment.  Also, because of those two issues, you’re not going to get anything for it.  The whole idea is to get more accommodation out of it when and if you do it.  If the very act of changing a threshold or changing the policy is unclear or not well understood, or if it really calls into question our commitment, then I think you don’t get anything for it and I wouldn’t do it.  That concludes my remarks, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses their support for alternative B and their willingness to support alternative C in the future. They also offer a suggestion for clarifying the statement language and express their agreement with certain aspects of the asset purchase strategy and the thresholds.


Passage number 258.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The phrase "Thank you" and the mention of "Vice Chairman" do not indicate any form of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 259.
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.  I’m very much in the minimalist camp.  So I want to really talk about paragraph 2 and paragraph 5 because those are the things that we’re debating.  On the one hand, I do think that there is a little bit more risk from inflation being too low, but what I don’t understand is, what’s changed since the last meeting.  We didn’t recognize that risk at the last meeting.  And have the risks increased from the last meeting.  I would say probably not.  David, do you have a view.  Risks are about the same as they were at the last meeting.  Or maybe they’re less because the nonmarket factors have reverted back.  We’ve had higher energy prices in the interim   So people are going to be a little bit surprised by highlighting that at this meeting when we didn’t highlight it at the last meeting.  I’m wondering what inference they’re going to draw from that.  What I guess I would want to throw out as a question or something for consideration is whether they might draw the inference from that that the dialing down of asset purchases in September is now less likely because we’re concerned about inflation risks, whereas we weren’t concerned about those risks at the last meeting.  I’m pretty willing to go along with what the Committee decides on this, but I do think we want to be careful not to inadvertently alter the market expectations about tapering by how we change the language in paragraph 2.  There’s a real risk there that I just want to throw out, and I think we need to think about it.  If we do this, do we make market expectations of tapering in September less likely.  Then, if we taper in September—let’s say the data support doing that—are we doing a zig and then a zag to monetary policy and creating unnecessary volatility that could be avoided by just sticking with what we had.  Now, one thing you could do if you wanted to note that inflation has gotten your attention, without doing anything in paragraph 2, would be to say that “inflation continues to run below the Committee’s longer-run objective” in paragraph 1—to underscore that you’ve noted it, it continues, and it’s on your radar screen.  Markets will notethat change, but it won’t be such a big deal that you’ll be altering expectations.  That’s the first thing I’d like to raise in terms of this alternative B. The second thing is on paragraph 5′, where there seems to be a debate between 5′ and the old paragraph 5.  I worry a little bit about 5′, in the sense that it says that the “Committee today reaffirmed its view” that it’s going to do all of these things.  Is the market going to take that as a statement that you’re saying that because you decided you’re going to taper in September.  So it’s actually being taken as a stronger statement about September action because you’re making all of these changes, which you really wouldn’t need to make if you were actually going to keep market expectations about policy where they are.  There’s a risk that 5′ as written will actually be interpreted as making September tapering more likely, because I think they’ll say, “Gee, why are they reaffirming all of this stuff today, unless they might want to signal something.”  So I guess that pushes me a little bit in the direction of, do no harm and go back to the original paragraph 5. In response to the questions, shockingly, I’m very comfortable with what the Chairman did at the press conference.  After all, we gave him our proxy, and so it would be a little weird for us to take that proxy away after the fact.  In terms of conveying more in the statement—not now.  I think that maybe when we actually dial down purchases for the first time, I can imagine changing the language to something similar to that in C(4) to explain what this means going forward.  But there’s no upside to changing the statement right now.  With respect to changing the forward guidance on rates, I think that would be a very strange thing to do right now.  On the one hand, we’re potentially dialing back asset purchases, not because of efficacy and costs but because we’re actually making progress toward our objectives.  But then we’re turning around and actually lowering our threshold.  So, what is it.  Are we trying to add accommodation.  Are we trying to take accommodation away.  I think doing it now would be really confusing topeople.  It would basically undercut the asset purchase program by reinforcing the idea that we were reducing it because of efficacy and costs, not because we were actually being more optimistic about the outlook.  In terms of changing the threshold in the future, I wouldn’t completely rule it out, but I think you have to have a good reason for doing so.  It’s better just to keep reinforcing that it’s a threshold, not a trigger, and it seems to me we’ve actually made some progress on that.  I also think that we have a lot of moving parts in this program already.  And so every time you make a change, boy, you’d better be really clear on what the benefit of making that change is relative to the cost of forcing the market to learn what that change means.  I just don’t see adding a lot more complexity in terms of changing thresholds or adding inflation floors; I don’t see the benefits there as being worth the costs.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker is expressing disagreement or contention about the potential changes to the language in paragraph 2 and paragraph 5. They question whether the risks have changed since the last meeting and express concern about altering market expectations and causing unnecessary volatility. They also disagree with changing the forward guidance on rates.


Passage number 260.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Thank you, all.  One advantage of not having a press conference is that we have plenty of time to discuss these issues.  I guess that’s one definite advantage. Let me try to summarize a few things.  First, on the three questions, with the exception of President Bullard, who was concerned, understandably, about making the guidance if not actually noncontingent, at least apparently noncontingent, the great majority of the Committee is at least broadly comfortable with the asset purchase plan that has been laid out; so that’s a good thing for us to clarify.  On language relating to asset purchases, there were a few people who were ready to put A(4) in the statement today, but only a couple.  There were a couple more who, in principle, would like to do something today but didn’t necessarily agree with A(4).  I believe the majority here does think it’s important to work toward at least possible options for explaining the contingent plan for asset purchases, but I didn’t get the sense that most participants wanted todo that today.  But I do think it’s important—I’ll come back to this in just a second—that we follow through on these suggestions.   Likewise with the rate guidance.  I didn’t hear a majority for doing that today, but there was a lot of interesting discussion—in particular, President Kocherlakota’s idea that we could further clarify the reaction function after we get to a 6.5 percent unemployment, for example, and President Bullard’s thought that we could do that by including further clarification about inflation and how that affects the reaction function.  I think those are useful points.  It was also suggested that changing the guidance is not something we should do lightly, but there would potentially be contingencies in which we might want to consider doing that; in particular, if, for cost reasons, we ended the asset purchase program earlier than otherwise, or if we did feel we had a need for additional accommodation that couldn’t be provided in another way. What I would suggest—and, of course, the staff and I and others will review these comments—is that, over the intermeeting period, we should be working, on a contingent basis, on language of both types.  In particular, on asset purchases, we should be thinking about both the contingency in which we do reduce purchases in September and the contingency in which we don’t.  Under both of those contingencies, we should be asking the question, would there be useful language that we could put in that would both clarify why we took the decision we took and give further guidance about what would determine future action.  That’s something, perhaps—and I say this without having consulted with the staff—on which we could also get some input from research directors as we think about that.  Likewise with the rate guidance,  I think we’ve gotten some good clarification about what the Committee thinks is the most productive direction here, and it’s not going to hurt us to be working on some language and having that available.  And then we can, of course, always decide whether to use it or not.In terms of today’s action, I’m grateful to Governor Duke for endorsing alternative B yet again.  [Laughter]  I think, as Governor Raskin put it, that the consensus was to chill and to do minimal language changes at this meeting.  However, there are some issues that I don’t think were completely resolved in the go-round, and so we need to tackle those now. If we can take a look at alternative B, I think virtually nobody made a comment about B(1).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is describing the discussion and positions of the Committee members, but it does not indicate any conflict or disagreement between them.


Passage number 261.
 MR. FISHER.  Vice Chairman Dudley did.  He made what I thought was a good comment about B(1).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply mentions that Vice Chairman Dudley made a comment about B(1), which the speaker thought was good.


Passage number 262.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  What was your comment about B(1).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is a straightforward question and does not involve any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 263.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Well, I said that if you decided not to put the language on inflation in paragraph 2, you could decide to put the “continues to” language in paragraph 1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing a suggestion or alternative option to consider, without expressing any disagreement or argument about the decision being made.


Passage number 264.
   MR. FISHER.  Yes, I like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fisher expresses agreement with something mentioned previously.


Passage number 265.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That was only conditional on the decision on paragraph 2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is not discussing any disagreement or contention. It is stating a conditional statement related to a decision in paragraph 2.


Passage number 266.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I thought the “continues” language is in paragraph 2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any explicit mention or discussion of contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a personal thought or observation about the use of language in paragraph 2.


Passage number 267.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The passage is not presenting any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas. It is providing a straightforward statement or information.


Passage number 268.
 MS. YELLEN.  Here, “Inflation continues to run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a statement made by Ms. Yellen without any opposing views or conflicting information provided.


Passage number 269.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  “Inflation continues to run”—oh, I see.  Okay.  I didn’t appreciate that.  All right.  Well, we’ll come back to the inflation question in just a second.  But, looking at other issues, we could probably live with going back to “moderate pace.”  But given that the first half was more or less on expectation, although not by quarter by quarter, are people comfortable with the language that refers to “modest pace during the first half of the year”.  It’snot a particularly downbeat thing overall, because, of course, we also combine that in paragraph 2 with the expectation that it picks up from its recent pace.  Any objection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification and asking for opinions on certain language and statements.


Passage number 270.
 MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage only provides a statement or address from Mr. Lacker to Mr. Chairman.


Passage number 271.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I'm unable to provide an analysis for that specific passage.


Passage number 272.
 MR. LACKER.  “Proceed at a moderate pace” seems consistent with saying that economic growth is going to be as it’s been.  “Pick up” seems to me like a strengthening in the portrayal of the outlook.  Is that your interpretation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker offers his interpretation of the phrases "proceed at a moderate pace" and "pick up" but does not express disagreement or argue against the other person's interpretation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 273.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  But this is in conjunction with the statement that we have a modest pace in the first half of the year—so, picking up from its recent pace.  I think most people would agree that 1.4 percent is not the second-half mode. Okay.  We have this modified language on housing.  We take note of mortgage rates having risen somewhat.  We responded to President Fisher’s concerns about financial conditions having tightened somewhat and narrowed the concern.  So this will signal a bit of concern about the intermeeting changes.  I think that’s what I heard yesterday. Now, this takes us to the inflation language.  As I said, most people are happy, more or less, with market expectations and don’t want to risk changing those too much.  But I do think there was a bit of concern that we were too complacent about inflation.  I believe that it is in fact the case that, if, for example, inflation were to actually move downward over the next two months, that would affect our thinking about September and about accommodation.  So my own preference would be to do something there if we can.  In part, I’m also trying to respond to President Bullard, who was very concerned about that at the last meeting.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker indicates that there are differing opinions among the members of the group, with some expressing concern about inflation and wanting to take action, while others are more satisfied with current market expectations and don't want to risk changing them too much. Additionally, the speaker mentions specific individuals within the group who have expressed differing concerns, indicating further disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 274.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  One thing we could do that would be very mild is to say “anticipates that inflation will move back toward 2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: The passage suggests a mild action that could potentially be taken, but it does not provide a definitive answer on whether or not there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 275.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But that seems to be complacent.  We’re saying it’s going to be fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing optimism and confidence.


Passage number 276.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  “And will continue to pay close attention to inflation.”  Don’t use the “but.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply indicating that the speaker will continue to monitor or remain attentive to inflation.


Passage number 277.
”  MR. TARULLO.  People objected to including that last clause, though.  People were worried that it would be difficult to get it out once you put it in.  I think that was a concern some people had.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 278.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot provide an answer without the passage. Please provide the passage.


Passage number 279.
 MR. FISHER.  I actually thought Vice Chairman Dudley made a sensible suggestion.  I think if you make that adjustment to the first paragraph, it’s a bit of a change in tone.  It notices that “inflation continues to run below,” and then I don’t think you have to work very hard and put in that new language in paragraph 2.  So that’s one point.  Before we get to that, though, why do we keep saying “since the fall”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, is agreeing with Vice Chairman Dudley's suggestion and expressing his support for making a small adjustment in the first paragraph.


Passage number 280.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  On the risks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. This is because the passage is not discussing any specific topic or making any claims that could lead to disagreement or contention. The passage is simply mentioning the existence of risks, which is generally accepted as a factual statement.


Passage number 281.
 MR. EVANS.  Where are you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statement or indication of contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a question asked by Mr. Evans.


Passage number 282.
 MR. FISHER.  It says that “downside risks to the outlook for the economy and the labor market” have diminished “since the fall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Fisher regarding the decrease in downside risks to the economic outlook and labor market.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 283.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Because we’re thinking that the asset purchase program started in the fall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Because we're thinking" implies that there is some uncertainty or differing opinions about the statement that follows.


Passage number 284.
 MR. FISHER.  So that’s the reason.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Fisher without any opposing or conflicting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 285.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s the reason.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement provides a reason or explanation for something without presenting any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 286.
 MR. FISHER.  I wonder if people remember that.  It seems we should use it in every statement.  Are we going to say that this fall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about using something in every statement without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas mentioned.


Passage number 287.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 288.
 MR. EVANS.  On the inflation risk, this is the way that I think about it.  I don’t think it’s right to take the June statement as the status quo.  In April, we added that sentence that indicated we might move in either direction on asset purchases, and the markets were attracted to the idea that low inflation might lead us to increase asset purchases.  So what we did was a little bit more of a surprise.  After the June statement, one of the things that you did very well at the NBER Summer Institute was that you gave a lot more voice to the risks of low inflation.  My friend Jim Bullard was sitting in the front row.  You talked about that effusively enough that I think the status quo should be thought of as your commentary there.  And if that could be added to the statement, however so slightly, there’d be a benefit.  I’m not saying we should make a lot of changes, because you’re right—we don’t want them to all of a sudden think that’s going to be a reason to move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Evans is suggesting that the statement should be modified to include more emphasis on the risks of low inflation, while the speaker (not mentioned in the passage) may have a different perspective.


Passage number 289.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Let me put out two suggestions here.  Oh—President Bullard.  Sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging President Bullard's presence but interrupting to make two suggestions.


Passage number 290.
 MR. BULLARD.  Could we consider Governor Powell’s suggestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It is simply discussing a suggestion made by Governor Powell.


Passage number 291.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I was about to say that Governor Powell can help me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker believed Governor Powell could assist them.


Passage number 292.
  You had, “The Committee— MS. YELLEN.  “Recognizes the risks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that the committee recognizes the risks without providing any further information.


Passage number 293.
”   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  “The Committee also anticipates that, with appropriate policy accommodation”—or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of anticipation regarding the potential effects of policy accommodation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 294.
  MS. YELLEN.  No—without.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. MS. YELLEN is denying or contradicting something.


Passage number 295.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No.  “The Committee also anticipates that inflation will move back toward its 2 percent objective over the medium term, but it recognizes the risks of very low inflation to economic performance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement that acknowledges the risks of very low inflation to economic performance but expresses the expectation that inflation will move back towards its 2 percent objective over time.


Passage number 296.
” MR. POWELL.  Here it is:  comma, “but recognizes the risks of persistent low inflation to economic performance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact that they recognize the risks of persistent low inflation to economic performance.


Passage number 297.
” VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But what’s “low inflation”.  Is “low inflation” 2..
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage is a simple question, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 298.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  In paragraph A(2), we have, “recognizes that the persistence of very low inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact or observation.


Passage number 299.
”  Low inflation— MR. BULLARD.  Very low—yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard simply agrees with the statement that inflation is very low.


Passage number 300.
 MR. FISHER.  But are we sending a signal that we expect continued very low inflation, or does that put us in a corner.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: This passage does not show any sign of contention or disagreement. It is a statement asking for clarity or confirmation rather than expressing disagreement or contradicting a previous statement.


Passage number 301.
 MR. EVANS.  “Recognizes the risk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that Mr. Evans recognizes the risk, without any conflicting opinions or arguments being presented.


Passage number 302.
” MR. BULLARD.  No, it says it goes back over the medium term.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply clarifies a statement by stating that it refers to a period of time in the future.


Passage number 303.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All it’s saying is that we think we’re going to get back to 2 percent, but we just want people to know that we’re aware that very low inflation is not a good thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It is simply explaining that the speaker is aware that very low inflation is not desirable.


Passage number 304.
 MR. LACKER.  I thought inflation was part of our mandate.  This makes it seem as though we care about it because of its effect on something else.  I’m not quite sure how it lines up with our mandate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate contention or disagreement. Mr. Lacker is expressing confusion about how inflation aligns with their mandate, but there is no indication of disagreement with anyone else's views or opinions.


Passage number 305.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I said “economic performance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of opinion or observation.


Passage number 306.
”  Presumably, that includes things like— MR. LACKER.  Our welfare function—a broader welfare function.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a continuation of a statement or discussion topic.


Passage number 307.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  A broader welfare function.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "A broader welfare function" does not indicate contention or disagreement. It simply describes the subject of discussion without expressing any opposing views or conflicts.


Passage number 308.
MR. LACKER.  Not economic growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It only states "MR. LACKER. Not economic growth." without any conflicting views or arguments present.


Passage number 309.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I didn’t say “growth.”  I said “economic performance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply clarifying their previous statement.


Passage number 310.
” MR. LACKER.  Yes, I know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement visible in this passage. The speaker simply acknowledges that they have knowledge of something without expressing any disagreement or conflicting views.


Passage number 311.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s the idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The phrase "That's the idea" does not express any form of disagreement or contention. It simply indicates agreement or understanding with a previously stated or implied idea.


Passage number 312.
” MR. LACKER.  Yes, but it makes it look like an intermediate objective for us rather than part of our mandate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply pointing out that the mentioned objective might be perceived as an intermediate goal rather than being within their direct mandate.


Passage number 313.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But, ultimately, it is an intermediate objective.  And why do we care about inflation, except that it affects the costs.  The reason we have a 2 percent inflation objective, I think, is that we also care about employment.  If it was not for that, we would probably go to zero.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 314.
   VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Why not say “and recognizes the potential dangers of inflation persistently below our 2 percent objective”.  Because I’m a little worried about saying “low inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their concerns about saying "low inflation," rather than stating any disagreement with another person or viewpoint.


Passage number 315.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  “Recognizes that inflation persistently below our 2 percent objective could pose risks to economic performance”—something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presenting a commonly acknowledged fact that inflation consistently below the 2 percent objective could potentially have negative effects on economic performance.


Passage number 316.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes, something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The phrase "something like that" does not provide enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement. Therefore, the answer to this question is 'no.'


Passage number 317.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "Governor" alone does not provide enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 318.
 MS. DUKE.  The thing I like about A(2) is that we recognize the risk first, and then we reassert that we expect it to move back toward the 2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a positive opinion about A(2) and its approach to recognizing and managing risk.


Passage number 319.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You want the risks noted first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a straightforward statement expressing a preference for the risks to be noted first. There is no disagreement or contention expressed.


Passage number 320.
 MS. DUKE.  I like the risks noted first.  It takes the edge off a little bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses a personal preference and acknowledges that it helps to alleviate some concerns.


Passage number 321.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  “The Committee recognizes that inflation that is persistently below its 2 percent objective . . .
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.   The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states the recognition of the Committee regarding inflation being below its 2 percent objective.


Passage number 322.
”MS. DUKE.  Just as it is in A(2).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without more context.


Passage number 323.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, I was just trying to make that one change that the Vice Chairman suggested—“The Committee recognizes that inflation that is persistently below its 2 percent objective could pose risks to economic performance, but it anticipates . . .”  Get rid of “appropriate policy accommodation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It indicates a proposal to make a specific change.


Passage number 324.
” MR. FISHER.  Yes.  That would be good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that something would be good without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 325.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Is that going to be all right for people.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply asks a question about whether something will be suitable for people.


Passage number 326.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes, I think that’s good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response simply expresses agreement and approval.


Passage number 327.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Is that all right, President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement or question.


Passage number 328.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You’re flagging it as a potential risk as opposed to a current one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states that something is being flagged as a potential risk instead of a current one. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this statement.


Passage number 329.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  I’m going to read this again—just to make sure everybody has it straight.  So, going off of alternative A, “The Committee recognizes that inflation persistently below its 2 percent objective could pose risks to economic performance, but it anticipates that inflation will move up to its 2 percent objective over the medium term.”  Okay.  Good.  Glad we were able to resolve that.  Okay.  Yes—Governor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply reviewing and clarifying a statement and expressing satisfaction with the resolution.


Passage number 330.
 MR. TARULLO.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: cannot attend the meeting on Friday because he has a conflicting appointment.


Passage number 331.
  Having delegated to you the Solomonic judgment, which you’ve just made— MR. EVANS.  No, you can’t withdraw it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement shows agreement.


Passage number 332.
 [Laughter]   MR. TARULLO.  —I don’t mean to question it, but I do want to ask one question.  If people get questions as to why we inserted that, what’s the answer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 333.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That’s the question I was raising.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The given phrase does not indicate any contention or disagreement between the speaker and the person they are addressing. It simply suggests that the speaker is referring to a question they had previously brought up.


Passage number 334.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The answer is that we think very low inflation is a concern, and we’re going to pay attention to that, but we do think that it will go back to 2 percent.  That’s our forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presenting a unified opinion or forecast.


Passage number 335.
 MR. FISHER.  And we note that it is running below our objective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fisher is simply making an observation that something is running below their objective.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 336.
 MR. EVANS.  It’s consistent with your comments at the NBER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.


Passage number 337.
 MR. TARULLO.  Yes, I just want to make sure everybody agrees on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Tarullo is simply expressing his desire for everyone to be in agreement.


Passage number 338.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It’s a question of a utility function rather than our forecast.  That is, we think very low inflation is a bad thing.  But we don’t expect it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 339.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You’re raising a question of, why this meeting as opposed to the last one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification or questioning the purpose of the meeting compared to a previous one.


Passage number 340.
 MR. TARULLO.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any evidence of contention or disagreement between the speakers, as it only states that Mr. Tarullo responded with a simple "Yes."


Passage number 341.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  And I think the answer would be, well, it continues to run below our objective, and the longer it’s below our objective, the more concerned we get.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their belief that the situation described (the measure running below the objective) is a cause for concern.


Passage number 342.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I would note that we’re making two changes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that there are two changes being made, without expressing any disagreement or arguing about the topic.


Passage number 343.
 MR. EVANS.  But after the statement, the Chairman felt compelled to add additional color at the NBER.  That was important.  Things settled down after that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 344.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  It’s because there was market commentary after that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the existence of market commentary after a certain event or statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 345.
 MR. LACKER.  This will reaffirm the Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In this passage, Mr. Lacker's statement implies that there is a disagreement with the Chairman. However, without further context, it is difficult to determine the exact nature of the contention.


Passage number 346.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’d note that we’re making two changes here.  One of them is acknowledging the risks of very low inflation.  The other is changing the statement “anticipates that inflation likely will run at or below” to a statement that says we think it’s going to go back to 2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is simply stating two changes that are being made, without expressing any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 347.
 MR. FISHER.  I think it’s important.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, is expressing his own opinion and there is no mention of any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 348.
MR. EVANS.  This is a good context for changing the words, in my opinion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Evans, is simply expressing their opinion about changing the words in a certain context. There is no mention of any conflicting viewpoints or disagreement with others.


Passage number 349.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Bill.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I need more context or the specific passage in order to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 350.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Sorry.  I just wanted to point out that, in the words you just read out, you have “its 2 percent objective” twice in the same sentence, very close together.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply pointing out a repetition or redundancy in the words read out.


Passage number 351.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Let’s see.  “Inflation”—I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is simply stating a phrase or word, without any context or opinions expressed. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 352.
   MS. DANKER.  Just drop the second “2 percent”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is straightforward and does not involve any conflicting views or opposing arguments.


Passage number 353.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is yes. Since there is only the statement "Mr. English," it is impossible to determine if there is contention or disagreement based solely on this information.


Passage number 354.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Read the sentence without the “2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The sentence does not contain any contentious or disagreeable statements.


Passage number 355.
” MS. DANKER.  “The Committee recognizes that inflation persistently below its 2 percent objective could pose risks to economic performance, but it anticipates that inflation will move up to its objective over the medium term.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states the recognition of potential risks associated with persistent inflation below the 2 percent objective, but also expresses the belief that inflation will eventually align with the objective in the medium term.


Passage number 356.
” MR. ENGLISH.  “Move back toward its objective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply a directive given by Mr. English.


Passage number 357.
” MS. DANKER.  Oh—“move back toward.”  I’m sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Danker says "Oh—'move back toward.'" This statement does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 358.
 MR. FISHER.  That follows “since the fall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is a disagreement or contention as indicated by the mention of "Mr. Fisher" and the phrase "That follows 'since the fall.'" Without further context, it is difficult to determine the specific nature of the disagreement or contention.


Passage number 359.
” VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  “Back toward,” though.  Does that mean it ever gets there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Back toward, though. Does that mean it ever gets there" is a question or statement seeking clarification. It does not present any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 360.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  With a period.  We don’t have the part about “possibly slightly higher.” Okay.  The last thing, I think, that we have to discuss is 5′ versus the status quo.  So the “foreseeable future” paragraph—we’re not going to discuss that for the foreseeable future.  [Laughter]  All right.  The argument for this is, first, as Governor Duke noted, to point out that “accommodative stance of monetary policy”—in this paragraph, at least—is referring to stuff other than the asset purchases; it’s referring to the rate policy and ongoing holdings.  And thesecond purpose of it, the one that I particularly was focused on, is that by emphasizing that, in the long run, that is our source of accommodation, we’re trying to stress the point that we did a lot of work communicating over the intermeeting period—that the end of the asset purchase program does not mean the proximate increase in rates.  If it would help at all, certainly a simple thing that the Vice Chairman suggested would be just to get rid of the “today reaffirmed its view.”  Just change that back to “expects.”  That would reduce a little bit of emphasis.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different points and suggestions, but there is no conflict or disagreement between different perspectives.


Passage number 361.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I’ll just speak on this point, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you.  I like the Vice Chairman’s suggestion.  I like the language that’s in 5′, but I can certainly see the argument that it’s best kept in store for the point at which we actually taper.  I think it would be very powerful to put it in there at that point.  So, right now, just have “today reaffirmed its view” and then include the other language in that sentence at the point at which the actual reduction of the purchases takes place.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Kocherlakota, acknowledges the suggestion made by the Vice Chairman and states that he likes the language proposed in section 5. However, he also acknowledges that there is an argument to keep that language for later when they actually taper. Overall, he expresses agreement and suggests a specific way to include the language.


Passage number 362.
  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So you would just say, “The Committee today reaffirmed its view that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will remain appropriate”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement as it presents a statement without any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 363.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That’s correct.  At this moment—yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response "That's correct" indicates agreement with the statement made.


Passage number 364.
 MR. STEIN.  You could literally just take old paragraph 5 and where it says, “The Committee expects,” say, “The Committee reaffirmed that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting a specific change to a paragraph, without expressing opposition or disagreement with the original text.


Passage number 365.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  So the old paragraph 5, just for reference—isn’t the sequence a little different.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is questioning the sequence of a paragraph for reference, but it does not indicate disagreement or contention.


Passage number 366.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The passage does not provide any context or information about a specific topic or statement that would indicate contention or disagreement. Therefore, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 367.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  So it would be old paragraph 5, under “June FOMC Statement,” on page 2.  You’re supporting “support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the Committee today reaffirmed its view that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will remain appropriate”.  Is that what you’re proposing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is seeking confirmation or clarification on a specific statement without expressing any opposition or contradiction.


Passage number 368.
 MR. STEIN.  Yes, that’s my proposal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that "Yes, that's my proposal."


Passage number 369.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is impossible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without having the actual passage. Please provide the passage you are referring to.


Passage number 370.
 MR. EVANS.  Could I offer the following speculation.  I’m relatively indifferent, and paragraph 5 would be okay.  But if you’re of the opinion that adding the inflation risks language in paragraph 2 might make people reconsider whether we are going to actually reduce purchase flow in September, and if you thought that was unhelpful, I think the language in 5′ about, “ongoing, substantial Federal Reserve holdings of longer-term securities” might help offset.  They will recognize that you’ve made this argument before, saying, “Even once we start reducing the flow, we’re still going to be quite accommodative.”  And it really sounds as though you’re just reaffirming arguments you made before when we were going to cut the flow rate in September, so it might help there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is offering a speculation and suggesting a potential solution or strategy for addressing a concern. They are analyzing the language used in the paragraphs and proposing a way to mitigate any negative reactions or doubts that may arise. The overall tone is collaborative and problem-solving.


Passage number 371.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, that did occur to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply indicates that the idea mentioned had crossed the speaker's mind.


Passage number 372.
 MR. EVANS.  Although I’m indifferent myself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions being indifferent, indicating a lack of strong opinion or disagreement with the topic being discussed.


Passage number 373.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Can I have some views here.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply requesting opinions or views from the individuals present, specifically from Governor Yellen. There is no clear contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 374.
 MS. YELLEN.  I think President Evans has made a good case, if you are worried about the inflation thing, then emphasizing the substantial holdings basically says, don’t focus on the pace—even if we reduce the pace a little bit, it’s still very accommodative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. YELLEN agrees with President Evans and supports his argument about inflation and the pace of reducing holdings.


Passage number 375.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But I think it will potentially reinforce the idea that you’re planning to go in September.  It’s hard to know how the market will take it, but they’ll wonder why you changed it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their belief that a certain action may reinforce an idea, and acknowledges the uncertainty of how others will perceive the situation. However, there is no explicit disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 376.
 MS. YELLEN.  So there’s an argument for just no change, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. The statement "there’s an argument for just no change, too" suggests that there is another perspective or alternative viewpoint but does not indicate a conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 377.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence simply mentions "President Plosser," without providing any further context or information to suggest any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 378.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I was going to say, I’m a little bit indifferent here, too, but whether they’re going to make the link between what we say in paragraph 2 and what we say in paragraph 5, that somehow those are related, I’m not sure I would put a lot on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about whether the link between paragraph 2 and paragraph 5 is significant but does not disagree with it.


Passage number 379.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  There’s not much of a logical link, but there’s a little bit of offsetting dovishness and hawkishness.  I think there is some truth to that.  Well, okay.  Do you want to have a straw vote on two options.  Do you want to do it that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker seems to be discussing different opinions or perspectives on a certain topic, but there is no indication of a conflict or lively debate. The phrases "there's not much of a logical link" and "there is some truth to that" suggest that the speaker is acknowledging different viewpoints and considering their validity. The subsequent sentences also do not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 380.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes.  Why don’t we do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage provided.


Passage number 381.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Option 1 is 5′, and, to tone it down a little bit, we’ll just make it, “The Committee expects that a highly accommodative stance,” and get rid of the “today reaffirmed its view.”  Okay.  Does that help.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Although the passage includes a suggestion to tone down a statement, there is no explicit contention or disagreement.


Passage number 382.
 MS. DUKE.  And keeping “very low short-term interest rates and ongoing, substantial . . . holdings of longer-term securities”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by an individual, without any opposing viewpoints or contradictory statements.


Passage number 383.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Keep everything else in that 5′.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It appears to be a statement or instruction, rather than a statement of opinion that can be debated.


Passage number 384.
 MS. RASKIN.  Also “continues to anticipate.”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no disagreement or contention in the sentence. It simply states that someone, presumably Ms. Raskin, continues to anticipate something.


Passage number 385.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, everything—except for the “today reaffirmed its view.”  All right.  So that’s one option.  And the other option is paragraph 5, under “June FOMC Statement,” on page 2.  Do the supporters of that want to put in the “reaffirmed” part or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply presenting two options for consideration, and there is no indication of conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 386.
  MR. FISHER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: There is not enough context provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "Mr. Fisher. Yes" does not convey any clear conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 387.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  All right.  I’m just trying to be democratic here—Solomonic.  So 5 would be, “To support continued progress . . . , the Committee today reaffirmed its view that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy,” et cetera, as written in June.  Okay.  All right.  I’m going to ask first for the June variant, and then I’m going to ask for the 5′ variant, okay.  All in favor of the June variant with the “reaffirmed”.  [Show of hands]  Okay, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11.  I think that’s a majority.  Okay.  So we’re going to go back to June, and we’re just going to reaffirm June.  “The Committee today reaffirmed.”  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a discussion about reaching a democratic consensus on a certain variant.


Passage number 388.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage mentioned, "MR," is not provided. Therefore, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement without the passage in question.


Passage number 389.
 WILLIAMS.  Yes.  Mr. Chairman, because I heard some back-and-forth, I want to make sure that, on paragraph 2, the language we’re intending says that “inflation will move up to its 2 percent objective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply seeking clarification on the intended language in paragraph 2.


Passage number 390.
” MR. ENGLISH.  “Back toward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating a person's name and a direction.


Passage number 391.
” MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 392.
 WILLIAMS.  “Back toward.”  Okay.  I wasn’t sure.  So it’s the language from B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Williams, is simply expressing uncertainty or confusion about the language being referenced.


Passage number 393.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Let’s make sure we get this all straight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is indicating a desire for clarity and agreement, not contention or disagreement.


Passage number 394.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Somebody read the inflation language again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser is simply requesting for someone to read the inflation language again.


Passage number 395.
 MS. DANKER.  Okay.  I’m going to read what I have, so if somebody would correct me, that would be great.  “The Committee recognizes that inflation persistently below its 2 percent objective could pose risks to economic performance, but it anticipates that inflation will move back toward its objective over the medium term.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking confirmation or correction regarding the statement.


Passage number 396.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Any other comments or questions.  [No response]  If not, do you think you can read the whole thing, Debbie.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a conversation between multiple people in which the speaker asks for any additional comments or questions but receives no response. Then, they ask if the person named Debbie can read the whole thing.


Passage number 397.
   MS. DANKER.  This vote is on alternative B and the associated directive, with changes from what’s shown in the handout as follows.  The final sentence of paragraph B(2), on inflation,is, once again, what I just read.  Rather than introduce another error, I should just say “what I just read.”  And paragraph 5 is exactly as published in the June FOMC statement, except that the first sentence begins, “To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the Committee today reaffirmed its view that,” and so forth, as published in June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating the changes made to the original text without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 398.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Are we okay.  Go ahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking a simple question about the well-being of the person they are speaking to.


Passage number 399.
 MS. DANKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Since no passage is provided in the question, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


