Passage number 1.
   April 30–Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on April 30–May 1, 2013 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, April 30, 2013, at 2:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, May 1, 2013, at 9:00 a.m.  Those present were the following: Ben Bernanke, Chairman William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman James Bullard Elizabeth Duke Charles L. Evans Esther L. George Jerome H. Powell Sarah Bloom Raskin Eric Rosengren Jeremy C. Stein Daniel K. Tarullo Janet L. Yellen Christine Cumming, Richard W. Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, Sandra Pianalto, and Charles I. Plosser, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, and John C. Williams, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Steven B. Kamin, Economist David W. Wilcox, Economist Thomas A. Connors, Troy Davig, Michael P. Leahy, Stephen A. Meyer, David Reifschneider, Daniel G. Sullivan, and William Wascher, Associate Economists Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors James A. Clouse and William Nelson, Deputy Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors April 30–Andreas Lehnert, Deputy Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of Governors Jon W. Faust, Special Adviser to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Seth B. Carpenter, Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Michael T. Kiley and Thomas Laubach, Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors David Bowman, Deputy Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors Steven A. Sharpe and John J. Stevens, Assistant Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Min Wei, Assistant Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Stefania D’Amico, Senior Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Randall A. Williams, Records Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Kenneth C. Montgomery, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston David Altig, Jeff Fuhrer, and Loretta J. Mester, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Boston, and Philadelphia, respectively Lorie K. Logan and Mark E. Schweitzer, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York and Cleveland, respectively Fred Furlong, Group Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Evan F. Koenig and David C. Wheelock, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas and St. Louis, respectively Robert L.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply lists the individuals present at a meeting.


Passage number 2.
 Hetzel and Andrea Tambalotti, Senior Economists, Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond and New York, respectively Jonathan Heathcote, Senior Research Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis   April 30–Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on April 30–May 1, 2013 April 30 Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good afternoon, everybody.  Our first item today is “Financial Developments and Open Market Operations.” Let me call on Simon Potter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 3.
 April 30–CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Questions for Simon.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any information about contention or disagreement. It is simply thanking someone and stating that there are questions for Simon.


Passage number 4.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes. My question concerns panel 5 on exhibit 1.  There’s a fairly sharp decline in yields for the 10-year, and even more so for the 30-year. And, strikingly, over the next several days, those movements are reversed.  Do you folks have a narrative for what happened there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a question about a specific exhibit and asks for a narrative explanation.


Passage number 5.
 MR. POTTER. There was the initial shock of how large the program was, and I think that caught market participants by surprise.  This underestimates, on that day, the movement in the JGB market; we cannot actually get the intraday moves on Bloomberg quite accurately.  There was a lot of turbulence; it is really hard to read anything into that.  And then, as I discussed in the briefing, there was the issue of how easily the Bank of Japan could actually implement purchase programs of that size—and the size is both the net purchases and the fact that they don’t roll over at auction, which means that they were looking at about ¥7½ trillion per month of purchases that they had to do across these six operations.  I think that produced a lot of volatility.  The futures price the next day made its high and low for the year.  That kind of volatility tends to lead to people not wanting to hold these securities or not wanting to trade them.  So that definitely made the yields move back up. The fact that those yields stayed higher relative to where they hit after the announcement of the purchase program is interesting.  We don’t have a good explanation, as you could tell from the briefing.  The measures of market functioning that we have suggest the market is functioning better.  Estimates of the term premium effect from purchases of this size suggest that the yields should be lower.  The part that is hard to get in your head is:  Suppose they were successful, and inflation is going to hit 2 percent, how would you  April 30–exactly price the JGBs right now. But this was a very interesting experiment about a large-scale asset purchase program for us to watch from a distance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: This passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is mainly a description of the author's observations and analysis of the market reaction to the Bank of Japan's purchase program.


Passage number 6.
 MR. LACKER.  If I could follow up, Mr. Chairman.  The obvious thing that comes to mind here is the methodology we’ve used historically to estimate the effect of large-scale asset purchases, and I wonder if this has any lessons for the reliability of our methodology.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker is simply posing a question and seeking clarification on the reliability of a particular methodology.


Passage number 7.
 MR. POTTER.  I would be wary of trying to use JGBs.  I would use the currency and the equity markets.  The movements we have seen in those would be very consistent with some of what we expect to happen to financial conditions from large-scale asset purchases.  But it is not a clean experiment because they’ve had deflation for about 20 years, and this is a very different policy, as we’re trying to show, from the ones that they followed before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Potter, is simply giving his opinion and stating that using currency and equity markets would be a better approach than using JGBs (Japanese Government Bonds) for their intended purpose. He acknowledges that the experiment may not be "clean" due to Japan's history of deflation and the different policy being implemented. However, there is no direct opposition or debate presented in the passage.


Passage number 8.
 MR. KAMIN.  President Lacker, if I could just add a few thoughts that echo Simon’s.  First of all, I think it is worth keeping in mind that JGB yields had actually fallen a lot in anticipation of the program.  So a lot of the response to expectations of more monetary easing was kind of built in.  Now, indeed, everybody, including us, was surprised by how large the program was.  But, in some sense, you might say a lot of the effect was already built in, and maybe that’s part of the explanation for why, subsequently, yields didn’t move a lot.  That’s one thing we’re keeping in mind. A second point, getting back to the issue of the extent to which rising inflation expectations may have been at play:  I’ll be referring in my remarks to some simulations that we’ve done using our models.  In those simulations, the term premium on JGBs actually falls enormously, by 200 basis points, but because inflation rises in the simulation, the 10-year JGB yield only falls by maybe 10 or 20 basis points.  Obviously, a model simulation is not proof or   April 30–evidence, but it does suggest that, in fact, you could have increases in inflation expectations offsetting some pretty substantial reductions in term premiums.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply adding their thoughts and observations.


Passage number 9.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only mentions President Fisher without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 10.
 MR. FISHER.  My question is on the domestic front, Mr. Chairman, and it deals with exhibit 2, graph 10.  Simon, I’m curious from an Open Market Desk operator’s standpoint— given that gold has come off, given that crude has come off, given that most inflation indicators, including the trimmed mean, are running significantly under 2 percent—why do you think it is that the red line, the five-year, five-year forward, pretty much stayed in the range that it has been in since we ramped up our program.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a question being asked by Mr. Fisher, seeking an explanation from Simon. There is no disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 11.
 MR. POTTER. If I had just shown you the five-year forward, that has fallen a lot in the intermeeting period.  This would seem an example of very well anchored inflation expectations in the United States.  You can see the red line dips down just a little bit there—there was a TIPS auction, and that led to a substantial repricing.  That just looks like it was market dynamics.  And it got back to pretty much this range it has been in since September, but there was a little bit of action there.  I assume it’s because you guys are doing a good job of keeping inflation expectations well anchored.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker acknowledges that there was a temporary dip in inflation expectations due to a TIPS auction, but overall believes that inflation expectations have been well anchored and that the central bank is doing a good job of maintaining this. There is no disagreement or contention in this passage.


Passage number 12.
 MR. FISHER.  That was the answer we were seeking.  And then second, Mr. Chairman, now that Mr. Lacker has already spoken, I’d like to second Simon’s recommendation that we approve the swap lines.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher is expressing agreement with Simon's recommendation to approve the swap lines.


Passage number 13.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Just on the five-year, five-year, this is not a true forward market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement simply states that the five-year, five-year is not a true forward market without expressing disagreement or contention with other viewpoints.


Passage number 14.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes.  The Barclays measure that President George has mentioned a few times also came down, and it looked like it was going to fall below the level it had been tradingApril 30–at for quite some time, and that’s one you can trade.  That also came back a little bit. The Markets Group has another measure, which doesn’t require as much effort on the yield curve as the Board staff’s does.  They’re all telling the same story, that these long-forward inflation expectations didn’t move that much over the intermeeting period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply explains different measures and their findings without expressing conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 15.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I’m willing to believe it, but I always am skeptical of small movements in this because it’s a difference of errors.  So the variance is going to be twice what the variance would be on a normal interest rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their personal skepticism about small movements in interest rates and explains the reason behind it. However, there is no indication of any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 16.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The answer is no because the passage only mentions Mr. Potter without any further context or indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 17.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Any other questions for Simon. [No response] Seeing none, let me first ask for a vote to ratify domestic operations since the March meeting. Are there any objections.  [No response]  Seeing none, we have a proposal to renew the swap agreements with Canada and Mexico.  As you recall, these are mostly symbolic in nature, but, nevertheless, we have done this annually, as long as I’ve been here, anyway.  Any questions or comments on that issue. [No response] Seeing none, are there any objections to renewing the swap agreements.  [No response] Okay.  Then we’ll take that as a “yes.” We turn now to item 2, and I’ll call on Bill Wascher to introduce the economic situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 18.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Questions for our colleagues.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that there are questions for colleagues and mentions President Bullard without indicating any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 19.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just had a question on core inflation.  Bill, your comment was that core inflation is lower and is about 1.2 percent measured from a year ago.  Some of the commentary suggested that the market-based measure is different. But I am looking at the market-based core.  It’s 1.3 percent measured from a year ago, so it’s almost the same.  I looked at this picture previously, and I’ve been impressed that all kinds of different measures of PCE inflation measured from a year ago are all down, basically.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 20.
 MR. WASCHER.  I agree.  Inflation certainly has come down over the past year.  For the overall core in the first quarter, I mentioned that nonmarket prices actually fell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply agrees with the statement that inflation has decreased over the past year and mentions that nonmarket prices fell in the first quarter.


Passage number 21.
 MR. BULLARD.  So your comment is that if you just look at what moved in the first quarter, it is the nonmarket components that came down a lot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard is simply stating a fact about the nonmarket components in the first quarter.


Passage number 22.
 April 30–MR. WASCHER.  Right.  They fell a percent in the first quarter over the fourth quarter, and in the last three months, they were down at a 2 percent rate.  The market-based core in the first quarter was up at an annual rate of 1.6 percent, close to what we were expecting. I think part of the slowing over the past year reflects the pattern of commodity and oil prices passing through to core; we also see that in import prices.  The rise in import prices has been pretty modest, and that has contributed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents factual information about various economic indicators without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 23.
 MR. BULLARD.  Would you say the staff view has modified a little bit on this. Because a lot of times, the staff view seems to be that the commodity prices aren’t going to feed through to core very well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It discusses a potential modification in the staff's view on the relationship between commodity prices and core inflation.


Passage number 24.
 MR. WASCHER.  Well, we sort of gauge that as they affect import prices, and we do see them affect core import prices.  And that we do pass into core, according to the share of imports in consumer spending.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is explaining how import prices affect core import prices, and how this is passed into core according to the share of imports in consumer spending.


Passage number 25.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I think the distinction is that we think they would probably pass through in the very near term but there’s very little, if any, pass-through  to longer-run price trends, looking out six months, a year, or two years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Reifschneider expressing his opinion on the likely short-term and long-term price trends.


Passage number 26.
 MR. WASCHER.  Right.  We haven’t made any adjustments to our assumptions for inflation expectations.  We expect them to hold steady.  So, in some sense, we look through these effects of supply shocks on core inflation over a more medium-run period, but they do have effects in the short run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they have not made any adjustments to their assumptions for inflation expectations and expect them to remain steady. They acknowledge that there may be short-term effects of supply shocks on core inflation, but they are looking at it over a medium-run period.


Passage number 27.
 MR. BULLARD.  Well, the last time we were down at these low levels, commodity prices went up a lot, but then core prices followed behind.  So now you have the opposite dynamic going on: Commodity prices are falling, and core is following behind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a previous pattern and how the current situation is the opposite of that pattern. They are not expressing any disagreement or contention with anyone else's viewpoint.


Passage number 28.
 April 30–MR. WASCHER.  Yes.  Then, in our forecast, as we have commodity prices leveling out, with inflation expectations stable and slack narrowing over time, we expect core inflation to edge back up toward 1¾ percent in 2014 and 2015.  That is the basic story.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply presenting their forecast for core inflation.


Passage number 29.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only includes a simple statement expressing gratitude. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 30.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 31.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My business reports this time were somewhat different from the last couple of times.  So I’d like to ask three questions, actually, about the Tealbook outlook, if you’d indulge me.  One is on Europe, one is on consumption, and one is on the labor market. In Europe, you’re seeing economic growth recovering fairly decently in the next couple of years, and I’m still struggling to understand the underpinnings of how Europe is going to get out from under this.  So, a couple of things.  How does economic growth differ across the countries in your scenario, and in particular, Germany.  Are you expecting Germany to be an engine of growth that pulls other countries along in Europe.  How does that square with the traditional German export-led growth strategy.  Those are the questions I’m struggling with. And are we seeing any evidence of the wage and price adjustments necessary to boost the competitiveness of the periphery countries. I mean, we must be seeing adjustments, but do you think they’re close to the necessary degree for them to become competitive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a speaker asking questions and expressing his own struggle to understand certain economic aspects.


Passage number 32.
 MR. KAMIN.  Right.  I’d like to start off by saying that we are, indeed, predicting a recovery in Europe, among other reasons because we don’t believe any economy can continue to contract forever.  It has got to move up at some point.  We have more reasons than that, but [laughter] that is a common rationale for it in the economic forecast.  But it’s actually an extreme.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their belief in a recovery in Europe and mentioning a common rationale for that belief, which is that economies cannot contract forever. The laughter in the passage suggests a lighthearted tone, but does not indicate disagreement or contention.


Passage number 33.
April 30–MR. EVANS.  Even Japan is coming back, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states that even Japan is coming back, suggesting that there is agreement or confirmation of this fact.


Passage number 34.
 MR. KAMIN. As I emphasized in my remarks, it’s a very tepid recovery, in the sense that, by the end of the period, we have an output gap for the euro area that’s only a little bit smaller than it is right now, in the neighborhood of 4 percent of GDP. In our forecast for this year, 2013, from Q4 to Q4, there’s basically zero economic growth in the euro area.  That’s followed by 1.3 percent next year, which is in the neighborhood of potential, and then 2 percent the year after, which is higher than potential.  By this metric, this is an extremely tepid recovery, and it means that by 2015—eight years after their recession first started, at the end of 2007— their level of GDP is just getting back to the neighborhood of where it was at the previous peak, and their unemployment rate, at 12 percent, is extremely elevated. To be sure, this is a very gloomy forecast, and it means that in 2015 they will probably regard themselves as still being in recession. That said, what do we think is driving it. Well, there are some concrete factors. One of them is that, certainly, the pace of fiscal consolidation in the forecast is going to lessen, and for other reasons, as they achieve their fiscal goals.  To be a little bit more concrete, we estimate their fiscal drag last year was in the neighborhood of 1½ percent of GDP, which is pretty hefty.  This year, it should be a little under 1 percent, and then next year and the year after, below ½ percent.  That, right there, is one concrete reason why they should start growing a little bit.  As you may have noted, there’s been quite a bit of publicity lately—sort of a backlash against austerity—and we have, in fact, reduced the extent to which we think they’re going to be fiscally consolidated by maybe a quarter of a percentage point—not a great deal, but that’s certainly a factor. Number two is the fact that much of the recession that took place was because of soaring sovereign spreads in the wake of a panic about the fiscal sustainability of governments and theApril 30–situation of banks.  We have seen these sovereign spreads fall a great deal. We have seen spreads on bank lending and CDS spreads fall a great deal.  We’ve seen these improvements, as I emphasized in my remarks.  We have yet to see those pass through to actual lending and borrowing conditions because we know by experience that that tends to take place with a lag, but we do expect to see that as well.  Finally, as regards the pattern within Europe of these different adjustments, we’re not really counting on Germany to be an engine of growth per se, dragging everybody else along.  In our forecast, Germany certainly does better than other countries.  For this year, even as euro-area economic growth is zero, we anticipate Germany growth of about 1 percent, rising to 2 percent afterward, but that’s not really enough to drag the whole continent along. Are adjustments being made, as far as relative prices within the euro area.  Yes, to some extent.  We are actually seeing some tailing-off of unit labor cost growth in the peripheral economies compared with the northern economies.  It’s not a great deal.  It may not even be enough to answer those critics who say that the peripheral countries would be better off breaking away and devaluing, although that has its own problems.  But certainly they’re on the road toward slow adjustments in relative prices. It is also true that with regard to current account balances, which is another way we measure that type of improvement in competitiveness, the peripheral economies have substantially reduced their current account deficits.  But that is probably due less to improvements in relative competitiveness than it is to the import compression due to their recessions.  But, as I say, there are some initial indications of progress on the unit labor cost front.  So putting all these things together, we do see a road toward normality for these countries, but it is a difficult road, and it’s going to involve a lot of hardship  April 30–on the way.  And it’s going to be a while before the global economy or the United States’ economy benefits substantially from higher growth in economic activity in Europe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing a forecast and discussing the factors that are driving the slow recovery in the euro area.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 35.
 MR. EVANS.  Right.  Thank you.  If I can ask about consumption.  The Tealbook forecast has fairly subdued investment.  Given what I hear from business contacts, that seems reasonable; if anything, the Tealbook may be on the optimistic side.  Despite the weakness in business investment, the Tealbook forecast has a pretty decent growth in consumption and housing.  The story that goes along with this is that of a virtuous cycle:  Consumption increases because disposable income rises; disposable income rises because employment goes up; employment goes up because consumption increases; and that feeds on itself. I’m having a little bit of trouble with the chicken and the egg problem here.  Which one is going to go first.  How long can this cycle go on without participation by businesses.  If they’re cautious about investment, won’t they be cautious about hiring.  A lot of firms are telling me that they’d rather install technology than hire workers.  And then on top of that, you’ve got the fiscal drag from the payroll tax increase. Can you make me feel better about this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement or contention in the passage. The speaker expresses uncertainty and raises questions about the relationship between consumption, employment, and business investment. They also highlight the potential negative impact of the payroll tax increase.


Passage number 36.
 MR. WASCHER.  I don’t know.  I think our business investment outlook isn’t superb, but we have E&S going up 6 percent a year—and that’s a solid gain—as well as increases in business investment overall.  As you say, we think that over time the economy is going to recover as some of the things that are holding down economic growth now are going to wane.  Fiscal policy, in particular, is a big drag this year.  But that drag is going to lessen, in terms of its effects on economic growth, over the next couple of years, and that should contribute to more consumption and income growth and employment and so forth.  Moreover, as that happens, confidence, which we also think is restraining growth now, will improve over time, again, as part of this virtuous circle.  And going along with that, we continue to expect some gradual  April 30–improvements in credit availability where things are still tight now. I don’t know if that makes you feel any better, but that’s the story we have in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is giving their perspective on the current business investment outlook and how they expect the economy to recover over time.


Passage number 37.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  One thing I’d add to that is I think you can make an argument that you see the start of this virtuous circle in the housing market.  I don’t want to get carried away, but things are getting better there slowly, and that’s an example of this sort of thing.  It has got a ways to go before the economy is all the way back, but I think there is evidence that that is occurring.  Consumer durables, particularly auto sales, have come back quite a bit.  It’s not as if the household sector is dead in the water; it is slowly improving.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing their perspective on the improvement and progress in the housing market and consumer durables sector.


Passage number 38.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay, thanks.  Lastly, if you’ll indulge me, on the labor market improvement, you have the chart on the middle left that shows the improvement in the outlook for unemployment relative to the September outlook.  The improvement looks sort of like a parallel shift down in the projected half.  So a big part of the improvement is what we’ve seen so far.  Since September, we’ve seen a decent-sized decline in the actual unemployment rate, which I think the Tealbook assumes is almost all a decline in the gap between the unemployment rate and the NAIRU.  That’s one reading of yesterday’s briefing document, I think.  Yet we haven’t seen a corresponding closing of the gap between the labor force participation rate and its trend.  In fact, it has widened by a couple of tenths.  This could temper one’s views about how much labor market slack has been closed.  What do you think is going on with these two margins.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification and expressing their thoughts about the labor market improvement.


Passage number 39.
 MR. WASCHER. The unemployment rate has clearly come down faster than we had expected back in September, and, correspondingly, employment growth has been stronger than we had expected back in September.  The level of payroll employment is about a million higher by the end of the forecast than we were anticipating back in September.  So I think it has been the case that there has been, basically, more improvement in the labor market in terms of  April 30–employment and the unemployment rate than we, certainly, would have expected.  Our interpretation of that was that the level of potential output was lower and that firms were doing some more catch-up in terms of bringing their workforces back toward more sustainable levels after having slashed them during the recession. In terms of participation, I think that often lags.  As you get some more persistent and more definitive improvements in the labor market, we do expect the participation rate to move back toward a declining trend.  And over the forecast period, that is what we have—we have the participation rate basically moving sideways and moving toward its trend. So while we may not have seen that yet, it actually may be too early to clearly see that at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an explanation of their observation of the labor market and their expectations for the participation rate.


Passage number 40.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Related to that as well, it’s not just the standard unemployment rate; the broader measures of underemployment—the various U’s—tend to show similar patterns.  So you can bring in part-time employment, you can bring in discouraged workers, and those sorts of things, and you still see similar patterns—not identical, but similar patterns—to the unemployment rate in those broader measures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the idea that broader measures of underemployment, such as part-time employment and discouraged workers, tend to show similar patterns to the unemployment rate.


Passage number 41.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  There’s a paper by Chris Erceg and Andy Levin that was given at the Boston conference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage states a fact about a paper that was given at a conference. There is no mention of any disagreement or contention associated with the paper.


Passage number 42.
 MR. EVANS.  Yes, I saw that.  That was a very interesting paper.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they found the paper to be interesting.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 43.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes. One of the results is that the participation rate does have a cyclical component, but it’s lagged considerably behind the unemployment component.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage states that the participation rate has a cyclical component, but it lags behind the unemployment component. This implies that there is a disagreement or contention regarding the timing or relationship between the two factors.


Passage number 44.
 MR. EVANS.  That’s one thing that they point out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or indications of contention or disagreement. It simply states that "they" (the subject is not specified) point out a certain thing without stating what that thing is.


Passage number 45.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage does not include any specific content or information about President Kocherlakota. Therefore, there is no basis for contention or disagreement.


Passage number 46.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Actually, in President Evans’s tradition now, I have three questions of my own.  But they are similar to his, so that will April 30–make things easier, I think.  On the “Forecast Summary,” the middle chart on the left, “Unemployment Rate,” if we were looking at the employment-population ratio, what would be your forecast for that, say, at the end of 2015.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply thanking the chairman and stating that they have three questions that are similar to President Evans's questions.


Passage number 47.
 MR. WASCHER.  I don’t know that I have that.  There it is: At the end of 2015, it is 59½.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact or a piece of information.


Passage number 48.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  59½.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any contentions or disagreements. It simply mentions the age of someone without any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 49.
 MR. WASCHER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 50.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Okay.  So we are going to see a full percentage point increase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is stating a fact about a projected increase.


Passage number 51.
 MR. WASCHER. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a fragment and does not contain enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 52.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  What is it today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 53.
 MR. WASCHER.  It was 58.6 in the first quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply provides a numerical value without any contrasting viewpoint or opposition.


Passage number 54.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Okay, thank you.  I hope that happens.  That would be great.  My second question is, I actually don’t understand the 1 million increase in total payroll employment, and maybe I’m just doing the calculations incorrectly—so how much extra per month is that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 55.
 MR. WASCHER. A good chunk of that is the benchmark revision that occurred in February.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of fact about a specific event that happened in February.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 56.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 57.
 MR. WASCHER. That’s about half of it, maybe even a little more than half of that. It’s not as big if you just looked at the changes since September.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 58.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Okay, thanks.  Yes.  So really, we should have been thinking that we had more people in September itself than we thought.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 59.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Yes.  And we did.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Reifschneider agrees or affirms something that was previously mentioned or asked.


Passage number 60.
   April 30–MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That’s helpful.  And I had a question about Japan.  We’ve been tracking zero-coupon inflation swaps in Japan, and that’s an illiquid market, as was pointed out.  They showed a lot of movement after the election but it really seems like those did not show much movement at all after the big policy innovation from the Bank of Japan.  Do you have any thoughts on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 61.
 MR. KAMIN.  Well, I think that echoes back to the point I made earlier to President Lacker, which is that there was an awful lot of movement in markets in anticipation of the announcement of a large program.  People expected a very large and very aggressive program, and, as your data show, those data move up from something under ½ percent, in terms of expected inflation, to something like 1½ percent now.  So that is pretty substantial.  Now, logic would entail that when the program was announced, and it was even bigger, that inflation expectations would rise even more, but they didn’t.  So it’s a bit of a mystery.  As you pointed out, the market is not too liquid, so it’s a little hard to decipher these things.  My best guess, as I say, is that most of it was baked in the cake, and market participants didn’t quite know how to react to that remaining hunk of unexpected purchases; we’ll just have to follow it closely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Kamin, states that there was an expectation of a large and aggressive program, and as a result, inflation expectations increased. However, when the program was actually announced and was even larger than expected, inflation expectations did not rise further. Mr. Kamin finds this to be a "mystery" and suggests that market participants may not have known how to react to the unexpected purchases. This implies disagreement or confusion about the relationship between the program and inflation expectations.


Passage number 62.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Okay.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing gratitude.


Passage number 63.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 64.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.  If I could just follow up on that.  So that makes the fall and then snapback in JGB yields more problematic, it seems to me.  Because if you don’t have expected inflation as the explanation for the return to the previous level, the initial response to the announcement looks sort of spurious and transitory.  And if that’s true, that sort of undermines our approach to estimating the LSAP effects in the United States because we use these little, narrow announcement effect windows, which is what I was getting at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker is expressing skepticism and raising concerns about the approach to estimating LSAP (Large-Scale Asset Purchase) effects in the United States. He suggests that if the expected inflation is not the explanation for the return to the previous level of JGB (Japanese Government Bond) yields, then the initial response to the announcement is "spurious and transitory," which undermines the current approach to estimating LSAP effects.


Passage number 65.
  April 30–MR. POTTER.  President Lacker, that’s why I said it was even bigger if you did the intraday window, which is hard to see with what we have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states a comment made by Mr. Potter to President Lacker.


Passage number 66.
 MR. LACKER.  Right.  It could be even more misleading.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a stand-alone statement.


Passage number 67.
 MR. POTTER.  It would be even more misleading.  I think with the inflation swaps, we really need to wait and think that the Bank of Japan is probably the best source for trying to look at these data because they will know some of the technical features with them.  They definitely did increase substantially leading up to the announcement.  Given the announcement was about double what people thought, you would expect that, if it was perfect, to get them close to 2 percent because that’s what they should be getting if they are credible.  And, so far, there is nothing in that market that suggests that’s true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their opinion and sharing information without contradicting or arguing against any other viewpoint.


Passage number 68.
 MR. KAMIN. I guess my best guess would be that it’s just very difficult to get a clear read on what is happening to expected inflation, term premiums, and other factors at the moment.  It has just been a period of some confusion, and we are hoping that, over the passage of time, things will clarify.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kamin is expressing uncertainty and a lack of clarity regarding certain economic factors, but there is no indication of disagreement or contention with anyone else.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 69.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. Also, I don’t think it’s correct to say that in the United States, we rely just on event studies.  For example, the estimates reported in Tealbook, Book B, about LSAP effects on term premiums are uninformed by event studies.  Those are based on a model.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. Mr. Reifschneider disagrees with the assertion that the United States relies solely on event studies. He brings up an example from Tealbook, Book B, to support his disagreement.


Passage number 70.
  MR. LACKER.  That’s something else entirely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 71.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Yes, something else entirely.  I would say there are three different methodologies, one of which is event studies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that there are three different methodologies, one of which is event studies.


Passage number 72.
 MR. CLOUSE.  Right.  The term-structure models are based on an underlying historical time series of numbers, and we do use the event studies to inform it.  And then we also looked at April 30–intraday movement, or CUSIP-by-CUSIP responses.  All three of them point to the same rough ballpark estimates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply describes different methodologies used and states that all three point to similar estimates.


Passage number 73.
 MR. KAMIN. Going forward, I would hope that we would get a little bit more clarity, as we see further evolutions of inflation swaps and other measures of inflation expectations.  But, presumably, one other approach we can take once enough of these asset purchases have been made is to look cross-sectionally at impacts of these purchases on yields.  But that is work down the road.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a hope for more clarity in the future regarding inflation swaps and inflation expectations. They also mention the possibility of looking at the impacts of asset purchases on yields cross-sectionally in the future. There is no conflicting opinion or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 74.
 MR. POTTER.  And there’s still the effect on the yen and the stock market, so you could try to back it out.  We have tried to measure inflation that way as well, and you see, perhaps, more of an increase in inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It merely states that "you could try to back it out" and "we have tried to measure inflation that way as well." There is no clear indication of disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 75.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Seeing no other questions, let’s begin our economic go-round, and I’ll turn to President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there are no other questions and suggests moving on to the economic go-round. The mention of President Lockhart does not imply any disagreement either.


Passage number 76.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My baseline outlook for the economy has not changed in any significant way from the last meeting.  The recent data are mixed and suggest an economy that continues in a mode of moderate growth with little upside price pressure.  While the current circumstances and outlook vary considerably from industry to industry, and to some extent across geography, most of our business contacts expect slowly improving conditions.  Businesses remain very cautious about expansion-oriented investment and adding to payrolls.  We did hear from some directors that the patterns of discretionary business spending are shifting more to the offensive, with renewal of broad-based advertising campaigns, more employee-development spending, and increased business travel.  Businesses in the energy, tourism, and real estate sectors reported improved conditions and an optimistic outlook.  A senior auto manufacturing executive opined that sales are leveling off at a healthy   April 30–level.  Industries exposed to lower-end retail or government spending are less buoyant.  We did not pick up a clear signal of widespread impact of the sequestration beyond the direct spending targets. Looking at consumer spending, consumer spending patterns appear to vary widely by income level.  Retailers selling mostly to lower-income customers perceived greater weakness and point to the payroll tax.  The reports of our contacts suggest very little pricing power and little inflationary pressure. If anything, in this cycle, we heard comments suggesting a slightly softer price environment.  Some referenced the influence of lower commodity prices.  We heard few reports of wage pressure, except where there are shortages of qualified candidates in specialized skill areas. Our inflation forecast relative to the Tealbook previously showed a faster convergence to the Committee’s inflation target.  Based on the incoming data and anecdotal soundings, we have lowered our inflation forecast and now see a return to the longer-term inflation objective taking more time, closer to the Tealbook.  On the growth line, our forecast is thematically in line with the Tealbook, but we are a little less optimistic about the pace of a pickup of growth in 2014 and 2015. I continue to perceive the risks around this growth outlook as roughly balanced.  Importantly, the sense we get from talking to a broad spectrum of business contacts is they believe the downside risk has lessened.  I have taken that on board. As a check on anecdotal reports, we have been polling a large panel of businesses about their unit sales outlook.  Last November, our panel of roughly 200 firms assessed the downside risk potential in their businesses as large—on average a 50 percent chance that unit sales would show either no growth or a decline in the year ahead. Two weeks ago, we polled the same firms and asked the same question.  They cut their estimate of downside risk to about a third and now see a significantly greater chance of an upside outcome over the next 12 months.  That said, I   April 30–see, at the moment, few indications that the recovery is about to kick into higher gear.  In my view, we are not getting much indication of a move in either direction. I think the situation calls for letting things play out for a while longer in order to get any real understanding of the trajectory of the economy. And anticipating a possible topic in the next round, if I ask myself whether I expect to see justification in the data for claiming that the outlook has improved in a material way, I am not highly hopeful.  For that reason, I will continue to favor the positioning of any decision on the LSAP element of policy in terms of a reduction of downside risk around the outlook and improved confidence in the sustainability of a slow and steady growth picture with gradual progress on unemployment.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Lockhart is giving an outlook on the economy based on recent data and anecdotal reports. He mentions some mixed data but overall describes an economy that is continuing in a mode of moderate growth with little upside price pressure. While there may be differences across industries and geographies, most business contacts expect slowly improving conditions. Thus, there is no explicit contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 77.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists of two unrelated sentences - a statement of gratitude followed by the mention of President Rosengren without any additional information or context.


Passage number 78.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Fisher.


Passage number 79.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Thank you. President Bullard" does not contain any contentious or disagreement elements. It is simply expressing gratitude towards President Bullard.


Passage number 80.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Eighth District economy continues to expand at a modest pace.  Business and consumer sentiment in the District seems to be moderately positive.  As one business contact put it, “There is continued subdued enthusiasm for sustained economic recovery.”  To the extent there is negative sentiment, it often reflects frustration with continuing political gridlock in Washington.  A clear bright spot in the District is the housing sector.  District real estate market conditions have continued to improve, and prospects for commercial and industrial markets have also become somewhat brighter. One comment from a builder in the Louisville area sums up the feeling:  “We’re struggling to keep up with demand.  Homebuyers are feeling more confident in the economy.  The recovery is finally here, and it seems to be real.”  District labor market conditions continue to improve slowly.  TheApril 30–District employment growth rate has been similar to the national rate over the last six months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and observations about the Eighth District economy.


Passage number 81.
 The District unemployment rate for 18 District MSAs, at 7.3 percent, continues to run below the national unemployment rate. Large District businesses with daily tracking systems suggested that relative weakness in overall business conditions during March seemed to be reversing, according to the data available in April.  To the extent that firms with global reach reported weaker-than-expected results in recent weeks, the weakness tended to be concentrated in markets outside the United States. Turning to the national economy, I continue to expect real GDP growth at or above 3 percent for 2013, slightly more than the Tealbook forecast.  I envision somewhat less drag coming from fiscal retrenchment than the Tealbook, and this likely accounts for the bulk of the difference in the two forecasts. While the decline in government purchases is a negative, I put more weight on the implied decline in future distortionary tax liabilities of the private sector, which provides an offsetting positive effect.  Nevertheless, the differences in the two forecasts are not large.  I agree with the analysis in the Tealbook emphasizing positive momentum from stronger equity markets, lower oil prices, and the continuing rebound in housing.  I continue to expect unemployment to tick down this year, reaching 7 percent by year-end.  This is somewhat faster than the Tealbook, but it is consistent with the pace of improvement in unemployment during the past three years—the past three years, which were not great years for economic growth. On inflation, I’m concerned that the headline PCE inflation rate measured from one year earlier is approaching 1 percent, as is the associated core measure.  These are particularly low readings.  Both headline and core PCE inflation rates measured from a year earlier have been trending lower since the beginning of 2012.  While I expect our very aggressive policy stance to   April 30–reverse the trend during 2013, I think this development bears careful scrutiny in the months ahead.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their analysis and expectations on various economic indicators, such as unemployment, GDP growth, and inflation. They mention some differences in their forecast compared to the Tealbook, but describe them as not large. Overall, they share similar views and analysis with the Tealbook.


Passage number 82.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply contains a thank you message from the speaker, addressing President Williams.


Passage number 83.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I cannot provide an analysis without the passage or context.


Passage number 84.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Recent data have been mixed, but the medium-term economic outlook hasn’t changed appreciably since our March meeting.  Overall, my forecast for growth, unemployment, and inflation is very much in line with the Tealbook’s.  In preparing for this meeting, I, too, found it helpful to compare how the outlook has evolved relative to my projections from September, when we began the current asset purchase program. For reference, my September forecast was predicated on continuing asset purchases until the fourth quarter of 2013 and on funds rate liftoff in the middle of 2015.  Economic growth has progressed more or less in line with my projections from last September, and my outlook for GDP growth hasn’t really changed. This outcome reflects offsetting developments that have emerged since last fall. The federal sequestration was a downside risk at the time but is now baked in the cake, but private-sector spending has provided greater impetus.  This is especially true for housing, which is benefiting from the low-interest-rate environment. My contacts say everything related to housing is doing well, including windows, furniture, and pickup trucks, reflecting the stepped-up pace of construction and home purchases.  House price appreciation has also been more brisk than I had expected, and the economy is benefiting broadly from the effects of the appreciation on household balance sheets and the financial conditions of lenders. Now, despite economic growth being reasonably close to expectations, two developments since last fall stand out.  First, the unemployment rate has come down more quickly than I had expected, although some of that sharper decline reflects falling labor force participation, rather than stronger-than-expected job growth.  Second, the downside risks to the economy have   April 30–become less predominant.  Indeed, some upside risks to the economic outlook have emerged, including an even-faster rebound in housing and stronger global growth, with aggressive policy actions by the Bank of Japan.  Overall, I don’t see developments since September as arguing for significantly more or less monetary stimulus than I had assumed back then.  Accordingly, I still view appropriate policy as including about $750 billion of asset purchases this year, the same figure as in the new and improved Tealbook assumption. In coming to that determination, a key issue is how to gauge where things stand relative to our goal of substantial improvement in the outlook for labor markets.  Toward this end, my staff examined various measures of the underlying momentum in the labor market and the economy.  In particular, they found that normalized six-month changes in a group of economic indicators are highly correlated with future improvements in labor market conditions, measured either by declines in the unemployment gap or increases in total payroll employment growth over the next six months.  The indicators that they found were correlated in this way include the six-month changes in private payroll employment growth, initial UI claims, the ISM manufacturing index, industrial capacity utilization, temporary help employment growth, and the difference in the share of households that find jobs hard to get rather than plentiful.  Nearly all of these measures of momentum in the labor market are stronger than the historical normal values, signaling that the outlook is for an improving labor market.  Moreover, the six-month changes in most of these indicators are stronger than they were back in September, reinforcing the message of an improving outlook for labor market conditions since we started our current asset purchase program.  Of course, this analysis cannot tell us exactly where we are relative to the threshold for substantial improvement in the outlook for labor markets.  My own reading of the data is that we are not there yet, but we are clearly making tangible progress toward that goal.  Now, even with April 30–the pickup in momentum that we see, I expect the pace of improvement in the labor market to be gradual.  My contacts tell me that outside of housing, businesses are still cautious about expanding their payrolls.  They want to see a sustained pickup in demand for their products or services before stepping up hiring.  And in my outlook, with the pickup in economic growth coming late this year, the prevailing wait-and-see mentality may not change quickly. Turning to inflation, core and total PCE inflation have fallen well below our 2 percent longer-run goal over the past year.  Although the low rate of PCE inflation is worrisome, some of the recent decline appears to be due to transitory factors, as discussed in the Tealbook.  As a result, I haven’t yet changed my medium-term inflation forecast and continue to expect inflation to gradually edge up toward 2 percent over the next few years. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 85.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude from President Lacker.


Passage number 86.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a simple expression of thanks from President Evans.


Passage number 87.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  I understand coffee is ready.  Why don’t we take a coffee break and come back at 4:10 p.m.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 88.
   April 30–[Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  If we’re ready to recommence, I’ll call on President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that if everyone is ready to continue, they will call on President Plosser.


Passage number 89.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply expresses gratitude to President Pianalto.


Passage number 90.
  April 30–MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I haven’t made significant changes to my forecast since our last meeting.  I continue to expect a gradual pickup in GDP growth and a reduction in unemployment, and a gradual rise in inflation toward our 2 percent objective. Given the small revisions I have made to my outlook, I won’t spend time reviewing my outlook.  Instead, I will focus my comments on three topics:  the anecdotal support I’m hearing for continued moderate economic growth, my interpretation of recent progress in labor markets, and my interpretation of the low readings on PCE inflation. Starting with the anecdotal reports, my District contacts continue to see moderate growth in economic activity.  While my contacts from the export-focused businesses offered some notes of caution, most of my District contacts have indicated that they see continuing growth in their activity level.  And a clear bright spot in my District reports was the housing sector—despite the fact that in my District we still have a substantial backlog of foreclosures and we have seen only moderate appreciation in home prices.  Even in my District, we are seeing some progress. The CEO of an international company that supplies paints that is headquartered in my District reported robust demand for paint for both new home construction and remodeling.  Interestingly, demand for paint is strong even in areas of the country that are still working through foreclosure gluts, like my District.  He also noted that paint contractors’ purchases of capital equipment, which is a forward-looking indicator, are also up sharply this year.  So, overall, his company is projecting both new home construction and remodeling to remain robust for some time.  And this domestic strength may be an important offset to weak international growth. Let me turn from my anecdotal reports to labor markets.  While the March report on labor market activity certainly wasn’t encouraging, I am not inclined to view it as discouraging either. Despite the weakness in payroll gains in the month of March, the three-month moving average, a April 30–much less noisy indicator of progress, stands at a respectable 168,000 jobs per month.  Relative to the likely trend rate of growth, this pace of job gains represents solid progress in the labor market.  As the Tealbook has noted, powerful demographic forces continue to drive the trend rates of labor force participation and labor force growth lower.  To see the implications of these declining trends, consider an extreme scenario in which, over the next couple of years, the actual participation rate declines in lockstep with a trend estimate like the one shown in the Tealbook. Under these circumstances, a slow rate of job growth, as low as we have observed in the month of March, would still be enough to gradually lower the unemployment rate.  Of course, much of the currently low participation rate is likely a reflection of the recession versus a reflection of demographic trends.  But, arithmetically, the fact that the trend is continuing to decline means that the pace of job gains needed to lower unemployment is much lower today than it would have been 10 years ago.  In that case, continued employment gains along the lines of the last three months should perhaps be considered as substantial, again, unless we start to see a cyclical bounceback in the participation rate. I will now turn to my third topic—the low readings on PCE inflation.  While PCE inflation has been consistently running below our 2 percent long-run objective and dipped yet lower in March, the CPI-based measures have remained relatively stable. This suggests to me that PCE inflation is unlikely to fall further.  On a year-over-year basis, the recent declines in PCE inflation and the stability of various measures of CPI inflation, including the median CPI, indicate that the divergence between CPI and PCE inflation rates has increased.  The current differential between CPI and PCE rates is largely due to the larger weight of shelter costs in the CPI.  I would be more concerned about disinflation if the cost of shelter, the single-largest component of the consumer’s out-of-pocket funding, was decelerating and pulling down both the April 30–CPI and the PCE inflation.  Another reason I put considerable weight on CPI measures in judging price trends is that households and businesses are more focused on CPI inflation than the PCE measure, so the CPI should be more influential in the formation of inflation expectations.  While the Cleveland Fed estimates of inflation expectations remain low, they have also been stable in the face of PCE disinflation. As to the balance of risks around my outlook, I continue to view the risks as tilted to the downside for GDP growth and tilted to the upside for unemployment.  This is due primarily to the ongoing fiscal challenges we are facing as a country and the potential for some slowing in economic growth abroad, especially in China.  In contrast, I see the risks to the inflation outlook as broadly balanced.  The downside risks stem from the potential for a faltering recovery to pull inflation lower, while the upside risks follow from the ongoing public worries about our large balance sheet that could trigger a rise in inflation expectations. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the author's outlook and interpretation of economic trends and indicators.


Passage number 91.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude to President George.


Passage number 92.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The District economy expanded moderately since the last meeting, although the drivers of growth shifted from commodities to consumer spending and housing.  Commodity markets, which have been a cornerstone of District growth in recent years, appear to have reached a plateau at a historically high level but with limited growth in recent months.  With relatively stable energy prices, District drilling rig activity remained flat over recent months, and farm incomes are projected to ease, given lower futures prices for both crops and livestock.  Farm exports, which had doubled since 2006, are projected to be flat in 2013, with a 6 percent decline in exports to China.  Manufactured exports, which rose between 15 and 20 percent in 2010 and 2011, are flat compared with a year ago.  In contrast, consumer spending has rebounded since the last meeting, with District unemployment now at 6 percent. April 30–Auto sales bounced back in March, and District retailers reported modest but stronger-than-expected sales.  Residential real estate activity continued to strengthen, even as some builders noted that a lack of available subcontractors and the rising cost of building materials could constrain construction in the coming months. Turning to the national economy, I have not altered my forecast, despite some softer data since the last meeting, and continue to expect moderate economic growth this year of around 2 percent.  Fiscal policy is a drag on growth, and business investment remains soft, while consumer spending is getting some support from lower gasoline prices.  The wealth effects from higher equity valuations and home prices have been positive, although they have yet to convincingly translate into actual consumption demand.  To the extent these stock market gains are situated at the very high end of the wealth distribution, as some recent research by the Pew Research Center suggests, the propensity to spend out of that wealth is likely to be less potent.  On the other hand, as housing prices continue to recover, these gains should be more broadly distributed. Signs of improvement in labor markets continue, despite a weaker employment report for March, and the underlying conditions in the labor market may be stronger than the data suggest, as we have seen in the past.  Recall that the initial estimates of net employment growth for the first four months of 2011 and 2012 were about 175,000.  Job gains were then first reported as falling from May through August to a monthly pace of about 50,000 in 2011 and 100,000 in 2012. The revised data, however, show monthly job gains over these periods in both years were about 135,000—not great, but substantially above the initial estimates.  In addition, the spring and summer of those years were accompanied by notable external shocks and risks, such as the Japanese tsunami and earthquake, floods in Thailand, and intensification of the crisis in Europe.  April 30–Certainly, we are still facing a number of external risks, but these risks appear to be attenuated compared with the prior two years.  Other labor market indicators, such as claims and quit rates, also continue to show gradual improvement.  Inflation remains low, and I continue to watch a five-year, five-year-ahead tradable measure of breakeven inflation that remains about 25 basis points above its level late last summer and is only a few basis points below its level at the last meeting.  So I anticipate an improving economic growth and labor market outlook will support firmer inflation over the medium term. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and analysis about the District and national economy, without expressing any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 93.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it merely expresses gratitude and the name of a person.


Passage number 94.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement. The statement "Thank you" could be seen as expressing appreciation or gratitude, but it does not present any disagreement or contention. It is a polite phrase often used to show acknowledgement or appreciation.


Passage number 95.
  April 30–CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude towards Governor Yellen.


Passage number 96.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage "Thank you. Governor Duke." This is a simple expression of gratitude towards someone.


Passage number 97.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Like many of you, my assessment of the economic outlook hasn’t really changed much since the beginning of the year.  But with my optimistic nature, this seems positive to me because I view the mixed data that we’ve received as indicating that we might weather the year-end tax increases and the beginning of sequestration with less damage than many might have anticipated. If the economy continues to grow at better than 2 percent this year, that resilience in the face of fiscal consolidation would give me a fair amount of confidence that we could finally see some real traction as the fiscal effects fade. Turning to banking conditions, my calls in preparation for this meeting caught the bankers fresh off their earnings calls.  Anyone who says banks are unwilling to lend just isn’t listening.  In addition to the need for loans to bolster interest margins, bankers are keenly aware that analysts are focused on loan growth, and they are jittery that recent softness in loan demand could cause the next few quarters to disappoint.  Most confess that recent production is primarily refinance and market-share movement rather than truly new borrowing.  Competition for commercial loans and auto loans remains fierce.  Credit card volume is moving sideways.  The industry expects credit card growth to come primarily in the lower FICO bands, but it is unclear who is willing to lend there and at what price. April 30–Improvement in commercial real estate fundamentals, such as vacancy, rents, transactions, and prices, is slow but persistent, and financing is responding similarly.  Mortgage refinancing volume is choppy and quite interest sensitive. Pipelines are no longer being filled by what walks in the door, and the banks are actively soliciting refis, especially HARP-eligible refis.  Credit losses are now at or below historic norms, and, even in mortgages, the transition rates into delinquency are approaching pre-crisis levels.  And the pipeline of foreclosures is being slowly worked down through modifications and short sales, as well as actual foreclosure. Overall, deleveraging by consumers and businesses appears to be largely complete, but there doesn’t seem to be much appetite yet to releverage. Meanwhile, the recovery in housing continues.  The National Association of Realtors reported March buyer traffic up 25 percent over a year ago, even as inventories continue to shrink.  Distress sales were down to 21 percent of total sales in March.  All measures of house prices continued to climb, and average time on market continued to go down.  I have been reading about some of the earnings calls with homebuilders, and their story has shifted dramatically from lack of demand to supply-chain problems. Notwithstanding the disappointing jobs number in March, it still looks to me like the private sector is finally on firm footing.  So I’m glad that we do have two more payroll reports before our June meeting, and we’ll be paying attention to both the initial readings and the revisions to prior months.  Like President George, I took a look at revisions to employment reports in the past.  I remember being on the fence about what to do last year at the September meeting, until the Chairman argued that the August payroll figure, at 96,000 net jobs, seemed to demand action.  But after the October payroll report revised August jobs up to 192,000, and the July number up from 141,000 to 181,000, the current estimates for those months are now  April 30–,000 for July and 165,000 for August.  So I still wonder whether our actions might have been any different if the initial report and the subsequent revision had gone in the opposite direction, and I have definitely learned to be wary of single-month numbers.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is mainly a summary of the speaker's assessment of the economic outlook and banking conditions.


Passage number 98.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists solely of a farewell expression from the author to Governor Tarullo. There is no contention or disagreement present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 99.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think, as many of you have already noted explicitly or implicitly, the data since the March meeting raise exactly the kind of question that a lot of us anticipated during our last meeting, namely, whether the burst of stronger job and other numbers in the preceding months was going to be followed by a relapse.  I wasn’t going to say anything about labor markets.  I was actually going to go to some of the issues that Charlie Evans has already raised, but because many of you have commented on labor markets, I thought I would say a couple of things. A few weeks ago, I began the proverbial deeper dive into what’s going on in labor markets.  And it’s pretty murky down there, and the murkiness is not just near-term murkiness.  I’ve been talking with a bunch of non-Board labor economists.  I talk to the Board labor economists all the time, but I’ve been talking to a bunch of non-Board labor economists, and three things come through despite the variations in their views.  First, they readily confess to not really understanding what was going on in labor markets before the crisis and recession, that is, the decline in dynamism of U.S. labor markets over the preceding 10 to 15 years.  Second, they all have the intuition that there is less distinction between cyclical and structural factors than we might otherwise have thought.  And they have the intuition that what we’re going through right now is having an effect on structural trends, but they find it difficult to specify exactly what. But third, they all seem to think that no matter how that debate turns out over the coming years, we are nowhere near, at this point, whatever full employment would look like, particularly when you  April 30–take into account the kind of analysis Janet just did of effective underutilization as opposed to just nominally stated underutilization.  They will say things like, “Well, you know, it may be that there’s been a good bit of structural damage, but that’s not showing up now. It’s not going to show up for a while.”  So talking to me as a monetary policymaker, they say “don’t worry about that now.  There may be other things to worry about—and maybe next year or the year after— but not right now.” I think we’re all going to have to dive down to those murky depths over the next couple of decision points, but my guess is that it is going to be hard to come to a highly precise sense of how much is cyclical, how much is structural, and whether there are huge amounts of slack or just moderately huge amounts of slack.  And so we’re going to have to move some on intuition. One of the other two things I did want to note is that, as Charlie observed earlier, even though the jobs number may have been the most eye catching, maybe the more significant trend over the last couple of months is in business investment.  We’ve had a couple of years now where businesses seem to have been compensating for the collapse of investment during the worst stages of the crisis and recession, but capital expenditures now seem to be leveling off as they return to something approaching their historical averages.  And I thought it was interesting that one of the newsletters put out by one of the financial firms last week noted that a lot of large businesses are saying that they’re essentially done with investment until they see enough additional demand to justify more spending.  That is, they’ve caught up with the spending that they didn’t do during the recession that they needed for replacement or other purposes, but now they’re done until there’s a reason to undertake something new. On the other hand, housing remains pretty strong.  Consumer spending and confidence have held up, really, remarkably well considering how weak income growth has been.  I don’t   April 30–know how much longer it can go on.  I mean, the saving rate is now down to 2.7 percent, and in the last 25 years or so, the only time it spent any appreciable time below 3 percent was the middle of the last decade, when everybody thought they would get rich by their houses appreciating. It’s not clear that that’s sustainable, but it has been good news to this point.  So I think we’re just, now, going to sit and see the degree to which March is an anomaly or a portent of the kind of setback that has occurred, now, three previous times during the recovery. Looking ahead, I think it may prove hard in the near term to disentangle the factors that are going to affect the pace of recovery for the better part of the rest of this year.  You could reasonably ask whether the recent burst of stronger activity was principally the result of a snapback from Hurricane Sandy and the drought and some other temporary factors, or whether it reflected an underlying momentum that has built up as deleveraging has proceeded fairly far and other residual headwinds have abated.  But even if the underlying momentum idea proves valid, the sequestration, on top of the fiscal measures adopted at the beginning of the year, is, in any case, going to be pushing down pretty hard on the brake pedal, just as things were starting to get going.  For me, this means that the information over the next several months is likely to be inconclusive.  Now, if we get reasonably strong numbers in the face of the greatest effects of the sequestration in the second and third quarters, that would be a pretty good indication that the underlying momentum story has some force to it.  But if we get poorer numbers, it’s going to be hard, I think, to determine whether the momentum story is still the right one and just going to take a little time to show forth, or whether there still is an underlying absence of momentum.  So we may not be able to make a judgment for a while, until we’re able to look through the maximum effects of the sequestration to see if it’s masking basic strength in the economy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker notes that there is disagreement among labor economists about the state of the labor market and the distinction between cyclical and structural factors. They also mention that it will be difficult to come to a precise understanding of the amount of slack in the economy. This suggests that there is disagreement and uncertainty among economists about the current economic conditions.


Passage number 100.
  April 30–CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Raskin.


Passage number 101.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude directed towards Governor Stein.


Passage number 102.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.  I saw you first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a polite and straightforward statement expressing gratitude.


Passage number 103.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, I do have a question for Governor Stein; I’m trying to think through his remarks, which were quite interesting.  If we had provided a precise definition of what substantial improvement in labor market outlook meant, which might have been very challenging, would it have eliminated that equilibrium you describe.  Or am I misinterpreting what you said. If we had said 7 percent, for example, for the unemployment rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 104.
 MR. STEIN.  Yes, if we had said 7 percent, yes, I think it would have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Stein simply states his opinion without any opposition or conflicting viewpoints mentioned.


Passage number 105.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That was my question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It appears to be a straightforward exchange where Mr. Kocherlakota is seeking clarification or further information related to his question.


Passage number 106.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is because the given passage only mentions the name "President Bullard" without providing any context or information that could imply any form of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 107.
 MR. BULLARD.  Yes, I just have a question for Governor Stein.  I had the opposite interpretation of this open-ended program.  There obviously is adjustment.  You know, when we get bad economic news, and maybe markets overreact to bad economic news, but one of the mitigating factors is they immediately say, “Well, I think the Fed is going to do more.” That is part of the equilibrium, and I think that is definitely going on.  It may not go on in exactly the way you’d like it to, but that is definitely going on.  Whereas, if we had set a fixed date last September, we probably would have set it for the summer, July 1, and we’d be sitting here wondering if we should actually end the program on July 1 or not.  That’s the situation we were in with QE2 and QE1.  So I think that this automatic adjustment definitely is going on, and we see that in the market reaction to the weaker data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their interpretation of the situation and providing an explanation for their viewpoint.


Passage number 108.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’m going to give Governor Stein the last word.  Just letting you know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply informing the audience that Governor Stein will have the final opportunity to speak.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 109.
  April 30–MR. STEIN.  I think the sign is right locally.  In other words, with the March number, it went in the right direction, but globally it has kind of gone the wrong way.  Since September, it’s not gone the way we would have predicted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The individual states that the sign is right locally, suggesting agreement with the direction in March. However, they also state that globally it has gone the wrong way since September, indicating a disagreement or contention regarding the overall trend.


Passage number 110.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. However, it is necessary to provide the actual passage in order to analyze its content.


Passage number 111.
 MR. BULLARD.  There are other data.  There’s also inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In the passage, Mr. Bullard is simply stating that there are other data to consider, including inflation. There is no explicit disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 112.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a polite statement of gratitude directed towards Governor Powell.


Passage number 113.
 MR. CLOUSE.3 Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will be referring to the materials that have just been handed out, labeled “Material for FOMC Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives.” The Tealbook presented three options for your consideration.  Alternative A raises the pace of asset purchases to $100 billion per month and modifies the forward guidance for the federal funds rate by lowering the unemployment threshold to 5½ percent. Alternative B maintains the threshold settings adopted last December and continues asset purchases at their current pace, and alternative C trims the pace of asset purchases to $60 billion per month but leaves the forward guidance for the federal funds rate unchanged.  The exhibit on page 1 of the handout summarizes how real activity, inflation, and interest rates might evolve under the three policy options, conditional on the underlying staff outlook and the dynamics of the FRB/US model; alternative A is shown in blue, alternative B in black, and alternative C in red.  In this exercise, outcomes under alternative B are assumed to match the April Tealbook’s baseline projection.  In particular, as shown in the top-left panel, the FOMC is assumed to continue purchasing assets at the current rate through the June meeting, but thereafter begins to taper purchases, and ends the flow-based program in December.  In addition, the federal funds rate—shown in the top-right panel—is assumed to lift off in late 2015, consistent with the Committee’s forward guidance and the projected decline in the unemployment rate; thereafter, the funds rate follows the prescriptions of the inertial Taylor (1999) rule.  As shown in the bottom-left panel, with these assumptions, the unemployment rate is projected to drift down to about 5½ percent— 3 The materials used by Mr. Clouse are appended to this transcript (appendix 3).April 30–roughly the middle of your forecasts for the longer-run normal level of the unemployment rate—by late 2016, while inflation (shown in the bottom-right panel) gradually edges up to the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal. Under alternative A, represented by the blue dotted line, the size of the SOMA portfolio rises to about $4 trillion by the spring of next year—about in line with median dealer expectations—and the funds rate remains at the effective lower bound until mid-2016, consistent with the forward guidance under this alternative. In response to the greater accommodation provided by this policy option, the unemployment rate falls more quickly and reaches 5½ percent by early 2016, and then moves lower over subsequent quarters.  Inflation rises a little above 2 percent for a time before returning to the target level later in the decade. In contrast, under the more restrictive policy envisioned in alternative C, shown by the red dashed line, the funds rate begins to move up late next year, well before either threshold is crossed, and the size of the SOMA portfolio peaks at $3.3 trillion.  As a result, the unemployment rate does not reach 5½ percent until mid-2017, and inflation remains below 2 percent until late in the decade. Turning to the economic arguments and statement language for each alternative: You may see the economic outlook as little changed from the last round, and in light of mixed signals from incoming economic data, you may be attracted to alternative B, which maintains current policy settings—asset purchases of $85 billion per month and the existing thresholds for the forward guidance. The draft statement for alternative B, shown on pages 6 and 7 of your handout, is unchanged from the statement issued in March, apart from updating the information on economic conditions in paragraph 1.  That paragraph says that data received since the March FOMC meeting suggest that economic activity has been expanding at a moderate pace, while noting that fiscal policy is restraining economic growth. Judging by responses to the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers, market participants do not expect significant changes in the statement at this meeting. Accordingly, a statement along the lines of alternative B would likely have little effect on interest rates or broader financial conditions. The more accommodative policy stance of alternative A, on pages 4 and 5 of your handout, may be attractive to policymakers who anticipate that without additional policy accommodation, progress toward the Committee’s longer-run objectives likely would be unacceptably slow.  These policymakers may also be concerned about the risk of permanent damage to workers’ skills and labor force attachment if employment growth were to remain sluggish, or about the potential for further disinflation if economic slack were to remain elevated. The first paragraph of the statement for alternative A notes that “economic activity has been expanding at a moderate pace,” but it goes on to note that “the pace of improvement in labor market conditions appears to have slowed.” Paragraph 2 states that “without further policy accommodation, economic growth might not beApril 30–strong enough to generate a sustained improvement in labor market conditions” and that inflation over the medium run likely would remain below the FOMC’s 2 percent objective.  In paragraph 3, the Committee notes that it will increase the pace of its securities purchases, while paragraph 5 lowers the unemployment rate threshold to 5½ percent and reinforces the message by noting that the Committee “intends to retain” (rather than “currently anticipates”) an exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate at least until the unemployment rate or inflation over the medium term have reached their respective thresholds. A statement along the lines of alternative A would be quite surprising to market participants, leading to additional downward pressure on long-term interest rates and reinforcing the effects of the downward revision in the expected path for the federal funds rate.  The exchange value of the dollar might decline, and stock prices would likely rise.  However, the rise in stock prices could be damped if investors saw the statement as pointing to a markedly weaker economic outlook than previously thought.  Alternative C, on pages 8 and 9 of your handout, might be attractive to policymakers who see economic indicators as confirming that the economic recovery is now on firmer footing, as well as to those who judge that continuing asset purchases at the current rate would risk a deterioration in long-term inflation expectations, contribute to financial stability risks, or complicate the Committee’s ability to withdraw policy accommodation at the appropriate time. The first paragraph of alternative C notes that the unemployment rate and other indicators of labor market conditions have improved.  Paragraph 2 notes that the Committee expects that economic growth will proceed at a moderate rate in coming quarters and then pick up; it also deletes the reference to downside risks to the outlook and notes that “the Committee sees the risks to both economic growth and inflation as roughly balanced.” Paragraph 3 states that in light of the improvement in the labor market outlook since last September, the Committee decided to slow the pace of its securities purchases. A statement along the lines of alternative C would greatly surprise market participants, likely prompting increased longer-term rates, lower stock prices, and a higher exchange value of the dollar. Draft directives for each of the alternatives are listed on pages 11 to 13 of your handout.  That concludes my prepared remarks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply presenting three different policy alternatives for consideration.


Passage number 114.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Are there questions for Jim.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply consists of expressions of gratitude, requesting questions, and mentioning President Bullard.


Passage number 115.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  You know, we have an alternative C, and the way you described it just now would mean the fed funds rate moves off zero before the threshold is encountered.  Do we really have to have that kind of alternative C.  Couldn’t we just  April 30–have a sooner tapering of purchases without having the liftoff date be sooner.  It seems a little harsh to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard is expressing his opinion and suggesting an alternative approach without disagreeing with anyone else's views.


Passage number 116.
 MR. CLOUSE.  Well, this is a matter of some discussion among the staff, and maybe David and others can help me out a little bit.  There is a tension in doing the simulations for alternative C, because FRB/US doesn’t really have the dynamics that we think many of the policymakers who might favor alternative C would be concerned about—namely, things like concerns about financial stability risks or risks to inflation from higher reserves.  We think that the reason somebody might choose C is out of concern, in particular, for inflation risk, so that’s partly how we got at it. We were thinking that policymakers who favored that option might rely on the language in the statement suggesting that you would be looking at things apart from just the thresholds to make a judgment about when to lift the federal funds rate—along the lines of that one sentence at the end of the statement.  That was the logic behind trying to do it that way, but we certainly needn’t do it that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the thought process behind a decision.


Passage number 117.
 MR. BULLARD.  Well, I’m a little concerned about it because the Committee is thinking about, at some point, trying to go in this direction.  And this maybe overstates a little bit what the effects would be if all you want to do is taper, but you’re willing to respect the Committee’s commitment to the thresholds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing concern and stating that the Committee is considering a certain direction, while also acknowledging the importance of respecting the Committee's commitment to the thresholds.


Passage number 118.
 MR. CLOUSE.  That’s a fair point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The statement "That's a fair point" indicates agreement or acknowledgement, rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 119.
  MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Yes.  And it does overstate the effects.  My guess, off the top of my head, based on other things we’ve done, is that if you just said, “We are going to stick with the thresholds; there is not going to be an earlier liftoff,” the unemployment rate would shift.  That red line would shift halfway back toward the black line.  That’s my rough guess.  But, as Jim said, we have had a hard time, over time, deciding what the motivation for choosing April 30–alternative C would mean.  Is it a different outlook.  A different assessment of risk. And what would it imply for the federal funds rate path as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing their own thoughts and guesses on the effects of a certain decision. There is no conflicting opinion presented.


Passage number 120.
 MR. POTTER.  There is also the effect on market expectations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any conflicting views or opposing opinions. It simply mentions a statement made by Mr. Potter about the effect on market expectations.


Passage number 121.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Yes.  There is also a signaling effect.  So even if the Committee was just bound and determined that the thresholds stick, the market might not interpret it that way, and you’d see an effect that looks like this simulation for alternative C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the passage, Mr. Reifschneider is providing an explanation for a potential signaling effect. He is not expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 122.
 MR. BULLARD.  Yes.  But that is the kind of thing that we have a press conference for and we can talk about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is simply stating that press conferences are an appropriate platform for discussing the kind of thing mentioned.


Passage number 123.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement. It solely mentions "President Kocherlakota" without any additional context or statement that could indicate disagreement or contention.


Passage number 124.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have two questions about the simulations underlying alternative A.  The first question is, what did you put in there for a substantial improvement in the labor market outlook—when did you end the purchase program in alternative A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Kocherlakota has two questions about the simulations underlying alternative A.


Passage number 125.
 MR. CLOUSE.  The purchase program in alternative A ends in the first half of 2014.  So it begins to taper later this year, and then ends in the first half of 2014.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a timeline for the purchase program.


Passage number 126.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  And my second question is, so A does better on unemployment.  How much of the improvement of A relative to B is due to the change in the purchase program, and how much is due to the lowering of the threshold.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking for a breakdown of the factors that contributed to the improvement of A relative to B.


Passage number 127.
 MR. CLOUSE.  Well, I think the threshold actually is quite powerful.  I mean, both are important, but the threshold really gives you a lot of kick.  And David probably can give you the actual numbers off the top of his head.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Clouse, is expressing his opinion about the power of the threshold, but there is no indication of someone opposing or disputing his viewpoint.


Passage number 128.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That’s a fine answer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kocherlakota's response is positive and complimentary.


Passage number 129.
  [Laughter]April 30–MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  The threshold itself is worth more than half of the unemployment rate effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of a statement about the value of a threshold and its impact on the unemployment rate.


Passage number 130.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude.


Passage number 131.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 132.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First, I believe I wasn’t listening carefully enough as Jim was going through the alternative C and the implications for the fed funds rate.  Just so I can understand, you must have been talking about the figure that shows how the funds rate could be lifting off prior to hitting the threshold.  But that’s an interpretation that you have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification and expressing that they may have missed something during the explanation.


Passage number 133.
 MR. CLOUSE.  That’s the staff interpretation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply presenting Mr. Clouse's opinion or observation without challenging or conflicting with any other viewpoint.


Passage number 134.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay.  So it could happen that way, certainly.  I understand that.  All right. I was looking at alternative B and alternative C, with an idea toward trying to understand how we would, not that I favor it, implement earlier tapering in June.  Currently, alternative B, in the first paragraph, has language on the labor market:  “Labor market conditions have shown some improvement in recent months.” It seems like a positive statement.  I don’t have any difficulty with that.  Now, if in fact you were contemplating alternative C today, paragraph 1 is also intended to be factual although it is a slightly different interpretation:  “Although the unemployment rate remains elevated, it has declined further, and other indicators of labor market conditions have shown additional improvement.” It’s still factually correct.  I mean, you could choose to emphasize that, I suppose—probably not after the March report, but you could see that after two good reports.  And then, paragraph 3 has the other reference about “based on the improvement in the outlook for the labor market since last September.”  Governor Stein and Governor Powell have represented that position, I think, fairly well, that there have been improvements.  So, if we were contemplating alternative C being offered up next time as April 30–alternative B, would we be putting most of our eggs on the positive developments on the labor market in those two reports—in which case it’s still up for grabs—or is it going to be the “Darn it, I just think we need to do this and taper”.  So is it going to lean more on paragraph 3.  Those are the questions that come to mind as I look at this language.  Is there one preferred over the other in the staff’s view of how markets would be looking at this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 135.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. In the memo about changing the flow of asset purchases, we tried to address that issue.  And I don’t know whether Steve Meyer wants to talk about it here, but we tried to address that issue by thinking about how you might craft a statement, say, in June, or whenever, under alternative states of the world, as far as the way the data have come in.  Depending on what conditions have been doing at the time you are thinking about doing it, you could be writing very different statements.  They might not look at all like this alternative C; they might look considerably different.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 136.
 MR. EVANS.  I’m not sure what my question is; I’m just trying to think this one through—does our characterization of labor markets in tomorrow’s statement matter a lot for how we set the June decision point, or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Evans is simply expressing uncertainty and seeking clarification regarding the impact of labor market characterization on their decision-making process.


Passage number 137.
 MR. POTTER.  The market expects some note of the weaker data.  So if there is no note of that, it would be a strong signal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that if there is no mention of weaker data, it would be seen as a strong signal by the market.


Passage number 138.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  I think the expectation, from what I’ve read, is for a slightly weaker statement.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion about the expectation they have derived from their reading.


Passage number 139.
 MS. DUKE.  Also, I would ask about the difference in formulating alternative C and in formulating the tapering language in the memo on adjusting the pace of asset purchases.  And it seems like there, the language is a little less “changing gears” type of language, but more “this is a step in a continuum” type of language.  So it would seem to me, if we wanted—and, in fact,   April 30–this was one of the suggestions I was going to make; now I’m really infringing on the next round—we take a sentence out of the memo, not out of alternative C—the sentence about adjusting the pace of purchases, which could be up or down—and put it into alternative B.  That could be something that markets could interpret as indicating that we were so worried about the weak data that we were setting up the possibility that we were going to increase purchases. But it certainly would continue that concept that we are thinking about altering the pace of purchases, which we, I think, did introduce pretty successfully after the March meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the different language used in formulating alternative C and in formulating the tapering language in the memo on adjusting the pace of asset purchases. They then suggest taking a sentence from the memo and putting it into alternative B, noting that it could be interpreted by the markets as indicating a possible increase in purchases.


Passage number 140.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. Let me just say a word on what we have already begun here.  Obviously, tomorrow we will need to make tomorrow’s policy decision, and have a statement, and so on.  But I have a feeling—and it won’t take much encouragement—that we will also have a robust discussion of the tactics and strategy of going forward, and I encourage that.  We got a very good memo from the staff that was a starting point, but, obviously, you can go in whatever direction you would like.  I encourage constructive interventions.  I hope we can find solutions together about how we can solve some of the communications issues that have come up.  So I hope it will be a good and constructive discussion tomorrow. I want to make just a couple of points about communication opportunities.  First, I am slated to testify before the Joint Economic Committee on May 22.  And, second, I have conferred with Michelle, and we have confirmed that if there was ever a need for an ad hoc press conference, we could announce at the time of the statement being released that we were going to have a phone press conference, public, live. I just want to say that because, as we think about this, we don’t have to necessarily assume that we only can act once a quarter.  I mean, I think we can act more often than that if we need to; we have the logistics for that.   April 30–But I think that there obviously are some very difficult questions here.  As we discuss it, again, I hope that we can think about how we can achieve our policy objectives, but do it in a way that will work from a communications perspective.  So I look forward to that discussion tomorrow.  And then, as you know, we will have an additional item on the agenda on exit principles.  Okay.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the speaker's thoughts and plans for future discussions and actions.


Passage number 141.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Said with such enthusiasm.  [Laughter]  Just a quick thing, to build on what you just said, that I think it would be useful for us to be able to think about.  If there are going to be elements of the labor market outlook we are going to end up highlighting as being the criteria by which we are going to adjust policy in June, it might be useful to bring those forward in alternative B in the first paragraph now.  For example, Governor Powell’s statement about the trailing numbers of nonfarm payrolls.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting that it would be helpful to bring forward certain elements of the labor market outlook in order to inform policy decisions.


Passage number 142.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let me make a radical suggestion here.  If you have sentences, paragraphs, whatever, that you would like, would you please send them to Jim or to Steve Meyer.  And could you make a sheet tomorrow that has just six sentences, for example, “From President Kocherlakota, this sentence”. Just so we have a sheet that has everything written down.  And then, that will just be something that will be for reference as we talk about this, in case people have specific suggestions.  Okay.  So just send those things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply making a request for sentences and paragraphs to be sent to Jim or Steve Meyer, and asking for a sheet to be created for reference during a conversation.


Passage number 143.
 MR. EVANS.  And when is the cutoff time for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the speaker is asking about a cutoff time.


Passage number 144.
 [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  8:30 tomorrow morning.  Let’s be reasonable about this, okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting statements or opposing viewpoints. The mention of laughter does not indicate disagreement. Additionally, the phrase "Let's be reasonable about this, okay" suggests a desire for cooperation rather than contention.


Passage number 145.
  [Laughter] MR. EVANS.  All right.  Yes, sir.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response "Yes, sir" implies agreement or affirmation.


Passage number 146.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right, okay. Force majeure.  We now have a reception and dinner.  We will reconvene tomorrow morning at 9:00 a.m.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply informs about the schedule for the reception, dinner, and the time to reconvene the next day, expressing gratitude at the end.


Passage number 147.
April 30–[Meeting recessed]   April 30–May 1 Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning.  We’ve reached item 3 on our agenda. The staff did a couple of quick pieces of ad hoc research overnight, which bore on some of the questions from yesterday, and I thought I would share them with you.  I guess these both had to do with Governor Stein’s and Governor Powell’s comments.  The first had to do with communication—how expected purchases vary with the news.  One point of interest that David Wilcox and his team showed me was that the improvement from the Blue Chip perspective is somewhat less than that from the Tealbook perspective.  In August of last year, the unemployment rate prediction by the Blue Chip for the fourth quarter of 2013 was 7.7 percent, and, as of April, it’s now 7.5 percent.  So there’s been less of an improvement from the Blue Chip’s perspective.  Of course, on top of that, the Blue Chip has probably been surprised by the additional fiscal policy restraint that’s come in. It’s still an important point, but I think the mystery is reduced, at least a little bit, by that observation. The other observation, which is due to Steve Meyer and which I felt was interesting, is that the total size of the program, as expected by the median dealer, has actually been pretty constant since October. Prior to the October FOMC meeting, the total amount of expected purchases for 2013 and 2014 was $1105 billion, and, before the January FOMC meeting, it was $1140.  Before March, it was $1080 billion, and, before this meeting, it was $1145 billion.  The point is that it’s not the case that the expected additional purchases, from the point where we are at a point in time, are constant.  In other words, we’re not on a treadmill.  As we move forward, we are in fact fulfilling what is more or less a constant expectation for the ultimate size of the program.  I think that does affect at least a little bit of the thinking about exit ramps and so on, but I’m sure there’ll be plenty of discussion and commentary on these issues.   April 30–One other thing before we start.  We were expecting at least 30 contributions to the language.  Governor Duke gets the merit badge.  [Laughter]  She submitted this additional sentence, which would go between the third and fourth sentences of paragraph 4, presumably in alternative B.  As we begin our go-round, I wonder, Governor Duke, would you like to go first and explain this, or would you rather wait.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information and updates on research findings.


Passage number 148.
 MS. DUKE. I can.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: not answer that question because there is not enough information provided in the passage.


Passage number 149.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Go ahead.  Why don’t you go first.  And then, as we go around, if anyone wants to comment on this suggestion, obviously they can do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement present in this passage. The speakers are simply discussing the order in which they will contribute their thoughts and inviting others to comment on a suggestion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 150.
 MS. DUKE.4 Well, first, I’d like to point out that Jim Clouse didn’t get any dinner because he was waiting for all of the new submissions. First of all, I’m not in favor of making any changes to policy at this meeting, but I would like the statement from this meeting to leave us in the best possible position to start tapering in June if the data cooperate. I found the memo on changing the pace of purchases to really be quite helpful.  Knowing that I’m a lot more concerned than most of you about the cost of a very large balance sheet, I’m still willing to admit that, when I reviewed the memo on changing the pace of asset purchases, I found that issuing a statement that said we had run up against an unfavorable cost–benefit tradeoff sounds an awful lot like defeat, whether it’s a collective statement from the Committee or whether it’s individual members of the Committee dropping off of this train as each reaches his or her own particular pain point.  But at the same time, the likelihood of getting to the substantial improvement in the outlook for labor market conditions that we originally set as a threshold to end purchases seems like a very long way away, especially if we discount resilience to fiscal drag and expect monetary policy to offset 4 The materials used by Ms. Duke are appended to this transcript (appendix 4). April 30–sequestration.  So I do see an attractive middle ground, and I thought we were converging on a middle ground at the last meeting—that is, the option of stepping down purchases just a bit in response to progress toward our goals—not the “substantial improvement,” but progress toward our goals.  This would give us a positive message, and, because the pace could always be increased again, I don’t think it comes at a large cost.  And it would give us a better signaling mechanism and allow us to regain control of expectations. As Governors Stein and Powell pointed out yesterday, and as the Tealbook graphs illustrate, we have made noticeable progress since September. It doesn’t rise to the threshold of substantial improvement that would indicate an end to purchases, but it is noticeable.  And the longer we wait to react to the noticeable progress, the less plausible it becomes as a reason for tapering and the more remote becomes our opportunity to point to that progress as a positive result.  So if the progress we’ve seen so far doesn’t justify a step-down, my question is, what does it take, and what’s the likelihood that we’re going to see even greater progress, as we go into the year, than we saw so far. The longer we wait to adjust the pace, the higher the markets will interpret that bar to be, and there’s a real possibility that we could miss out on a window of good news by waiting for better news. I’m not saying that we plan to taper in June regardless of the data, but if we did have some positive revision to March and got some decent job growth, I think we should at least consider signaling that we’re happy with the direction, especially if it comes in spite of the fiscal drag.  I think we could pull that off without hurting our credibility if we prepare the ground. Markets expect us to taper sometime, and we’re the ones who are going to have to teach them what to view as positive or negative. I don’t think a small deceleration in the pace of purchases would have a big effect on efficacy. In fact, when we first launched the MBS program in September, I believe that theApril 30–original pace in the Tealbook was $30 billion a month, and it was only in the last few minutes of the meeting that it was increased to $40 billion to make it sound a bit more muscular.  The big effect of tapering comes from adjustment to market expectations, which is exactly what I intend. I’m still truly bothered by the wide gap between market expectations and the assumptions in the Tealbook that reflect the staff’s interpretation of the broad center of the Committee.  So I think transparency demands that we reconcile the two, and I can see two ways for this to happen.  We could start tapering as a signal to rein in market expectations as progress is made, or we could stop pretending to believe that we anticipate a program that’s much smaller than the market anticipates and instruct the staff to adjust the Tealbook assumptions accordingly. I thought the minutes of the last meeting were pretty clear about the number of members who expressed support for tapering sometime this year and ending by year-end 2013, but Fed watchers completely discounted that signal and even increased their expectations for the timing of the adjustments and the ultimate purchase size. Since the day we launched the program, I’ve been concerned that, rather than driving market expectations, we would be driven by them.  The market now seems to expect an unbroken streak of wins, with any stutter along the way restarting the count, and we appear to be on track to validating that expectation.  So I’m in favor of alternative B, but I would like the statement for this meeting to build on the concept of adjusting purchases that we introduced in the press conference and the speeches after the last meeting. I think that the change I’ve suggested would serve two purposes.  It would set up a smooth transition to tapering in June, if that turns out to be appropriate, and it would communicate to markets that adjusting purchases is a more serious and imminent option than they now seem to expect.  Even if markets assume that it’s a signal that we might increase the April 30–flow of purchases in response to soft data, I still think it would serve a worthwhile purpose.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Ms. Duke expresses that she is not in favor of making any changes to policy at this meeting, while also stating that she would like the statement from this meeting to leave them in the best possible position to start tapering in June if the data cooperate. She also expresses concern about the wide gap between market expectations and the assumptions in the Tealbook, suggesting that transparency demands reconciling the two.


Passage number 151.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. The passage is not provided, so it is not possible to determine the presence of any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 152.
 MR. EVANS.  Could I ask a clarifying question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for a clarifying question.


Passage number 153.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 154.
 MR. EVANS.  Where’s the language intended.  I count only three sentences in the paragraph.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply an inquiry about the presence of language intended in the paragraph and a statement about the number of sentences observed.


Passage number 155.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. In alternative B, paragraph 4, it would come after the sentence about continuing purchases until “the labor market has improved substantially in a context of price stability.”  Then we would insert this sentence—“prepared to vary” and so on.  And then, finally, we would continue to have the last sentence, which says that we’ll also take account of efficacy and costs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply presenting a suggested addition to the text and explaining its placement.


Passage number 156.
 MR. EVANS. Okay.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states that Mr. Evans is thanking someone, there is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 157.
 MS. RASKIN. So it would be between the second and third sentences.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. The passage only includes one sentence, so there is no opportunity for contention or disagreement between sentences.


Passage number 158.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, after the phrase “improved substantially in a context of price stability,” in paragraph B(4) and, I assume, analogously, in the other alternatives.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase mentioned is simply stating that something has improved substantially in a context of price stability, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 159.
 MS. DUKE.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or statements that suggest disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 160.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other comments.  [No response]  Okay.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement evident in this passage.


Passage number 161.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 162.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Are you feeling better, by the way, Eric.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a question asking about Eric's well-being, there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 163.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Yes, I am feeling better.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement expressing gratitude.


Passage number 164.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s good to know.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses acknowledgement and agreement.


Passage number 165.
  April 30–MR. ROSENGREN.  I support alternative B.  We are projecting large misses on both elements of our mandate for this year, and the miss on inflation is getting quite large. It is ironic that, when I looked at the Bank of Japan announcement last week, the median of the Policy Board’s inflation forecast, adjusted for the consumption tax, was 1.4 percent for 2014 and 1.9 percent for 2015.  The Tealbook forecasts for PCE inflation for both 2014 and 2015 are 1.6 percent.  I think one lesson from Japan is that being the major central bank that most undershoots an inflation target is not a distinction for which we should strive. Inflation falling further below our target and fiscal austerity that is worse than we expected provide ample reasons to strongly prefer alternative B to alternative C. While the data are not unambiguous, taken as a whole, labor markets have not improved substantially enough to alter our purchase program.  The benefits of LSAPs seem clear, as the interest-sensitive sectors continue to perform well despite the fiscal headwinds, and the costs to date seem quite modest. It worries me to know that the Bank of Japan has had a history of pulling back on aggressive policy just as their economy was beginning to improve and deflation was receding.  Keeping that lesson in mind, we should not pull back from a program that is both working and likely a major reason why our economy is improving better than those of most other developed countries. We have a dual mandate.  With inflation well below its target and unemployment well above full employment, we do not have dueling mandates.  Each mandate implies the same policy prescription:  accommodation.  But given the increasing divergence from our inflation target and the only modest improvement in the unemployment rate that is, to a large degree, reflecting not the strength of labor markets but the weakness in labor force participation, this is no time to hesitate in our quest to achieve our congressional mandate. April 30–While I have no objection to Governor Duke’s language, the current draft of alternative B is quite parsimonious.  I prefer a parsimonious approach when we do not want to change policy and when future action is dependent on incoming data that are quite uncertain.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both speakers express support for alternative B and provide reasons for their preference.


Passage number 166.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude to President Lockhart.


Passage number 167.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B in the statement as presented. Let me turn to the consideration of tapering, which may be on the table at the next meeting.  In past discussions, I’ve expressed concern about the open-ended aspect of the current LSAP program and have shared my almost gut judgment that the growth of the balance sheet has to come to an end at some point.  And I somewhat arbitrarily settled on the threshold of $4 trillion, beyond which my level of discomfort starts to rise substantially. Now, with a tapering decision being considered as immediately as the June meeting, I’m concerned about how the Committee, and the Chairman, explains the rationale for such a move.  As I said at the end of my economy-round statement, I’m skeptical we’ll be able to point to tangible improvement in the incoming data as auguring a materially improved outlook.  Claiming an improved outlook with little real-time evidence strikes me as a tenuous position.  So I see the decision to begin tapering as one of satisficing among somewhat conflicting concerns, not the least of which is credibility. I see three concerns.  First, there is the risk of removing policy stimulus prematurely, and doing so inadvertently by evoking a market reaction that has that effect.  Second, there is the desirable aim, in my view, of suggesting a terminal point for the program, even with conditionality explicitly preserved.  Third, I have some anxiety about the Committee losing April 30–credibility by seeming to declare victory with respect to labor market improvement with the unemployment rate anywhere near current levels and broader measures of labor market performance showing spotty improvement at best. I’m concerned with how credibly we will be able to stick to the spirit of the conditionality around labor market improvement.  I would make a comment about improvement since last September.  The unemployment rate is 7.6 percent today, versus 7.8 last September.  Since September, there’s been very modest improvement in broader measures of the employment markets.  Much of the real improvement occurred between September 2011 and September 2012.  And if there is improvement, it’s really in the staff and SEP forecasts more than it is in the data. Depending on how conditions evolve between now and June, I can see myself supporting a decision to begin tapering if the communication around the decision is very carefully crafted.  I think it will be important to emphasize that the slower pace of purchases is based on a receding of the risk that gradual improvement will not be sustained, and not on the claim that the outlook for labor markets has improved substantially enough to halt asset purchases.  Related to that point, the tapering decision does not imply an imminent end to the asset purchase program. And, finally, as the Chairman stated in his last press conference, and as is suggested by the insert that Governor Duke would like to put in, the Committee is ready to adjust the pace of purchases up or down as economic conditions evolve.  For the most part, I think that these last two ideas are captured well in the staff’s illustrative language on page 10 of the memo on changing the pace of asset purchases, under the header “Moderate growth in economic activity and employment growth in coming months.” As I said yesterday, I believe that it will be necessary to lean more heavily on improved confidence in the outlook, versus improvement in the outlook April 30–per se.  For that reason, I would suggest explicit reference to diminished downside risk as part of any tapering rationale. Although, as I said, I think the sentence that Governor Duke suggests inserting needs emphasizing, I’m not ready to support it at this time.  Given that we just don’t know how things will look in two months, I’m reluctant to signal too much in this meeting’s statement.  So, after all of these considerations, I would go with the statement as written.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lockhart, expresses his support for alternative B and also shares his concerns and considerations regarding tapering and the rationale for such a move. However, there is no indication of disagreement or contention with any other person or viewpoint mentioned in the passage. Mr. Lockhart is simply expressing his own thoughts and perspective.


Passage number 168.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage consists of a statement of appreciation ("Thank you") and a respectful salutation ("President Lacker"). There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this brief interaction.


Passage number 169.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Once again, I fully support maintaining the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 25 basis points.  My only comment has to do with agency MBS.  You all know that I’ve objected to purchases of MBS, based on our stated principle that we should avoid credit allocation.  But let’s set that objection aside for the moment.  The theory or motivation underlying our MBS purchases is that those purchases, compared with buying a similar amount of U.S. Treasury securities only, are going to be reducing mortgage rates to below what they otherwise would be.  By deciding to buy MBS instead of a similar amount of Treasuries, mortgage rates are lower than they would be.  So housing activity, presumably, would be stimulated.  That’s presumably the objective of our tilt toward MBS.  Housing has been increasing over the last year or so, and I think that should raise the question as to whether we should begin shifting away from MBS.  I think that needs to be on our agenda.  Now, you might object and say that the housing recovery is incomplete, that it would falter without our continuing support, or that we pulled the rug out from under it.  I’m not sure I agree. It’s not clear to me that we should be expecting this housing market to head back to 1½ million units a year, for example, anytime soon, and we can have a debate about whether that’s the case or not.  But surely there exists some level of housing market strength that ought to April 30–cause us to change direction, pivot away from MBS, normalize our balance sheet, and shift back to Treasuries.  So I think it’s something we need to seriously discuss.  It needs to be a serious option at future meetings. One small, minimal step we could take in that direction would be to start reinvesting the principal payments from our holdings of agency debt and agency MBS into U.S. Treasuries, rather than rolling them into agency MBS—so, a gradual shift, as the MBS mature, back into Treasuries.  No wholesale swap of a gigantic MBS portfolio dumped on the market—just the smallest step you could picture us taking, but, I think, a reasonable one. A larger step, of course, would be to taper our MBS purchases more rapidly than we taper our Treasury purchases or to make all of the tapering on the MBS side.  But in any event, shifting out of MBS needs to be on the agenda because of the strength we’ve seen in the housing market.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It only presents the speaker's viewpoint and suggestions for shifting away from purchasing agency MBS.


Passage number 170.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Lacker, I’ve given some thought to your credit allocation argument, which I think is an important argument.  I guess the defense I would offer is that, in normal times, when the Fed tries to stimulate activity, housing is an important transmission mechanism by which our actions affect the broader economy.  We don’t have a goal specifically for housing.  Rather, it’s just a tool by which we are getting overall employment and inflation where we’d like it to be.  I guess I would argue for the analogy that we’re not particularly interested in the housing sector per se, but rather, it is a transmission mechanism to achieve our broader macroeconomic goals.  Of course, I think your concerns are legitimate, but that would be the counterargument I would give.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges the importance of President Lacker's credit allocation argument and offers a defense for their own viewpoint. They also acknowledge that President Lacker's concerns are legitimate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 171.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes, if I could follow up—there is this correlation.  Obviously, some sectors are much more interest sensitive than others.  A broad array of risk-free rates fall in recessions, and demand falls; demand rises, as sectors are stimulated by lower interest rates, and April 30–they come back.  The way we’ve done things in the past preserves a neutrality or an unbiasedness across different interest rate sensitivities. A corollary of us pushing mortgage rates below what they otherwise would be is that, in this recovery, small businesses, for instance, may be paying more than they otherwise would.  If it’s aiding housing, it’s surely shifting resources from somewhere else.  And I just don’t see the analytical basis for thinking that that’s going to lead to a better recovery than one that’s neutral, in the traditional sense, about where the recovery is going to take place.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing skepticism and disagreement with the idea that pushing mortgage rates below what they otherwise would be is beneficial for the recovery. They argue that this may benefit housing but it is shifting resources away from other sectors, such as small businesses, which may be paying more than they otherwise would. The speaker questions the analytical basis for thinking this will lead to a better recovery and argues for a more neutral approach.


Passage number 172.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It’s raising overall activity. It isn’t necessarily shifting resources from elsewhere—maybe just utilizing unutilized resources, like construction workers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is discussing how raising overall activity can potentially utilize unutilized resources, such as construction workers, without shifting resources from elsewhere.


Passage number 173.
 MR. LACKER.  I’m not sure I understand that.  I’m not sure I get that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, MR. LACKER expresses confusion and uncertainty, but there is no explicit contention or disagreement.


Passage number 174.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage consists of one word, "Okay," which does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 175.
 MR. FISHER.  I won’t try to broker this conversation, Mr. Chairman.  But thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I will be making comments on MBS in the later session today.  I’d like to ask a question before I get started, if I may, so I get a sense of what the limits are here. I’d be interested in the staff’s definition of what the practical limits are on the size of our balance sheet, and then I’d be interested in your views, Mr. Chairman, and those of the Vice Chairman of the Committee. So, may I ask the staff really quickly, what’s a number. Is there a number.  I mention this because President Lockhart mentioned his discomfort.  Governor Yellen—yesterday, in her intervention—indicated that she was in favor of increased long-term LSAPs. But is it $5 trillion. Is it $10 trillion.  Is it $20 trillion.  Would the staff kindly give me some insight.  Have we considered this. What is the practical limit of what we can do—just so I have a sense of dimension.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 176.
   April 30–MR. CLOUSE.  I honestly have to confess that I don’t think we have a particular number in mind.  As we have talked about, we have some issues about the pace of the increase in the balance sheet, and Simon can comment on that.  But we haven’t focused as much on whether there’s a hard limit of some sort or some point where the marginal cost of increasing our balance sheet really starts to kick in.  Of course, as you might imagine, we’ve never really been in this territory, and it’s very hard to bring any sort of empirical evidence to bear on it.  So we’d be trying to reach that conclusion from a priori reasoning, which is a little bit difficult in the current circumstances.  I’m sorry, but I can’t really give you a very definitive answer on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they do not have a specific number in mind for the balance sheet increase and that it is difficult to come to a definitive answer without empirical evidence.


Passage number 177.
 MR. POTTER. In July of last year, we sent you a memo.  I think we thought $2 trillion over two years was the maximum pace that was sustainable. If we redid those calculations, we could probably go a little bit quicker than that based on the MBS side.  That would get you to about $4½ trillion, if we start at about $2½ trillion. As Jim said, what the actual capacity is, I think, is going to depend on issuance after that and some of the costs that we’ve spoken about.  But if you’re talking about a physical limit, then the number is going to be much higher, as we can see in Japan right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different potential levels of pace and limitations without contradicting or disagreeing with any other person or statement.


Passage number 178.
 MR. FISHER. But there is a limit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage shows the statement made by Mr. Fisher without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 179.
 MR. POTTER.  There will be a limit because there won’t be anything left for us to buy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement made by Mr. Potter seems to be a statement of fact rather than a point of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 180.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher, another way to calculate the limit is to think about our exit tools.  If we were to do alternative A, which is the larger set of purchases, we would end up with about $2.4 trillion in excess reserves.  We have, of course, the interest on excess reserves as a way of raising interest rates.  But in addition to that, we have about $1 trillion of capacity reserve-draining tools, which are the reverse repos and the time deposits, and we have about $1.2 trillion in short-term Treasuries that we can sell. So, from a point ofApril 30–view of exiting and maintaining monetary control, I don’t think that that would be of particular concern.  I think the concerns—I won’t speak for others—that have been raised have to do with the side effects—financial stability concerns and the like.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting a perspective on how to calculate the limit and discussing the available tools for maintaining monetary control. They also mention concerns that others have raised without expressing their own opinion on those concerns.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 181.
 MR. FISHER.  That’s helpful, Mr. Chairman.  There is a limit out there; I’m trying to get my arms around what it might be, because one argument could be that, as we go through time, if we haven’t seen the improvement that we’d like to see on the labor front, we just continue the process.  And I’m trying to get a sense of what the fence line is. Now for my comments on policy.  I was pretty clear yesterday that, with regard to policy, I maintain that the efficacy of our current policy is questionable and will prove less efficacious as long as there is enormous uncertainty about fiscal policy and regulatory policy and until the fiscal authorities come forward with initiatives on the tax and spending and regulatory front that regear—again, I’m not advocating austerity; I want to make that clear—the economy so as to take advantage of already ultra-abundant and uber-cheap capital that we have engineered in order to create jobs. And one of the most disturbing statistics for me is that, in the last 10 years, in the two middle income quartiles, we’ve seen job destruction in the United States, not job creation.  The important thing for me is to have a monetary policy that matches or is properly utilized by the fiscal authorities and that is directed so that the middle class, working men and women, are the beneficiaries—not just the rich, so that the rich get richer. I mentioned Japan’s Abenomics last year and the third arrow.  Clearly, we need a third arrow—structural change—and no further amount of monetary accommodation will solve that problem.  Businesses simply cannot make decisions under conditions of total uncertainty, and they are operating in a fog of uncertainty.  If you look at the cap-ex numbers, we’re back to 2007. What we want to see is additional cap-ex with real job-creating capacity and commitment,April 30–and I just don’t believe that will be made until that uncertainty fog has lifted. We at the Dallas Fed have been looking carefully at this issue and are working with Professors Baker and Bloom of Stanford and with Professor Davis of Chicago.  They’ve tried to put some numbers on the price of uncertainty.  You may or may not buy their theories.  We’re going to have a conference on that, which is coming up.  But there is a price to uncertainty, whether it is the 1.5 million workers whom, they claim, fiscal uncertainty has waylaid or a shaving of GDP growth by 2.3 percent. Again, I feel very strongly, Mr. Chairman—and I realize I’m in a minority—that, in continuing down this path, in terms of efficacy, that efficacy is diminished until we have a matching partner on fiscal policy.  And in fact, I think it becomes counterproductive, particularly if we don’t define what the limits may be.  I don’t believe the market—they have a sense of what the limit might be, but remember the expression “QE Infinity” after we went on the last one. So we need to have some better definition and better communication here.  I don’t think we’ve had it. Now, I did mention yesterday that our 11th District surveys were less than buoyant.  I referred to Carteresque malaise among business leaders.  It may be temporary, or it may be a more permanent phenomenon, but it is afflicting decisionmaking.  And again, I don’t believe that further monetary accommodation can change that.  Yes, the markets might have a reaction if we were to indicate—even to the degree Betsy has suggested, which I support—that we might begin to taper.  As Jim pointed out yesterday in response to questions, we might have market reactions.  But as Governor Stein argued yesterday, I don’t believe we should allow ourselves to be placed in an expectational trap. Mr. Chairman, you referred just now to the Blue Chip economists.  What’s their record for accuracy. It’s not very good.  And fulfilling a commitment April 30–expectation—you’re right, but I believe we should condition that expectation.  We should not let market expectations control the decisionmaking process, and we should simply do what’s right for the economy.  I believe that the right thing to do is to begin tapering now.  But as I don’t have a vote, I don’t expect people to listen to me at this table today.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker expresses disagreement with the current monetary policy and calls for a change in fiscal policy in order to create jobs. They also criticize the lack of definition and communication in the current policy and argue against allowing market expectations to control decision-making.


Passage number 182.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Pianalto.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 183.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I can support alternative B today, although I continue to have some reservations.  Throughout this round of asset purchases, I have felt that economic and financial conditions warrant a purchase program smaller, and probably shorter in duration, than the one the primary dealers appear to anticipate. The staff assessment shows that the primary dealers anticipate a program nearly of the size that’s assumed in alternative A. I continue to think that some caution, in the form of a slower rate of purchases, is appropriate, given the potential complications of a larger balance sheet and the gradual improvement in labor markets that has occurred and that I anticipate will continue. At our upcoming June meeting, our purchase program will have been under way for nine months.  In my view, the June meeting will be an appropriate time to evaluate how substantially the labor market data have improved since we began the purchase program. As a Committee, we have discussed at length the possibility of a smaller program.  However, so far, as we’ve been talking about both yesterday and today, market participants don’t seem to be receiving the message that the program could be smaller than $1 trillion.  Therefore, I think it is appropriate that the minutes continue to reflect that some participants are expecting the end of the purchase program to occur before the end of the year.  Given that the primary dealers seem to be interpreting our current communications in line with a program that’s the size assumed in alternative A, I believe that the signal from the minutes and the statements should be a bit firmer.April 30–The subtle change in the language that we made at the March meeting did not shift market participants’ views very much at all.  So I support the option of adding the sentence that was suggested by Governor Duke, for all of the reasons Governor Duke articulated.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Pianalto, expresses reservations about alternative B and believes a smaller and shorter purchase program would be more appropriate. She also believes that market participants are not receiving the message that the program could be smaller than $1 trillion. This suggests that there is contention between Ms. Pianalto and the primary dealers who anticipate a program nearly of the size assumed in alternative A.


Passage number 184.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a simple expression of gratitude from President Evans.


Passage number 185.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude from President Plosser.


Passage number 186.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Bullard.


Passage number 187.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. "Thank you" and "President Williams" are not statements that express disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 188.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide sufficient information to make a definitive conclusion, but it does imply that there is some sort of disagreement or contention present. The use of words like "contention" and "disagreement" suggests conflicting viewpoints or opposing ideas being discussed or debated in the passage.


Passage number 189.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  The current stance of policy remains entirely appropriate.  And as I discussed yesterday, there are encouraging signs of progress in the outlook for the labor market, but we have yet to meet the substantial-improvement test.  April 30–In terms of Governor Duke’s suggestion, I have to admit I like the fact that alternative B didn’t change much from last time.  But one comment I would make is, I noticed that last time, we actually did add to paragraph 4 the words “as well as the extent of progress toward its economic objectives.” I saw that as an attempt to get this conditionality in there. So it seems to me that Governor Duke’s suggestion would be to add another sentence to that.  I thought that maybe we could say, “Really,” or something like that [laughter] to get this point across, because that was the effort we made last time—maybe a fancy script or italics or something. In the end, I think that I’m fine with the suggested addition, but I’m just not that confident it will change things that much. Now, in my view, the time to completely halt our asset purchases is still a ways down the road.  As we approach that milestone, I expect that we’ll ease up on the accelerator and begin to taper our asset purchases.  This will present us with a delicate communication challenge of announcing a reduction in the pace of purchases without causing market participants to interpret this as a lessening of our commitment to keep aggressive monetary stimulus in place even as the recovery strengthens. So, looking ahead to that day, I think that paragraphs 3 and 4 of alternative C provide a good template for this purpose.  To me, it’s very important that the language makes it clear that we’re adjusting the pace of purchases in response to improving conditions.  I just think that’s an important part of our communication, when and if we choose to taper—that it’s really in response to improving conditions.  The second is that it’s very important when we get to that point to reaffirm our commitment to continue purchases until the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing support for alternative B and discussing potential changes to the language used in the policy.


Passage number 190.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a simple expression of gratitude.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 191.
   April 30–MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Alternative B continues to apply substantial monetary stimulus to a growing economy.  While I do support accommodative policy, continuing this policy well beyond our response to the crisis and recession, I think, poses risk to long-term sustainable economic growth.  And the risk associated with zero interest rates for many years, combined with the ongoing expansion of our balance sheet, has become more significant. Evidence of financial imbalances has emerged, although, as many have noted, near-term risks to broad financial stability seem unlikely right now.  But such risks should not be dismissed.  We know from history that early identification is problematic.  Innovation tends to outpace regulation, and supervision cannot prevent changes in the structure of portfolios from occurring.  As risks surface in multiple areas, they individually may not threaten the broad economy, but they are symptomatic of conditions that give rise to excessive risk-taking, reaching for yield, and asset mispricing.  Zero interest rates for an extended period of time create such conditions and, as such, pose real risk of painful future adjustments.  For example, nonfinancial firms continue to increase debt issuance. And while leverage is not yet alarming, it is accompanied by signs of weakening underwriting standards.  For example, the nearly $90 billion of covenant-lite loan issuance in 2012 was just below the previous record set in 2007 and has continued at a rapid pace.  In terms of asset purchases, I do remain concerned about future costs.  The exit strategy memos and analysis are reminders of the complications and complexities, as well as uncertainty, associated with the conduct of monetary policy going forward, including risks to future long-term inflation expectations. Because of these concerns, I would prefer to take steps now that signal an intention to begin tapering these purchases at midyear and allow markets to adjust their expectations, reduce April 30–reliance on asset purchases, and return to more-normal risk pricing and market functioning.  Language from alternative C that speaks to expectations of improving economic growth later in the year and continued improvement in labor markets could provide some signal to market participants that tapering is likely to start sooner than their current expectations. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Ms. George expresses disagreement and contention in the passage. She argues that continuing accommodative policy poses risks to long-term sustainable economic growth and that the risks associated with zero interest rates and the expansion of the balance sheet have become significant. She also expresses concerns about financial imbalances, excessive risk-taking, and asset mispricing. Overall, she disagrees with the policy of maintaining zero interest rates for an extended period of time and advocates for steps to taper asset purchases.


Passage number 192.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude from the speaker to President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 193.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only contains a statement of appreciation towards Governor Yellen, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 194.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B as written.  With respect to our asset purchases, I don’t think we’ve moved meaningfully closer to achieving a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market, even though yesterday I noted silver linings among the dark clouds of the March labor market report.  Several people have noted that,   April 30–cumulatively, the Tealbook projection for the unemployment rate at the end of this year has been revised down 0.6 percentage point since September.  But it’s important to bear in mind that the projected labor force participation rate has also been revised down.  This means a higher estimate of the cyclical shortfall, and, when you work out the math, that substantially reduces the implied employment gain from the lower estimated unemployment rate. With respect to efficacy, I see no evidence that our asset purchases have become less efficacious. In fact, I was heartened by the robust performance of private domestic final purchases in the latest GDP release.  Strong consumer durable purchases and continued progress in housing help offset intensifying drag from a substantial tightening in fiscal policy. Our purchase program entails some costs, but I continue to regard them as manageable at this point.  Moreover, I don’t think we’ve learned much that’s new about costs since the program began.  I’d also add that I consider market expectations concerning the likely size of this program reasonable.  They coincided very closely with my own at the outset of the program.  And I do think—this is something President Bullard emphasized, and I agree—that markets have been reacting sensibly to economic news in adjusting their expectations about the program, and that is serving an important automatic stabilizer effect. Going forward, I’m certainly open—and I think it’s quite appropriate—to adjust the pace of our asset purchases, depending on the progress we make in meeting our economic objectives.  I hope that the softness we’ve seen in the recent data does not portend a more pronounced slowdown in the months ahead, and that private demand will prove robust enough to offset increasing fiscal drag.  And I hope that the labor market will continue to improve in a context of strengthening economic growth. Before scaling back our purchase program, we need to have greater confidence that the improvements we’ve seen in the labor market since the start of our   April 30–program will continue.  If these hopes are in fact realized, I see the potential for us to reduce the pace of our purchases even before we’ve fully achieved what we deem a substantial improvement in the outlook. I appreciated very much the helpful memo on communications issues related to changing the pace of our purchases.  Of course, I’m hoping that we will be able to begin tapering our purchases because we see sufficient progress toward our objectives.  If the employment reports for April and May are reasonably strong and are supported by solid spending indicators, I’m open to considering tapering our asset purchases at the June meeting using language similar to the one shown for the “Strong growth in economic activity and employment in coming months” scenario on page 9 of that memo.  If the pace of improvement in labor market conditions turn out to be more modest, but nonetheless sustained, I could envision beginning to taper, say, at the September meeting using statement language along the lines suggested in the staff’s “Moderate growth in economic activity and employment growth in coming months” scenario. If, in contrast, we decide to taper asset purchases because of a changed assessment of their efficacy and costs, we will owe the public a coherent account of what we’ve learned since the start of the program that has now convinced us that the cost–benefit tradeoff has turned negative.  The illustrative statement language that the staff prepared for the “Modest growth” scenario demonstrates, in my view, just how difficult it will be to explain why we decided to begin winding down our asset purchases despite lack of progress on labor market improvements and for reasons we did not already know at the time we started the program.  Nonetheless, without some explanation, we risk damaging our credibility and, with it, the credibility of our forward guidance. I believe that the market reaction could be swift and severe, and I think we should not contemplate taking this route anytime soon and not without dire need.  April 30–I would also caution against overestimating our ability to substitute accommodation through other means if we reduce the pace of our purchases on efficacy-and-cost grounds.  Our asset purchases send a powerful message that we’re committed to promoting a self-sustaining recovery. A decision to end them would call that commitment into question and, in the minds of the market, likely take asset purchases off the table as a remaining tool in our arsenal. In this context, and with financial markets already expecting that we will provide accommodation through the federal funds rate for years to come, I really would question how much scope we’d really have to offset the impact of such a shift through further alterations in forward guidance. Finally, on Governor Duke’s proposal, I’d prefer not to include the new language, although I have absolutely no objection to the substance.  We did include new language last time.  We’ve emphasized this point in speeches.  I think it’s well understood in the markets, and I think markets might take it as a signal that I’d consider premature that we anticipate action in June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement with tapering asset purchases in the near future and emphasizes the need for continued improvement in the labor market before considering tapering.


Passage number 195.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses thanks to Governor Tarullo.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 196.
 MR. TARULLO.  Boy, there is a lot of disagreement around the table.  What I’ve noticed this time—and it just struck me—is that there seems to be disagreement among people whose instincts generally go in the same direction—that is, those who have more accommodationist instincts and those who have less accommodationist instincts.  I guess, then, that my remarks are probably directed to those of us who think of ourselves as somewhere in the middle.  There are, roughly speaking, three groups, although, as I say, there’s more disagreement within those groups than I had anticipated.  One group was always skeptical of any real benefits coming from the LSAPs and feared that inflation or other problems were just around the corner.  The second group is pretty comfortable and doesn’t see much risk associated with LSAPs.  So, for them, it’s basically a question of, when do you see improvement.  For whatever group that is—and I won’tApril 30–assign a number of how many people are in the middle—I think Jay and Jeremy have, for some time now, identified the issue, which is, what happens if we get into a circumstance in which there is a tepid performance of the economy, in which things are not demonstrably showing improvement—or, in the terms I used last time, a reasonably high plateau—but they’re also not deteriorating.  And this is the concern, I think, that both of them expressed again yesterday. I believe that one could share that concern to a lesser or greater degree and still think that this would be an odd time to indicate any movement toward tapering or ending the program.  If anything, the economic situation since the March meeting has looked less bright.  The moderate benefits we’re getting from the program—and I do think it’s a little hard to deny that there are moderate benefits; whether you think they’re as great as or greater than the Tealbook says may be debatable—seem particularly worth maintaining, as we’re going into the period in which the sequestration is going to have the maximum contractionary effect on the economy.  So any implication that we’re starting to think more seriously or look forward to June as a tapering moment would seem dissonant at this moment, both on substantive and on presentational grounds.  As I also said last time, whatever the costs, whether they’re reasonably foreseeable, or the concerns, which I share, about the unknown unknowns that may attend continuation or eventual termination of the LSAP program, it seems hard for me to believe that these costs are materially greater whether we started ending or tapering in June or sometime later in the year. The potential roiling of fixed-income markets may happen whenever we slow down, but it seems to me at least more likely to happen if general economic conditions haven’t been good enough to start pushing longer-term rates higher.  And the unknown unknowns, which might become greater as the balance sheet itself gets larger, seem unlikely to be substantially greater with several hundred billion dollars more of purchases. So, as I sit here today—this is a very limited  April 30–observation—it seems to me a reasonably low probability that, by June, we’re going to be able to look through the sequestration and make a judgment as to whether that underlying momentum in the economy promises substantial improvement.  But I don’t foreclose the possibility that it will be the case. And certainly, if there are strong numbers in the next couple of months, notwithstanding the sequestration, that would be pretty good evidence that there was substantial improvement. Finally, on Betsy’s language, it might have been preferable if we had included that language at the outset, because it would have given a bit of the flexibility that people, I think, would like to have.  Several have already suggested possibilities for its misinterpretation in either direction right now.  I think I share that, but this is one, Mr. Chairman, where, if going one way or another makes life easier for you, I’d be happy to go in that direction as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker mentions that there is a lot of disagreement around the table and also acknowledges that there is more disagreement within certain groups than anticipated.


Passage number 197.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s an excellent philosophy.  [Laughter]  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "That's an excellent philosophy" is followed by laughter and gratitude, indicating agreement or approval.


Passage number 198.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a courteous expression of gratitude and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 199.
 MR. STEIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  I also support Governor Duke’s proposed language amendment, although I am mindful of the caveat that Charlie pointed out, which is, with the inflation language in there, it could potentially be interpreted as saying that we might be willing to adjust up in the face of inflation concerns.  I suppose you could just focus it on the labor market.  That might address that, but I think, on balance, I would go with it. Looking forward to June, I’m planning to argue in favor of tapering.  I expect to do so for a relatively large range of outcomes.  For the news that comes in between now and then—just to calibrate, loosely speaking—as long as the payroll numbers are in, say, the upper 75 or 80 percent of the distribution, my own view is that we should begin to taper in June.  In the upper part of that—that is to say, if the news that comes in is better than expectations—I think the case is easy to make and is at least reasonably widely shared, so I won’t dwell on it.  The more challenging argument—and I’m clearly, as Dan pointed out, in the minority—concerns the lower part of the distribution, where you might characterize the news as disappointing but not really terrible.  I think if you want to try to make the argument, it hinges entirely on control and communication issues of the sort that I alluded to in the previous go-round and is largely divorced from views about efficacy and cost.  I want to note parenthetically that—a number of people have made this point, and I share the sentiment—on net, our actions have been more   April 30–efficacious than I would have anticipated in September.  I want to set that aside. I think the argument for doing something in June is divorced from that.  And in fact, suppose you were to tell me in June, “I’m not all that confident about the state of the economy, and I think we may need to be at this for a while longer.” I might say, “Well, okay, but then it’s important—and maybe even all the more important, if we’re going to be in this business for a while—that we have a pretty good handle on our communications technology for it so that we’re going to be in control and we’re not going to be held hostage to market expectations that sometimes respond quite strongly to transient data.” Moreover, I think it’s possible—I guess this is where I maybe differ—to handle the messaging in this intermediately disappointing case in a pretty constructive way without declaring defeat—without saying that we got overtaken by cost—or otherwise doing things that are credibility damaging.  Done right, it’s credibility- preserving, and here I’m really just taking off on some of the themes in the staff memo.  Here’s what I would say in this more difficult case. The first thing we would say is that, in thinking about a decision to taper, because it’s the first time we’ve revisited it since September, the appropriate thing to do was to condition not just on recent news, but also on the cumulative information that we’ve had since September.  And then I would allude to the forecast revisions we’ve had since September—that, in spite of the month-to-month choppiness and the fact that we’re facing fiscal headwinds, they’ve added up to something meaningful.  I would take the fiscal headwinds on board but say, in terms of a message about the underlying strength of the economy, that the net progress is indicative of something.   I would refer, again, to something that President Bullard mentioned.  In a stock-based world, changing the rate of purchases is a second-derivative move. In other words, it’s a reduction of the rate at which we’re adding accommodation in the face of an economy that’s improving maybe not as  April 30–fast as we would like, but is improving nevertheless.  So it’s still a pretty aggressive policy. I would stress, again, that, in addition to whatever cumulative progress we’ve had, it seems somewhat clear that the downside risks have gone down a little bit.  Then, of course, as the recent data readings remind us, there are still headwinds, and we’re still not where we would like to be.  As we continue onward, we would reiterate that we’re prepared to adjust, either up or down, in the face of incoming news.  Indeed, precisely because we haven’t been explicit about our stopping rule, this variation in the pace is inevitably a central part of our communications technology.  And if we’re rigid and we don’t change the rate of flow, you, the market, never really learn about where we think we are relative to where things are trying to go.  I think that, as President Bullard and others have pointed out, we want to establish a premise that we can turn this dial after nine months and nine months’ worth of news; that is an important premise.  And if we’re going to be in this business for another nine months, we want to be able to show that it’s a dial that we can turn. That’s, to me, the essence of the argument, and that’s where I would hope to be pointing toward in June.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses his support for alternative B and Governor Duke's proposed language amendment. He also provides his own views and arguments for tapering in June, even though he acknowledges that he is in the minority. He discusses control and communication issues and emphasizes the importance of credibility and messaging. Overall, the passage presents the speaker's perspective and reasoning without any clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 200.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists of two separate statements: "Thank you" and "Governor Powell." They do not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 201.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, will support alternative B at this meeting.  And I want to talk about the question of when and why to taper, but, first, I want to put that question in context a little bit. I do continue to see moderate benefits from asset purchases, perhaps less than the Tealbook, but I think they are evident.  The asset markets are showing us that our policies do affect interest rates and asset prices, and to then take the position that that doesn’t get through to the real economy at all is untenable.  You can say that they’re less effective, but it’s very hard to argue that they’re ineffective. Second, it seems to me that the time to stop purchases is down the road.  We haven’t achieved a state of play in the labor market that  April 30–we would need to do that.  Third, in terms of the costs, looking at financial stability, inflation, balance sheet losses, and market functioning—we don’t observe them today.  But, going back to the fog metaphor that Governor Raskin used and was used in the staff memo, I think we need to be pretty humble about how close we’re willing to run toward that cliff.  And I’m not going to be the bravest one at the table when those issues arise.  But I don’t think we’re near the edge of the cliff, so I don’t think that’s an issue for today. Regarding when it will be appropriate to taper, let me say that, for me, the main reason to taper now is to demonstrate that the Committee is at the controls of this LSAP and will calibrate up or down, or out in time, based on its reaction to incoming data.  We have trusted the market with this role so far without giving it a clear basis to react, and it’s just not working well enough, in my view.  If we’re going to continue to live in this middle case, where we get choppy progress but not perfection, we are eventually going to find that we have to pay a big price to get out.  Let me say, in that connection, that I am reluctant to allow additional aspects of our tapering or stopping test to accrete over time.  In particular, I, too, read the Erceg–Levin paper and a lot of the other papers on labor force participation in the wake of the March employment report, which was all about the participation rate, and that work certainly raises very difficult and troubling questions about the state of the labor market in the United States.  But to say that the issue is uncertain and murky doesn’t do it justice.  It’s not clear, according to the biggest experts, whether or not even a very strong recovery would restore the labor force participation rate to what we think was the trend.  So I think that it’s just not something that can be added comfortably to our reaction function, although it is something we need to know about and have in the back of our minds. April 30–I would take the next reasonable opportunity to taper.  If the data are bad in June and it’s not plausible to taper, I will support tapering at the next reasonable opportunity.  If the data are really terrible, I’m also open to increasing purchases. As a practical matter, let me say that, in my view, it’s never going to be a good idea to surprise the market by a surprise tapering or to say that the tools have stopped working.  So I hope and expect that our public communications will reinforce that the Committee will adjust purchases in response to incoming data, including the one that, ultimately, I believe, will probably matter the most for tapering, and that is the extent of progress toward our economic objectives.  I’ll argue for reducing purchases at the June meeting if the intermeeting data show that the economy continues to make moderate progress toward our objectives.  And in my assessment, that will mean a restoration of more of the feeling we had at the time of the March meeting, when the market was, I would say, interested but not shocked at the fact that we were talking about tapering. I would want to see some improvement in the data.  Certainly, we’re going to get an employment report on Friday and another one before the next meeting. I’d want to see a run of data that make us feel more as we felt in March, and then I think I will be arguing for tapering. I would support the change suggested by Governor Duke, although I, too, was taken by Charlie Evans’s comment about inflation.  And I’m more than happy to bounce-pass that to the Chairman, as Governor Tarullo did. I also think, as Governor Stein noted in his remarks, that this can be managed.  This is not an unmanageable thing in the context of reasonable economic data. We showed, after the last meeting, that this is something that can be done.  This is not going to be done in a way that provokes a massive reaction of shock from the market.  If the data are there and we’re talkingApril 30–about this publicly and it makes sense and it’s rational to do, we should take the next reasonable and plausible opportunity to taper.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 202.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a polite expression of gratitude from the sender to the recipient.


Passage number 203.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B. I don’t think we have sufficient information to signal today what we want to do at the June meeting.  Thus, I don’t think we should make changes in the statement that foreshadow shifts in policy that might or might not happen at the next meeting. In this regard, I don’t favor adding Governor Duke’s language, not because I think the language is bad, but because I think it could potentially create confusion about what we’re trying to signal.  The market participants already understand that the pace of purchases could be adjusted up or down as the outlook changes.  We’ve made that pretty clear through our speeches.  I don’t think that adding this language gets us a bunch more clarity in that respect. If the data stay as weak as I suspect they will be, then I will not be sufficiently confident about the prospects for improvement in the labor market to support dialing down the rate of asset purchases at the June meeting.  But I hope I’m wrong, and I hope that the economy does better than expected and the labor market outlook improves.  Then I would think that dialing down the pace of asset purchases in June might be appropriate.  The key issue for me in dialing down is whether we can justify it on the basis of confidence in the outlook for the labor market.  If we can’t justify it, then we would badly damage our credibility.  If we can justify it, then I think dialing down makes sense for two reasons.  First, it would send a positive signal about our evaluation of the outlook, which would be well received by market participants and by people in the economy broadly.  And, second, it could potentially help us desensitize the market to such an adjustment. I’m really worried, as we go forward, that market participants could overreact to   April 30–changes in policy, and I think the way you want to respond to that is to take opportunities to change policy so that people understand that small changes in policy don’t have huge consequences for what’s going to follow, and that what’s going to follow is going to be sensitive to the data.  But the key issue for me at the end of the day is credibility, and the way I think about it conceptually is that I’m not willing to risk the credibility of the FOMC. And it’s not just credibility about the asset purchases, but it’s also credibility about all future commitments on the basis of the balance sheet being a couple hundred billion bigger or smaller.  So the credibility issue is really going to be the key test for me. The second thing I want to talk about is something that no one has really talked about yet, which is remarkable, but here goes.  We talk about the efficacy and costs of the large-scale asset purchase program, and we act as though the costs and efficacy are independent of us, but there are some costs that we do actually have some control over.  One potential cost that I think we have some control over is the cost that we might have less control over short-term rates as our balance sheet grows in size. We can do something about this.  There are steps we could take to improve our control of the level of short-term interest rates within a large balance sheet. In this regard, I’m very intrigued by one of the ideas that was put forward in the memo “Tools to Improve Control over Short-Term Interest Rates.”  The Desk could take cash in unlimited amounts through full-allotment reverse RPs, at a set overnight rate, from a wider range of counterparties.  I think this is a very interesting idea, because it could likely establish a solid floor for short-term interest rates, and it could significantly mitigate any concerns about our ability to exert monetary control with a large balance sheet.  So I would really encourage the staff to develop this proposal further for discussion at the June meeting.  How would such a floor reverse RP system work.  How could it be implemented.  How quickly could it be   April 30–implemented.  How soon should it be implemented. What are the potential downsides of such a floor system.  And what are the potential unintended consequences. This is an interesting idea to me because this is something that you could potentially implement very soon, well before actually raising short-term rates.  You could demonstrate long before you were raising short-term rates that you actually had quite a bit of control over monetary policy regardless of the size of the balance sheet.  And I think that reassuring market participants in this regard, that we can control monetary policy regardless of the size of the balance sheet, is worth doing sooner rather than later, even if actual liftoff is very far in the future.  So this is an idea that we should develop further.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There isn't any contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their support for alternative B and discussing their thoughts and ideas related to the topic.


Passage number 204.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you, all, very much.  I think there is broad support for alternative B.  As I said in the go-round, we have seen improvement since September, and there are some signs of a stronger labor market and a stronger private sector.  But of course, it’s also true that we remain very far from our objectives, and we have a lot of near-term uncertainty, given both some of the recent data readings and the impending fiscal policy restraint.  So I remain very comfortable, personally, with the high level of accommodation, and I don’t see any basis for changing that in this meeting. Communication issues are very important, as we’ve talked about.  I made a couple of points at the beginning that, from the staff work overnight, there does seem to be some endogenous response of expectations to developments, and, I think, even more clearly, that the expectation of purchases is not increasing without bound.  It’s also important, as many people have noted, that we exit or taper or do whatever we’re going to do based on strength, progress— however we want to characterize it—and I’m hopeful that the economy will permit that.  But I also agree—and I think everyone agrees—that our concerns about the balance sheet and so on April 30–are increasing with the size of the balance sheet, and we need to continue to think about communication and planning for how we might, at some point, bring this program to a close.  I just used the word “tapering.” I would like to maybe ask for a ban on the word “tapering” for the following reason:  The word “tapering,” I think, would be interpreted, if used in public, as saying that once you change the amount, you are on a deterministic glide path to zero.  In at least some of the discussion today, and going back to comments that President Bullard made a couple of years ago, what we’re trying to get at here is a policy that has more of a random walk character, i.e., it can go either up or down, depending on the incoming news.  And so I would encourage terms like “vary” or “adjust” or “dial” or whatever, rather than “taper,” and that’s something we need to continue to work on.  I do intend, certainly, in my testimony and other contexts, to use this concept—not the word “taper” but this general concept—and I assume that others will continue to do that as well. On the language, I think I got a slight majority in favor, but it wasn’t overwhelming.  So, just to make sure I didn’t make a mistake, I’d like to take a straw vote of people at the table.  And abstaining is a legitimate action.  How many would like to include Governor Duke’s language in paragraph B(4).  One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight.  How many are opposed.  One, two, three, four, five, six, seven.  Oh, geez.  [Laughter] All right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply includes statements and opinions from the speaker.


Passage number 205.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Now that you’ve got that clear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser is simply stating that something is clear.


Passage number 206.
 MR. FISHER. Who were the chickens.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question about the identity of the chickens.


Passage number 207.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  All right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no provided passage to analyze and determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 208.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Mr. Chairman, there are 19 of us.  Eight plus 7 is 15.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a fact and performs a mathematical calculation.


Passage number 209.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, we had abstentions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement simply mentions that there were abstentions but does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 210.
 MR. LOCKHART.  I demand a recount.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. The speaker simply states their request for a recount without indicating any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 211.
  [Laughter] April 30–CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  So, whatever I do, I’m going to alienate half of the Committee. I guess I would like to put the language in, if people are willing to tolerate that.  The reason for doing that is not necessarily to signal action in June, but to introduce this notion of varying, in a random walk kind of way, as an up or down, depending on the incoming news.  And a number of people suggested that June might be an opportunity to do this if the data are sufficiently strong that we can claim not victory, but that we have made progress since September.  So if we are seriously contemplating doing this in June, it’s probably better to foreshadow it and take some of the market response to it now.  Judging on the change we made last time, it could very well pass completely unrecognized.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their own perspective and considerations regarding introducing a certain language. They mention that some people suggested June as an opportunity for something, but there is no clear disagreement or contention expressed.


Passage number 212.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Mr. Chairman, I am very concerned about the point that President Evans raised—that there’s been a lot of media attention on the softness in inflation and speculation that the Committee might be contemplating responding to that.  With that in mind, just to complicate things, instead of “the outlook for the labor market or inflation changes,” may I suggest using the phrase “as the economic outlook changes”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 213.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Duke, how do you feel about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply asks for Governor Duke's feelings about something.


Passage number 214.
 MS. DUKE.  I don’t think I object to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their opinion without any opposing views expressed.


Passage number 215.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You don’t object to that.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that President Evans does not object to something.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 216.
 MR. EVANS.  Well, all of a sudden, changing it to “economic outlook” is going to take the labor market improvement out, and I don’t know how people are going to speculate on that.  I can understand taking the inflation out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Evans, expresses disagreement or contention with changing the phrase "economic outlook" because it would remove the reference to labor market improvement. He argues that this change would make it difficult for people to speculate on the labor market.


Passage number 217.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, the problem that President Kocherlakota is identifying is that our language now is focused on the labor market but does mention “in a  April 30–context of price stability,” and so inflation is certainly part of the constraints that we face.  So I don’t think we can just take out inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges the problem identified by President Kocherlakota and agrees that inflation is a constraint that cannot be ignored.


Passage number 218.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes—that, I think, would be problematic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about disagreement or contention. It simply mentions a statement without any indication of opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 219.
 MS. DUKE. And if I could, when I suggested this, I thought and actually said that there was the potential that there would be an expectation that we could adjust the pace up.  That may very well happen, but I don’t think that’s necessarily wrong.  It ought to be an up or down.  So if that happens—if there’s a revision, things go better, and it comes down and starts to actually move—I don’t think that’s necessarily a bad thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating their perspective and suggesting that adjusting the pace up or down is not necessarily wrong.


Passage number 220.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That’s a reasonable point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "That's a reasonable point" suggests agreement or acknowledgement rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 221.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The sense of the Committee in the go-round was that, although inflation is low, there didn’t seem to be a lot of concern at this point about further disinflation.  But of course, if that changes, we probably would want to respond to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The "sense of the Committee" indicates a general agreement or consensus on the topic of concern about further disinflation and potential response to it if the situation changes.


Passage number 222.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That’s reasonable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "That's reasonable" indicates agreement with the previous statement.


Passage number 223.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other comments.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "President Bullard" does not provide enough context or information to determine if there is any disagreement.


Passage number 224.
 MR. BULLARD.  I just wanted to echo Governor Duke’s comment.  You do want it to be up or down, and if the situation did get worse on the inflation front, then we might contemplate that, even though at this point we think that inflation is going to return closer to target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that if the situation regarding inflation worsens, they may contemplate a different approach.


Passage number 225.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Any other comment. President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statements "All right," "Any other comment," and "President Evans" do not indicate any disagreement or opposing viewpoints. They seem to be a neutral request for further comments or questions.


Passage number 226.
 MR. EVANS. Could the staff opine on the likelihood of it getting the market’s attention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple request for the staff's opinion.


Passage number 227.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any staff reaction about the likely market response.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that there will be a market response, but does not indicate any disagreement or contention about it.


Passage number 228.
 MR. CLOUSE.  It’s awfully hard to judge.  They’ll definitely pay very close attention to it.  After hearing the discussion around the table, I would have thought they would have been thinking that you’d be setting up for tapering, but I can see the inflation argument.  The reactionApril 30–may be an increase in uncertainty around policy expectations, but the direction is really tough to judge.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Clouse is expressing his difficulty in judging and gauging the reaction and direction of the policy.


Passage number 229.
 MR. POTTER. Are there two CPI releases before the next meeting. The meeting is June 19 to 20, so there should be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: This passage is a straightforward question about the number of CPI releases before the next meeting. There is no evident contention or disagreement.


Passage number 230.
 MR. EVANS.  On the CPI, that got a lot of attention in President Pianalto’s comments, and it caused me to look back at the Tealbook forecast.  One thing that I’m not sure we’re entirely clear on—or at least, the staff could comment on—is the wedge between the PCE and the CPI; I’ve been taking that to be about 0.3 percentage point.  And so, just because the CPI forecast is 1.7 percent in the Tealbook—which is what I think I finally dug out for 2015—that’s not closer to 2 percent. It should be judged against 2.3 percent, shouldn’t it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a request for clarification and confirmation of a specific point.


Passage number 231.
 MR. WASCHER.  I think that’s right.  The wedge is unusually large right now between PCE and CPI inflation, but again, we think that is transitory.  I believe that a wedge of 0.3 percentage point over the medium term sounds right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply presents the speaker's belief that the wedge of 0.3 percentage point over the medium term sounds right.


Passage number 232.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  It’s on my head.  The proposal, then, is alternative B, with the sentence you have here inserted in paragraph 4, after the words “in a context of price stability.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging the proposal and accepting responsibility for it.


Passage number 233.
” MS. DANKER.  And just to clarify, it’s as written.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Danker is simply seeking clarification on a statement.


Passage number 234.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  As written.  No change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 235.
 MS. DANKER.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any disagreement or contention among the individuals involved.


Passage number 236.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Please call the roll.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply giving a straightforward instruction to call the roll.


Passage number 237.
 MS. DANKER.  Okay.  With the addition of that sentence, this vote is on alternative B and the associated directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the topic of the vote.


Passage number 238.
 Chairman Bernanke Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes  April 30–President Bullard Yes Governor Duke Yes President Evans Yes President George No Governor Powell Yes Governor Raskin Yes President Rosengren Yes Governor Stein Yes Governor Tarullo Yes Governor Yellen Yes CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  It’s an excellent time to break for coffee.  Why don’t we return at 11:10 a.m..
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The individuals listed are all in agreement with each other.


Passage number 239.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Why don’t we recommence. Item 4 is about exit strategy principles, and I’ll turn to Steve Meyer to introduce the topic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 240.
 MR. MEYER.5  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The minutes of the June 2011 FOMC meeting include the exit strategy principles shown on the first page of the handout titled “Material for Briefing on Exit Strategy Principles.”  Publishing these principles, and thereby clarifying how the Committee intends to normalize the stance and conduct of monetary policy, served two closely related purposes: (1) giving the public confidence that the Federal Reserve will be able to normalize policy smoothly and has a plan for doing so and (2) reducing the risk that the Committee’s eventual steps to reduce policy accommodation would come as a big surprise to the public and so cause an outsized market reaction.  In light of those two purposes, the 2011 exit principles include both broad strategic elements and specific tactical guidelines. The seventh principle indicates that you might adjust the exit strategy in light of economic and financial developments.  Since June 2011, the economy has been hit by shocks emanating from the euro area and from fiscal policy, among others.  Also since June 2011, you decided to reinvest principal received from agency securities into agency MBS rather than into Treasury securities, you conducted the maturity extension program, and you began the flow-based asset purchase program. Consequently, the SOMA portfolio is larger, holds more MBS, and has a longer average maturity than we projected in June 2011.  In addition, you adopted threshold-based forward guidance about your intentions for the federal funds rate, a step that was not anticipated when you released the exit principles. In light of these developments, some of you have suggested that it may be necessary to revise the June 2011 principles.  As background for today’s discussion, 5 The materials used by Mr. Meyer are appended to this transcript (appendix 5).  April 30–the staff prepared memorandums on exit principles, strategy, and tools.  If your dialogue today indicates that you see a need for revisions, the staff will prepare drafts for your consideration.  The first and last of the seven principles seem timeless.  Our sense, based on your remarks during recent Committee meetings, is that many of you see a need to revise one or more of the other principles.  For example, a number of you have suggested that the Committee might forgo selling MBS, either to avoid the risk of an adverse market reaction or to provide some additional monetary stimulus.  Some of you have noted that ceasing to reinvest principal payments from MBS would, by itself, reduce the Committee’s MBS holdings substantially.  Several of you have suggested reducing the level of reserve balances by selling Treasury securities that will have a relatively short remaining time to maturity rather than by selling MBS.  As you’ve noted, Treasury securities that will mature within a few years likely could be sold without realizing significant losses.  A couple of you have suggested retaining some MBS in a “new normal” SOMA portfolio.  And even if you still intend to sell MBS and to reduce your MBS holdings to zero, you might nonetheless judge, in light of the increased quantity of MBS held in the SOMA, that it is no longer advisable to sell all of them over a three- to five-year period.  If you want to open the door to any of these approaches, you might see a need to modify the exit principles. In light of the small volume and somewhat idiosyncratic nature of transactions in the federal funds market under current conditions, several of you have expressed concern that raising the remuneration rate on excess reserves might not result in an equal increase in the federal funds rate.  Others have worried that the federal funds rate might not remain closely connected to other short-term market rates. If you’re not confident that the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates will move up in line with the interest rate on excess reserves, you might want to eliminate references to the federal funds rate and instead indicate that adjustments to the interest rate paid on excess reserves, along with open market operations, will be used to influence the level of market interest rates in order to promote maximum employment and price stability. The second and third of the June 2011 principles, in combination with the first part of the fourth principle, lay out a sequence of steps that you indicated you would follow when you decide to begin moving to a less accommodative policy.  With threshold-based forward guidance in place, you may no longer think it necessary to change your forward guidance before raising the federal funds rate; you might judge that the public will infer that an increase in the federal funds rate is drawing near as the unemployment rate approaches its threshold.  You could, of course, decide to change your forward guidance before acting to raise interest rates, particularly if you eventually were to conclude that economic and financial conditions at the time a threshold is crossed do not warrant a prompt increase in short-term rates, but you may no longer want to promise that you will raise your target for the federal funds rate only after you have ceased reinvesting, changed the forward guidance, and initiated temporary reserve-draining operations.  More generally, you might now see it as desirable to modify the exit principles in light of your threshold-based forward April 30–guidance, and perhaps to allow greater flexibility about the details of removing policy accommodation.  Or you might still judge that maintaining confidence requires communicating a sequence of specific steps, but not the sequence of steps in the June 2011 exit principles. Finally, you might think that revisions will be necessary, but not yet.  So, with that as background, I’d point you to the discussion questions that were distributed last week.  For your convenience, I’ve reproduced them on the second page of the handout.  My colleagues and I would be happy not only to learn your views, but also to answer any questions you may have for us.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in this passage. Some members of the committee have suggested revising the June 2011 exit principles, while others may think that revisions are not yet necessary. There are also different views on specific strategies for reducing policy accommodation, such as selling MBS or Treasury securities, and on how to influence market interest rates. Additionally, there is discussion on whether to modify the sequence of steps outlined in the June 2011 exit principles in light of the threshold-based forward guidance.


Passage number 241.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Are there any questions for Steve or his colleagues. [No response] Okay.  Seeing none, let me make a couple of additional remarks. The motivation for looking at exit principles, is partly, of course, the change in our policy stance—the much bigger balance sheet and the thresholds.  But as I was mentioning to President Fisher earlier, I think that there’s also been some significant improvement in our exit tools beyond interest in excess reserves and reverse repos and time deposits, which we have been working on for some time.  The staff memo points out that we have about $700 billion in Treasuries that will have a remaining maturity of less than three years by late 2015, and we have another $500 billion that will have a remaining maturity of between three and five years.  So that’s, obviously, something we could sell, perhaps as an alternative to MBS. And beyond that, there are still further options.  The Vice Chairman talked about the standing of a reverse repo facility, which could help tighten control of interest rates and, by the way, would have the benefit of allowing us to pay a wide variety of recipients rather than just banks, a point that some people have noted before.  Finally, as a very “deep bench” kind of backup, reserve requirements—both existing rules and emergency provisions—could allow us to immobilize hundreds of billions more dollars of reserves, if that were necessary.  So we do have, I think, better tools, and that’s another thing we want to think about. April 30–As we talk about these issues today, we have substance issues, and we have communications issues.  Steve has already gone over this.  Among the substance issues, linking the exit steps to the threshold guidance, talking about sales of Treasuries and MBS, and, perhaps, commenting on additional tools are the key elements that we would want to try to get some information from you about.  There are also longer-run issues, including whether to keep a small amount of MBS in the long run and what our operating procedures will be in the long run.  Although, certainly, we’re welcome to discuss those issues, it’s a future Committee that will make those final determinations, and I don’t think we have to come to any conclusions on that.  There are also communications issues, and you should please pay attention to those.  We could do a formal statement like last time, which we released through the minutes.  We could do a formal statement released through some other mechanism.  The statement could be of greater or lesser detail.  Or we could use other methods.  If we agree on some basic principles, we could disseminate them through speeches and testimony, et cetera. So there are a variety of different ways to communicate this information, and some of them have different tactical implications for policy communication as well. I wanted to put all of those things on the table and invite comment.  Depending on what we hear today, we could, of course, bring you something to load on, if you wish, in June, or we could have further discussions.  We’re waiting for guidance from you on that issue.  So let me begin a go-round, and I will start with the Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing potential options and strategies for the Federal Reserve's exit plan.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 242.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you. I think it makes sense to revise the exit principles and make that known sooner rather than later, because, clearly, what we have in place today is no longer operative.  This can be seen in the primary dealer survey, which shows that a majority of respondents no longer expect agency MBS sales, even though that’s what’s in ourApril 30–exit principles.  And that view, of course, was reinforced by the discussion in the March FOMC minutes about how not selling agency MBS could mitigate the risk of an upward spike in yields.  The exit principles also don’t seem sensible to me, given the introduction of the thresholds.  How can we commit to the timing sequence of normalization—ending reinvestment, for example— when we don’t know when we’ll reach the thresholds or, in the case of the unemployment rate threshold, whether we’ll want to raise short-term rates as soon as that threshold is reached. It also makes sense to me to revise the exit principles sooner rather than later because people will soon assume that this is in train.  If they haven’t figured that out already, the minutes to this meeting will make that clear. I would hope we could get it done at the June meeting.  That would be ideal because that would be relatively soon, and the Chairman would have the opportunity to discuss it in the press conference.  So that’s a goal—aspirational. In terms of what approach, I think the exit principles should be recast in two broad ways.  First, they should be less about tactics and more about principles.  The focus should be on the outcome we seek—smooth exit; minimizing disruption of market function and risks to financial stability—rather than on the precise ordering in the way each tool will be used.  We should maintain some flexibility on how we can best use our tools to achieve our objectives. In June 2011, when we put forward this first set of exit principles, it was a different environment.  Our balance sheet was smaller.  Exit was anticipated to be relatively near at hand compared with today, and we had a different objective.  We were trying to reassure people that we weren’t going to dump a lot of assets into the market, and that’s really what the exit principles at that time were trying to address. In terms of the exit principles, I think we should emphasize how we plan to exit in a way that not only maintains effective monetary control, but also minimizes market-functioning andApril 30–financial stability risks.  I would put the focus on that rather than on how the balance sheet will evolve over the longer term.  I think that these issues are separable as long as we have the tools in place to conduct monetary policy effectively, even with an enlarged balance sheet, which I think we do.  And I want to separate these two issues because I don’t want commitments about the longer-term balance sheet to constrain our ability to exit in a way consistent with our near-term objectives. I don’t want to have these artificial constraints that we’ve created for ourselves. Also, I’m not sure what the longer-term balance sheet should look like, and so I don’t understand what I gain today by constraining myself to a particular balance sheet or structure in the future.  The only potential benefit of doing so, of putting these balance sheet constraints in place, would be if that made exit easier, but I don’t see the connection between the longer-term balance sheet and exit. We’re going to learn a lot about our monetary policy regime as we normalize interest rates.  So, to me, it makes sense to learn from doing before determining what the longer-term balance sheet should look like. In terms of sales of MBS or short-term Treasuries, I would favor announcing that we have no plans to sell agency MBS in the foreseeable future, at least until interest rates are fully normalized.  That gives you the option of selling them later, at some future date, if you want.  Retaining agency MBS, as our discussion around the table has shown, has four clear benefits: It eliminates the risk that such sales might pose to market functioning, it reduces the risk to financial stability from a sharp rise in long-term rates, it adds a bit of additional accommodation by keeping the agency MBS on our balance sheet for longer, and it eliminates the risk of capital losses from sales that could depress our Treasury remittances.  So I think this straightforward. In terms of short-dated Treasury sales, I wouldn’t pre-commit to this or rule it out. I think we can defer this decision.  I don’t think it’s something that market participants are worried   April 30–about or focusing on now.  Most important, we don’t know when we’re going to want to start raising short-term rates.  We don’t know, therefore, how much short-dated Treasuries we’ll hold at that point in time.  We don’t know how well the other tools will work in controlling short-term rates—in other words, how important it actually will be to drain reserves through asset sales. We also don’t know what interest rates will be doing then and what the impact of those interest rates will be on the path of our remittances.  So, from my perspective at least, it seems too soon to commit to such sales when it’s unclear whether we’ll actually want to undertake such sales in the particular circumstances in which we find ourselves a few years out in the future. To sum up, I favor a much scaled-back version of the exit principles.  These would focus on our goals of using our tools in a way to foster our dual mandate objectives and that would give some attention to minimizing market-functioning and financial stability risks. And, finally, I’d note that we anticipate that the short-term interest rates, such as the federal funds rate, are anticipated to be the primary tool of monetary policy.  But the point here is, I want to de-emphasize the primacy of the federal funds rate because we might want to shift to a different short-term rate instrument—say, the floor RRP rate that I was talking about a little bit earlier, if that turns out to be a very effective tool to control short-term rates. Another advantage of the floor RRP is, if that works, it solves some of the potential governance issues because that would clearly be in the province of the FOMC, unlike the interest on excess reserves.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker disagrees with the current exit principles and believes they should be revised. They also disagree with the focus on the precise ordering of tactics and believe the principles should focus more on the desired outcome. They also disagree with putting constraints on the longer-term balance sheet and believe it should be determined after normalizing interest rates. They also disagree with pre-committing to selling agency MBS or short-dated Treasuries and believe these decisions should be deferred. Finally, they disagree with the primacy of the federal funds rate and suggest considering other short-term rate instruments.


Passage number 243.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard—a two-handed intervention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions President Bullard and his approach as "a two-handed intervention."


Passage number 244.
 MR. BULLARD.  Could I ask the Vice Chairman to clarify your view on thresholds and how that intersects with this.  I didn’t quite get what you said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is asking for clarification and understanding, there is no contention or disagreement in this statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 245.
   April 30–VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Well, the issue on thresholds is, we have a threshold that states this unemployment rate and expected forward inflation.  We don’t know when we’re going to hit that threshold, and then we don’t know if we’re actually going to act once we hit that threshold or someplace in the future.  So, talking about how you’re going to stop reinvestment early—I don’t know how to link that up with the timing of when I’m actually going to do liftoff.  I feel as though thresholds create a lot of confusion.  When should we stop reinvesting when we don’t know when short-term interest rates are actually going to increase.  I don’t understand how the sequencing works.  I think the thresholds make the timing issue a little bit confusing to me.  And maybe other people aren’t concerned about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses confusion and disagreement with the use of thresholds and how they relate to the timing of actions such as stopping reinvestment and increasing short-term interest rates. They find the thresholds to be confusing and raise concerns about the sequencing and timing of decisions.


Passage number 246.
  MR. BULLARD.  I took the thresholds to apply to the interest rate side of our policy, and so it was a commitment on coming off the zero bound, but not on other actions that we might take.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Bullard, is explaining his interpretation of the thresholds and stating that they apply specifically to the interest rate side of their policy, but not to other actions they might take.


Passage number 247.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Well, the original exit principles, I think, envisioned a very fixed period of time between when we were going to end the reinvestment and—X months later—when we were going to start to raise short-term interest rates.  Maybe it wasn’t completely fixed, but it was pretty well understood that it was 6 to 12 months afterward.  Now, it’s very difficult to make that linkage; today, if I’m deciding to end the reinvestment, how do I know how that links up to when I’m actually going to raise short-term rates, given the thresholds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply describes a change in the original exit principles and highlights the difficulty in linking the end of reinvestment to the timing of raising short-term interest rates.


Passage number 248.
 MR. BULLARD.  Wouldn’t that just be a policy decision that the Committee is making. You’re getting close to these, or maybe you’re a bit beyond, and then you make a policy decision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a question posed to seek clarification and understand the decision-making process of the Committee.


Passage number 249.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I don’t know.  Other people may not be as concerned about this as I am. I just think it creates a lack of crispness to the current set of exit principles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their uncertainty and personal opinion about the current set of exit principles, acknowledging that others may not share the same concern.


Passage number 250.
 April 30–MR. EVANS. I prefer the word “complicated” over “confused.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing a personal preference for using the word "complicated" instead of "confused".


Passage number 251.
” VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes—“complicated.” It’s confusing to me.  It may not be confusing to others, but it’s confusing to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their personal confusion about something, but there is no indication of any disagreement or argument with others.


Passage number 252.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Bullard is simply expressing gratitude or thanking someone.


Passage number 253.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no passage provided, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 254.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First, let me apologize for jumping the line twice.  I didn’t realize I was going to get to go first in the last round.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude and apologizing for speaking out of turn in a previous instance.


Passage number 255.
 MR. FISHER.  But you exerted a great leadership role last time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 256.
April 30–CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Governor Tarullo expresses gratitude.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 257.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In some respects, I guess I’ll continue the themes that Bill and Betsy introduced, but I’m dialing up the skepticism a bit on the utility of this enterprise. Back in 2011, I recall having some concerns about an extended discussion of exit principles for just the reason that Betsy alluded to a moment ago, which was we were communicating that we were actually thinking about exiting—something that turns out to have been premature at best.  In retrospect, there was another problem that we created for ourselves precisely by putting these things out, which is, now they seem outmoded and thus, I think, call into question the wisdom of trying to reformulate exit principles at anything but the high level that Bill was alluding to earlier.  The question I’d ask, then, is:  What are we going to get out of this enterprise. Now, it seems to me that there’s one thing that we really do—or at least I really do— want to accomplish, and Bill mentioned this as well, which is making clear that the previously stated intention to sell MBS is no longer operative.  And I do think it’s not only useful, but also important, to get that idea out. Ironically, what that reflects is the need to reverse a principle that we stated a couple of years ago, which reinforces the caution about stating too many things in advance. I wonder whether there’s much usefulness to be gotten out of this beyond a restatement of things in a way that’s close to a set of platitudes.  There’s nothing wrong with platitudes, but saying, “Well, we’re going to do things so as to avoid financial instability”—I’m not sure it contributes an enormous amount, except maybe just restating to ourselves what we think we’re going to do.  But I don’t know that it provides much reassurance to people in the world that we’re going to be able to exit smoothly.   April 30–I don’t think that we really need anything else right now.  Even the issue of how the thresholds change things could probably be left for later, although my instinct is to agree with Bill that it does require some further statement. It might be desirable to have a more contemporary statement of operative principles, but I’m, frankly, not even sure of that, because it may just invite the world to compare the last statement with the new one and, as seems often to be the case in such instances, not only to draw attention to the fact that we’ve changed our minds, but also to elicit a bunch of people reading into some of the changes way more than what we may have intended. If we are going to do it, though, I think there are two things to avoid.  The first—it must be obvious by now—is having very much detail in the exit strategy that will later encounter the same kinds of problems that we’re now seeing with the 2011 exit principles.  And the second is getting into a prolonged discussion in an effort to develop statements around longer-term issues, such as whether we should continue to hold MBS until after policy normalization or whether we’re going to move from primary reliance on the federal funds rate to some other mechanism. As Betsy said, there are a lot of things to be talked about over the next couple of years, but I don’t think we need to even begin to engage in that discussion in order to achieve what needs to be achieved now. So if we are going to restate principles, I think something like what Narayana has suggested is the sensible approach.  If there’s enough sentiment for going down that route, I certainly wouldn’t be opposed to it.  But if we start getting bogged down in issues of principle, such as what the balance sheet is going to look like after normalization, or if we start getting tempted to put in too much detail, then my suggestion would be that we just step back, identifyApril 30–quite parsimoniously—the word of the day—what it is that we need to say, and then have the Chairman say that in a speech or in congressional testimony. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses skepticism and disagreement with the idea of reformulating exit principles and suggests that it may not provide much reassurance to the public. They also argue against including too much detail in the exit strategy and getting into prolonged discussions about longer-term issues.


Passage number 258.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 259.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Before I address the questions generally, I’ll make just a couple of preliminary comments.  I think we should be careful in any communication to decouple discussion of ultimate exit from adjustment of the current LSAP program.  There is already some blurring out there, conflating the exit from the low interest rate and large balance sheet environment with phasing out or adjusting the LSAP.  A member of my staff noted two webinars in the next few days on exit from the LSAP policy.  So there’s some chance for confusion.  And for that reason—this is a minor point—to discourage anticipation that real exit is imminent, we may want to employ a version of the formal wording that was in the minutes back in 2011, which was “normalizing the stance and conduct of monetary policy,” if the Committee decides to produce something or publicize something on what we’re calling exit. On the questions themselves and the general topic, I find myself in agreement with Vice Chairman Dudley and others.  I would suggest that, if we go forward, a clear distinction be made between guiding principles and thinking about tactical implementation.  The projections of many of us show the start date two and a half years away.  Much could change between now and then.  Decisions on many of the specifics of tactical implementation are even further out in the future and will involve a learning curve. I don’t think the six principles—and here I am referring to the paraphrased principles on pages 2 and 3 of the staff memo—which were articulated in, perhaps, somewhat other words in 2011 require much updating.  They remain valid today.  The only one that really is in play, it seems to me, is the principle related to whether we will return to a Treasury-only SOMA   April 30–portfolio.  For my own part, I’m not as concerned as some may be about the prospect of having some agency debt or MBS in the SOMA portfolio for a long period of time.  However, I do think it should be stressed, as a matter of guiding principle, that the Treasury portfolio is intended to be more diversified or balanced in terms of maturity structure than it is now. If that concern is addressed, the Committee might consider something that says, “The Committee anticipates return over time to a SOMA portfolio that consists primarily of a balanced maturity structure of Treasury securities.” As regards the tactical steps that were articulated in the principles in 2011, as I said earlier, I’m reluctant to get in the weeds again at this juncture.  I don’t see a need to pre-commit to a specific plan.  It might be better to just reference the earlier tactical points and say, “They remain broadly applicable and will be revised as the 6½ percent unemployment rate threshold gets closer and the time for action approaches.  This discussion might acknowledge that the working down of the MBS portfolio will take longer than we thought in 2011. I had some other comments here about some of the specific questions, but I find that the three preceding commenters really covered many of my points.  So let me just summarize. I think the six principles paraphrased by the staff from 2011 are sound.  The tactics will likely have to be revised, but I would suggest later, and I don’t think it’s useful to get too specific this far ahead.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of agreement and suggestions for future actions.


Passage number 260.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply contains a thank you message from someone addressed as President Kocherlakota. There is no contention or disagreement indicated.


Passage number 261.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I thought the Vice Chairman laid out the relevant issues very well, and Governor Duke raised some key issues for us to be thinking about over the next couple of years.  So I’ll try to be brief in what I have to say. April 30–First, I think the work done by the staff here in D.C. and by the staff around the System has emphasized repeatedly that the policy rule that governs exit has a big effect on current outcomes.  This means that credible communication about our exit strategy is an important policy tool for the Committee. Second—and relatedly, in my view—we need to begin to have a serious conversation about the likely goals of policy during exit.  The goals of policy during exit will shape the amount of stimulus that we will be providing over the next year or two.  Specifically, after deciding this, if we communicate that we plan to keep inflation at 2 percent or under during the exit process—that is, we view our target as a ceiling during that time—then we will be withdrawing accommodation rapidly.  That pushes down on current stimulus. If we are willing to allow the medium-term inflation outlook to rise as high as 2½ percent, then exit will be slow.  In particular, given how flat the Phillips curve is—as Governor Yellen mentioned—exit will be very slow, and people will be more willing to spend now as a result.  Finally, our current exit principles constrain us from using many forms of communication about exit.  This means that our current exit principles are restricting us from providing as much accommodation as the economy needs. Let me turn to the questions.  I’ll really only answer question 1.  I think the answer to question 1 is, “Yes, we need to change the principles as soon as possible,” because our ability to communicate effectively about exit is one of our key policy tools, and we’re not really able to use it effectively at this stage because of the existing principles. For example, if we wanted to communicate that we currently plan to hold all assets until maturity, we can’t do that under the current principles.  So they have to be changed. It’s a good idea to put the principles out in the minutes, as we had before. As President Lockhart suggested, I would title them something like “Long-Run Normalization of Monetary  April 30–Policy,” something along those lines, to try to emphasize that it’s very long run—or whatever terms you want to use.  I think that we just want to be very high level in terms of what we want to communicate.  We want to figure out what’s appropriate along those lines, and I think the previous principles ended up being overly specific.  On Monday, I circulated a memo from the Minneapolis staff that I thought took a very nice approach to describing the relevant principles.  I’m certainly not wedded to any specific language, and I don’t want to get into a speech about words, et cetera.  But I do believe that the draft that my staff prepared really had the appropriate level of detail. To sum up, I think this is an important thing to be doing, and in short order, Mr. Chairman.  Communication about exit is really an important policy tool for us. It’s going to be especially important for us to be able to communicate credibly about our goals during the normalization process, and the current specificity of our exit strategy principles disrupts that communication.  And we need to get around to revising those principles as soon as possible.  If it can be done in June, that would be great—to correct this problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any apparent contention or disagreement.


Passage number 262.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I have a question for some of the speakers already, which is, if we have a very high-level document of principles that we’re trying to achieve, does this particular issue of not selling MBS fit into that. And if so, how.  Or is that communicated in some separate way.  Maybe President Kocherlakota will answer the question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking a question for clarification or for further information.


Passage number 263.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I’ll answer the question for myself, obviously. I think that’s a policy move that should be undertaken by the Committee and put into the statement.  If that was something that the Committee wanted to communicate—that it was currently anticipating not selling MBS—that could be put into the statement; I wouldn’t put it in the principles.  The  April 30–principles should be high level enough to incorporate that kind of decisionmaking, though, by the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the opinion of Mr. Kocherlakota and his suggestion for adding a policy move to the statement.


Passage number 264.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s helpful.  Okay.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statements are simple acknowledgments or agreements.


Passage number 265.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 266.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’d like to thank the staff for the very helpful memos on this very important topic, and I’ll just mention that I get asked this question about our exit every time I speak publicly.  I think we’ve actually done a pretty good job, with our exit principles from 2011, of laying out the high-level principles.  In my view, we probably got into too many details. I’ll talk about that some more.  But this is an incredibly important thing we’ve done in terms of communicating to the public that we do have a plan, we’ve thought hard about the plan, and we have confidence in that plan.  I agree with the Vice Chairman that we need to update it and reinforce that message that we’ve thought hard about this, we’ve come up with tools, and we can control the stance of monetary policy going forward.  I think we’re kicking ourselves here a little bit too much about how the exit strategy wasn’t perfect and now we have to change it. I actually believe that it’s been very valuable, and I know there are a lot of political questions out there, too.  Does the Fed have an exit strategy.  Again, it’s an important thing we’ve done, and we do need to update it. The memos made an important distinction—which numerous people have already mentioned—and that’s between broad principles and specific tactics. As I mentioned back in March, and as many people have already mentioned, the general principles from our June statement generally remain appropriate today. But our balance sheet is now much larger than it was back then, more tilted toward longer-duration Treasuries and MBS.  So, in light of these changes, we need to adjust our tactical guidelines to give us more flexibility to soundly implement those broad principles.  I continue to support the general principles of eventuallyApril 30–moving back to a Treasuries-only SOMA portfolio and of significantly reducing bank reserves to a level consistent with conducting monetary policy.  However, the specific tactical details about the pace of balance sheet renormalization provided in our June 2011 statement clearly are no longer appropriate.  Decisions about the rate of balance sheet normalization, including the pace of any asset sales that we may choose to conduct, will depend on economic conditions and can wait until we’re closer to the time of funds rate liftoff. Therefore, to maximize our flexibility in implementing our exit, I’d make three changes to the proposed exit strategy principles and tactics that are in the staff memo.  First, I would increase the flexibility in principle 4, the one about returning to a Treasuries-only portfolio over time, by leaving out the rationale at the end of the sentence about the allocation of credit across.  This sentence leaves a false impression that we’re eager to rid ourselves of these assets as soon as practicable.  Second, I agree with the staff memo’s suggestion to combine the first two tactical guidelines into one.  That would lump together the tactics of ending reinvestment, modifying our forward guidance, and deploying reserve-draining tools into a single initial-steps guideline.  The advantage of this approach is that we’d have the flexibility to pursue any combination of these tactics when the time comes. Again, I think we explain the principles, or the tools we have, what we’re trying to accomplish, but we don’t get into the specifics of how we’re going to do that.  Third, I would add some qualifications and flexibility to the last tactic, the one about sales of agency securities, so that it says, “Part of normalizing the SOMA could include sales of agency and Treasury securities”—so, “could include sales of agency and Treasury securities.”  “Such sales, if they occur, would be at a gradual and steady pace.” I would also delete the explicit three- to five-year and two- to three-year time horizons for MBS sales and balance sheet   April 30–renormalization in that paragraph.  Given that our current exit strategy plan is already stale, we should not delay putting out a revised statement for too long. Finally, it would be a mistake to permanently keep MBS securities in the SOMA portfolio just to maintain expertise at the Desk.  Our MBS purchases have proven a powerful tool during this episode, but we must be judicious in deploying it in the future. In thinking about this, I’m reminded of a scene from one of the all-time great movies. I’m speaking, of course, of The Lord of the Rings:  The Fellowship of the Ring.  The hobbit Bilbo is about to journey from the shire and leave behind the ring of power.  Yet when it comes time for Bilbo to go, he keeps unconsciously flipping the ring back into his pocket.  It keeps tempting him.  Like the hobbits in The Lord of the Rings, we must overcome the temptation of the ring of power.  So when the time comes, we should let it go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the Vice Chairman and the staff, and is suggesting changes and updates to the exit strategy principles and tactics.


Passage number 267.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It only includes the word "[Laughter]" and the mention of President Rosengren's name, which does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 268.
 MR. ROSENGREN. It’s hard to follow that up.  Actually, there’s been a surprising amount of consensus through the first set of speakers, and I’m pretty much in the same place.  Because the minutes will reflect the key elements of our discussion of the exit strategy, I hope that the minutes will highlight that we have reassessed our previous strategy, and that they’re no longer operative because circumstances in the economy and our balance sheet have changed.  And then that can be further explained by the Chairman in either speeches or testimony.  Once a consensus can be reached, we can provide an explanation of our new strategy, which, I hope, will be much less detailed, a theme that almost every speaker has highlighted.  I would expect this to occur over the next several meetings. It’s aspirational, maybe, for June, but that’s a very high aspiration.April 30–We need to significantly revise our exit strategies, and, as part of that, I would encourage a broader discussion of the appropriate steady-state composition of our balance sheet at some point.  We have decided that, at the zero bound, holding only Treasury bills did not meet our macroeconomic objective.  We need to have a general discussion of whether there are circumstances under which this may be true when we are no longer at the zero bound.  At one extreme, we could adopt a T-bills-only strategy.  This strategy minimizes interest rate risk but, in effect, causes the public to hold a portfolio more weighted toward long-term debt, possibly resulting in larger term premiums.  At the other extreme, we might hold T-bills, Treasury bonds, and MBS in the same proportion as the securities that are outstanding.  In this way, our holdings reflect what is available to the public at large, and we would not seek to distort the relative supplies that would otherwise be available to the public.  This passive holdings policy would recognize that we are generally holding investments to maturity and incurring little interest rate risk, and that we do not want to distort holdings by the public through our holding securities in different proportions than the portfolio of securities outstanding. There could be several reasons why we’d consider something in between these two options.  One is based on operational risk management, which would argue for at least some activity in MBS, Treasury bonds, and Treasury bills.  Should we want to buy or sell in these areas in the future, the infrastructure would still be up and running.  A second would be that one tool may not be the optimal tool for all occasions, as the zero lower bound has highlighted.  Thus, we may want to have a diversified set of policy tools, rather than limiting ourselves to only movements in overnight rates, which would require more holdings of each asset class.  A third reason to hold long-term Treasury securities and MBS is that we may want to have an option of using the SOMA portfolio for macroprudential monetary policy as well as macroprudential   April 30–supervisory policy.  We might choose this option if we view macroprudential supervisory tools, such as capital ratios, to be much like fiscal policy:  time-consuming to implement and difficult to set without political interference.  Thus, we might want to preserve the option to buy or sell securities for macroprudential purposes.  For example, we might want to signal an undesirable overheating in the residential real estate market by selling MBS securities outright or by swapping MBS for Treasury securities.  The size of our holdings of MBS might be determined by whether we wish to emphasize the signaling role of such an intervention, which might imply smaller holdings, or the ability to significantly alter mortgage rates, which would require significant holdings. It may be useful to begin our discussion of how to get to our steady-state portfolio by coming to agreement on what the steady-state portfolio should be.  I would like to keep open the option to not eliminate any permitted asset class from our holdings. My own preference would be that we hold all MBS to maturity.  Staff simulations show that this does not have a large impact on how long it takes to normalize our balance sheet, and it has the benefit of reducing the likelihood that we stop remitting funds to the Treasury.  To the extent that we want to reduce the size of our balance sheet, I would focus on selling shorter-term Treasury securities, and, for now, we should retain flexibility on how that can be accomplished.  If the economy improves quite slowly, we may want to only slowly reduce the size of our balance sheet.  On the other hand, if the economy begins to grow very strongly, we may prefer a more rapid decline in our balance sheet. As a general rule, I think it’s critical that we maintain flexibility and an array of balance sheet options.  Specific sales timetables should be contingent on economic outcomes rather than preset as an inflexible exit principle. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges the consensus among the first set of speakers and expresses their agreement. They also discuss various options and considerations for the composition of the balance sheet without indicating disagreement or dispute.


Passage number 269.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 270.
 April 30–MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like Presidents Lockhart and Williams, I think the current exit strategy principles have served us well in public discussion, assuring people that we’ve thought about the way out and have some confidence in our ability to execute on it. Personally, I’d prefer the current principles, or something very close to it, to any alternatives that have us holding MBS longer or selling them less rapidly.  These options, to me, represent a break from the premise that our foray into the MBS market is a temporary, emergency measure.  We refer to what we’re going to do with the balance sheet during our exit as normalization, which implies that where we’ve been, where we are, is abnormal. I’d see this as a move away from treating the current holdings of MBS as abnormal and unusual and something we should get away from.  It would be a mistake to take a step in the direction of institutionalizing our operation in the MBS market.  If we went down that road, though, we would owe the public an explanation reconciling an indefinite presence in the MBS market with the March 23, 2009, joint statement of the Treasury and the Fed, which declared that government decisions to influence the allocation of credit are the province of fiscal authorities.  I also think that if we drop the reference to credit allocation that President Williams cited that’s in our current exit principles, we’d owe people an explanation about that as well. I took the rationale you proposed at the end of our last exchange, Mr. Chairman, as saying that tilting interest rate spreads toward MBS has no adverse consequences in the presence of underutilized or unutilized resources in society.  But, clearly, other nonmortgage interest rate spreads are going to be higher than they otherwise would be if we’re lowering MBS spreads, or will fall by less than they would have if we had bought all Treasuries. So other borrowers are going to expand their borrowing by less.  Maybe there’s some other model you have in mind orApril 30–some other approach that yields a different conclusion.  I’m willing to discuss it.  But even if you do, the joint statement is still a problem because there’s no caveat or escape clause in there about underutilized or unutilized resources.  We still owe people an explanation, in my view. Let me just comment on the idea that we continue to hold MBS in order to maintain the analytical expertise to understand those markets, which is hard to take seriously.  The logic seems to be that we need to operate continually in MBS markets in order to understand MBS markets so that we are capable of deciding whether we need to operate in the MBS market. This logic would seem to apply to every market in the universe, I’d point out.  And the idea that you need to operate in a market to understand or to intervene in it conflicts with the premise underlying our intervention, which is based on these models where it’s common knowledge to everyone in the model that the price of the security without our intervention is below some fundamental value.  Allen and Gale, chapter 9, for example, is a version of that that I’ve heard cited. It’s also hard to take seriously the idea that we should revise exit principles because dealers we survey don’t think we’re going to follow them. If we think we want to follow them, let’s declare it to people and let them know, and correct their misapprehensions.  We could easily reaffirm the principles and guide their expectations toward something sensible. The broader picture here is that where we’re going to head with the balance sheet in the long run is a highly consequential issue for us.  Are we going to get back to Treasuries only or not.  This all started as an emergency expedient. It’s become something that we’ve become numb to, inured to, and accustomed to and are treating as normal.  Yet our articulation about this is that it’s abnormal and we’re getting back to normal sometime soon.  I think that we need to reconcile some competing understandings of our MBS holdings.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Lacker, expressing his personal preference and opinions on the current exit strategy principles in relation to the MBS market.


Passage number 271.
April 30–CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude to President Fisher.


Passage number 272.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude from President Evans to someone.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 273.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First, I’d like to start with a proposal:  With all of the cultural references that have been made today—movies, The Lord of the Rings, “Memorable Movie Death #3,” community college job fair—it might be nice if the transcripts could reflect a link to the relevant website [laughter] so that future historians can make the proper associations.  All right. Levity aside, I agree with comments like those of Presidents Williams, Lockhart, and Lacker.  I think that the June 2011 exit principles statement has really served us quite well.  For anybody who goes out and talks and takes questions, there have been many times when somebody stands up and acts as if no one has ever thought of this before: “Have you thought about exiting.” And it’s very useful to say, “Yes, the June 2011 minutes have that, and we expect to do that.”  So they have served us very well.  Now, having said that, I still think that exit is a few years away, and we should be careful not to impede the effectiveness of our current policy, which I take to be, provide a sufficient amount of accommodation to reduce the April 30–unemployment rate below 6½ percent as soon as possible.  There is a tension, as many have noted already, in our communications discussing our current short-term accommodation and, ultimately, longer-term restraint. We need to deal with that.  So I personally am in no real hurry to announce a full revision to our exit principles.  But that said, I do take the point that it’s a good idea to make some minimalist adjustments to the principles that we have in place, and most of those simply reflect the reality of a substantially larger balance sheet than what we did contemplate in June 2011. Regarding the things that the staff is looking for to tabulate, I definitely think that somehow mentioning that normalization is likely to take longer than three to five years— whether we’re specific about that or we just take it out—is important as is conveying the idea that we’ll be in no hurry to unload our MBS holdings to get back too quickly to a Treasuries-only SOMA account.  Ultimately, Treasuries-only is the right place to head, but we should reserve as much flexibility on the tactics of that as seems reasonable. In some sense, I think that one way to handle this might possibly be just in a statement from the Chairman or in a paragraph in the minutes.  I don’t know.  I suppose we could label something “Exit Principles, version 2.0,” but I’m a little concerned about drawing too much attention to it.  And because many people have made some very good recommendations already about how to handle that, I’m not going to get into that detail too much. The second set of questions I took to be, how do policy developments since June 2011 factor in.  As I was mentioning during the Vice Chairman’s comments, it is very complicated how the thresholds interact with the size of our balance sheet and what we’re going to do with it.  I think that it’s very important for us to continually reinforce the threshold concept of what our policy is.  Our forward guidance—it’s not a trigger; it’s a threshold.  And that will come intoApril 30–play as we contemplate any reserve draining.  As the unemployment rate gets close to the threshold level of 6½ percent, reserve draining might begin about contemporaneously with the expected liftoff of the funds rate—but that’s a big “if”—if the inflation projection is around 2¼ percent or whatever your number is.  If inflation is at the upper tolerance, conditional on what our guidance is, then we’re more likely to view 6½ percent as closer to a trigger in that conditionality. But if the inflation projections are 1½ percent, then I’m in the camp with President Kocherlakota—there’s no reason why we should very quickly withdraw accommodation when inflation is not a problem and unemployment is too high.  Then you would not want reserve draining to start too soon.  I think we’re going to need to judge some type of response function of the funds rate with the unemployment rate and our inflation projection.  It strongly suggests to me that draining will need to be contemporaneous with the decision to actually increase the funds rate at a future meeting.  So that’s how I would think about trying to describe this.  However, having gone through as much detail as I have, I’m not optimistic that we’re going to be able to put that nicely into a principles statement.  But if we could, that would be fine. I think that’s more tactical, and it’s not high principle. The remaining questions I’ve already pretty much answered. I think we can reduce MBS assets slowly.  Terminal SOMA should be Treasuries only.  The path could be simply redemptions, and selling short-term Treasuries, and securities in general; that would be fine by me.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses agreement with some comments made by Presidents Williams, Lockhart, and Lacker, but also states that they are in no hurry to announce a full revision to exit principles. They express concern about drawing too much attention to the revision and suggest making minimalist adjustments instead. Additionally, they express uncertainty about how to handle the issue and acknowledge that others have made good recommendations.


Passage number 274.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states "Thank you" and then mentions President George without providing any further information or context, so it does not present any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 275.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would agree with providing clarity around the exit strategy in light of changes since 2011.  I think that would enhance expectations and reduce some uncertainty, and I would do that sooner rather than later.  I think I agree with thoseApril 30–who’ve commented about what being clear means—that the communication is about our ability to manage an exit versus actual exit plans, notwithstanding my own preference.  I do think relying more on high-level principles, as Vice Chairman Dudley and President Kocherlakota have emphasized, and leaving out the tactics is going to be important, and we’ll need that flexibility during the policy-normalization process.  I prefer that we retain the commitment to eliminate agency securities and return to a Treasury portfolio, but that said, I would not encumber such a commitment with any specific time frames for how we shift assets in there. The final thing I wanted to mention is in terms of describing the long-run operating procedures.  We have time to get some experience and study this, but I would take some of the steps that were in the staff memo to ensure that the mechanics of liftoff proceed smoothly.  And we should think more about exploring some of the options they proposed in those recent background memos for how we improve control over the short-term interest rate. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. GEORGE is expressing her agreement with the need for clarity in the exit strategy, taking into account changes since 2011. She also agrees with the idea of relying on high-level principles and leaving out specific tactics during the policy-normalization process. While she expresses her preference for eliminating agency securities and returning to a Treasury portfolio, she is open to flexibility in the timeframe for shifting assets. She also supports taking steps to ensure the smooth operation of liftoff and exploring options to improve control over the short-term interest rate.


Passage number 276.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Thank you" and "President Pianalto" are expressions of gratitude and acknowledgment.


Passage number 277.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As we all know, nearly two years after we published our exit principles, the outlook and policy circumstances have changed considerably, and, because we don’t know what the future will bring, I think we should be careful on how we revise the published exit strategy.  In preparing for that uncertain future, we should take care to preserve the credibility of those principles that we view as strategic.  The bar to changing a principle should be high, and if a change is warranted, it needs to be convincingly explained to the public.  A key lesson that I draw from this experience is that specificity has its costs, and perhaps we were more declarative and specific about tactical details than we should have been in 2011. When the time does come to tighten monetary conditions, I don’t know what the size and composition of our balance sheet will be or what financial market conditions will prevail. In  April 30–addition, the tactical exit decision will be made by a future Committee, and we just don’t know what preferences they will have.  While I think we should tell the public as much as we reasonably anticipate about the exit strategy, I would be careful about presuming too much about the future.  Therefore, in revising the exit strategy, I agree with others who have spoken ahead of me that we should preserve the existing broad strategic elements of policy normalization.  And I think that the staff did this well in the six bulleted items that they wrote down in their background memo.  Beyond those six elements or a set of principles that are similar to those, I would leave the timing and sequencing details to be specified by future Committees. With those general comments, let me quickly answer the questions.  Regarding question 1, even though we don’t know what the future holds, I think we have a problem if our published statements lose credibility.  And based on the Desk’s April Survey of Primary Dealers, we appear to have reached that point with our exit principles.  For example, most dealers don’t expect us to sell our MBS portfolio at all, let alone in three to five years. To maintain transparency, if we can agree on changes to our exit strategy over the course of this meeting and the next, I think we should publish the changes after the next meeting or as soon as possible. Turning to question 2, in light of the developments of the past two years, I would suggest that we revise the exit strategy to be more general and less tactical in order to provide more flexibility to the Committee in the future. The changes in our forward guidance enable us to downplay the tactical elements of the exit strategy and instead focus us more on principles and flexibility. On question 3, as I indicated a few minutes ago, I think the bar to changing principles should be high.  The principles of the exit strategy that we published two years ago include a commitment to eventually return to an all-Treasury portfolio, and the reason that we put that in is that we want to minimize the extent to which the SOMA portfolio might affect credit allocation.  As PresidentApril 30–Lacker mentioned, at this point, we haven’t explained to the public why we’ve become less concerned about credit allocation today than we were two years ago.  So unless we are prepared to explain that change in our thinking about credit allocation, I would just prefer to keep the principle as it is.  Responding to question 4, if we agree to retain the principle of returning to an all-Treasury portfolio, I consider the plan for eliminating the MBS from our balance sheet as a tactical one, and I wouldn’t include it in our set of principles.  Depending on the conditions in the economy and financial markets, it could be appropriate to follow a more gradual course of allowing MBS to just run off of our balance sheet and not actively sell.  But at this point, I would leave that decision for some time in the future. And regarding the potential sales of Treasury securities with shorter remaining maturities, from the background memo prepared for this meeting, I came away with the sense that, to get reserves down to where we need them, we’ll need to expand the reserve-draining toolkit in a variety of ways, and it seems as though we’ll need to use not only reverse repos and term deposits, but also other tools, which include overnight repos, sales of Treasuries with shorter remaining maturities, and even, perhaps, an increase in reserve requirements. Of these other tools, sales of Treasuries with shorter remaining maturities seem the most promising, in the sense of offering a decent level of reserve draining without any obvious downsides.  Still, with the exit, clearly far into the future, I don’t think a tactical decision or plan to use the sales of Treasury securities with shorter remaining maturities is something we need to publicize now. It would be better to wait until exit is more imminent and the set of tools is more refined.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 278.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude from someone named President Plosser.


Passage number 279.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage does not contain any information or statements that suggest contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude from someone named President Bullard.


Passage number 280.
 April 30–MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have just some brief comments.  First of all, let me agree with President Williams and others.  I do think our exit principles have been exceptionally valuable during the last couple of years.  The Chairman and many others have been questioned on numerous occasions—daily, perhaps—about what we’re going to do about exit, and it’s been very valuable to have those principles in place. On question 1, about the timing of any revision to exit principles, I don’t think that now is a very good time to make any changes.  As Governor Duke, Governor Tarullo, and President Evans noted, discussion of exit is often taken as a notion that some decision has been made that exit is near.  And that’s a troublesome factor for this Committee at this juncture, so I wouldn’t try to do too much with the exit principles right now.  I have a suggestion in this regard.  These are technical and complicated issues. I will propose that we assign the detailed normalization discussion and the associated operating procedure discussion to a subcommittee, and that we have that subcommittee report back to us at some point in the future.  I think it’s worked exceptionally well on the communications issue. In our previous discussion, Governor Yellen described the exit strategy as an overdetermined system.  There are a lot of ways you can do this, and it’s not quite clear exactly what the right way is.  And I think President Plosser is exactly right, and as Governor Duke and others have indicated, where you are trying to be in the long run really affects how you would go about this.  These strike me as not easy issues to deal with at the FOMC level, and so I’d at least give thought to having a subcommittee work on this and report back with a recommendation or a set of recommendations that might be easy to work with for the Committee. On the revisions of principles and how they interact with thresholds, I do think that thresholds have helped us get away from the date-based forward guidance.  That’s been very   April 30–useful for the Committee. I’d like to remind people that forward guidance is a policy tool only because of the zero lower bound.  Accordingly, I don’t think that thresholds are going to make any sense or play any role as a long-term tool. The way I was thinking about thresholds and exit was that, well, once we pass a threshold sufficiently far that the Committee is ready to put the exit machinery in motion, these thresholds will be discarded, as they wouldn’t make any sense anymore because now you’re in the exit phase and you’re not trying to promise to stay lower for longer.  You’ve got the rocket, and you’re discarding the booster rocket at some point.  I think that’s the way to think about it, so that’s why I was asking Vice Chairman Dudley earlier about his views on this.  I don’t see that as particularly confusing.  Of course, when you get near to the time of these thresholds, there is going to be a lot of discussion about what the Committee is going to do.  And that’s appropriate. But one of the first things the Committee might do is to take one of the first steps in the proposed exit strategy.  That seems okay to me. On retaining MBS, I do agree with Presidents Lacker, Williams, and Evans that the Committee should reaffirm its long-run goal to return to a Treasuries-only portfolio.  I do prefer that we be out of individual markets, as a matter of principle.  I think that’s a good place for the central bank to be in the long run.  I am willing to introduce somewhat more flexibility on the pace of sales of MBS, but, ultimately, they should move off the balance sheet.  The Congress has other institutions for intervening in housing markets. On question 4, sales of MBS or Treasuries during exit, I agree with President Fisher on this.  As some of you recall, I’ve long maintained that a gradual, state-contingent pace of sales as a first step in the exit process would be preferable to raising the policy rate.  Frankly, I think the Committee suffers from a mild form of insanity on this issue.  Once the balance sheet is down to a more manageable size, the Committee could make a decision about rates.  This would allow  April 30–you to maintain lower policy rates for longer.  That seems to be exactly what we’re trying to do.  So I think that that would be a preferable way to do the exit.  I lost that debate earlier, but perhaps once this gets into subcommittee [laughter], that view might be reconsidered.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 281.
 MR. FISHER.  Remember, insanity is when you repeat something over and over and over.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a simple definition of insanity without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 282.
  [Laughter] MR. BULLARD.  I’m aware of that.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The response "I'm aware of that" is a polite acknowledgement of a statement made by the Chairman. The phrase "Thank you, Mr. Chairman" indicates gratitude and respect.


Passage number 283.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen, would you like to comment on the Bullard subcommittee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it simply acknowledges Governor Yellen and invites her to comment on the subject.


Passage number 284.
 MS. YELLEN.  Good luck.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states "Good luck" without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 285.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Governor Yellen's laughter, which does not indicate contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 286.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I agree with those who have stressed that it served us well to have a set of exit principles.  But circumstances have changed in important ways since we adopted them, and adjusting them soon would have a number of benefits.  First, our adoption of threshold-based forward guidance for the funds rate rendered portions of the existing principles obsolete.  More important, however, the positive market reaction to that shift suggests that we’d be better off recasting the exit principles in a manner that de-emphasizes calendar dates and intervals, instead clarifying the economic conditionality of our future actions.  In particular, I agree that a revised statement of exit principles should de-emphasize details and, instead, emphasize that we’ll use our various tools in support of our chosen stance of monetary policy, and that that stance will be expressed in terms of a target level for short-term interest rates.  Another reason to revise the exit principles is that we’ve already alerted markets that we may alter our MBS strategy. I believe we owe the public greater clarity on this issue as soon as possible.  But I agree with Governor Tarullo and President Lockhart that it’s important to change  April 30–our exit principles in a way that it will be perceived as technical adjustments reflecting changes in our circumstances and not be confused as a shift in our views concerning the appropriate stance of policy.  And I’d say that the availability of a press conference in June could make that an opportune time to adopt a revised policy. Before continuing with the questions for discussion prepared by the staff, I’d like to emphasize how much I agree with Governor Duke and Vice Chairman Dudley.  I think we face a difficult quandary due to our reliance on the fed funds rate as our target.  Our exit strategy really needs to support our new threshold-based forward guidance, but that guidance links moves in the federal funds rate target to evolving economic conditions.  Now, if we stick with the funds rate as our target after exit—and our current forward guidance implicitly takes that as a decision that we’ve made—I don’t see how we avoid draining reserves to establish better control of that rate after we lift the target. But then we face the problem of, how do we, in effect, avoid saying to markets, just as soon as we’ve undertaken draining action, that policy has now been placed on a predetermined course at which a liftoff of our target for the funds rate will happen at some predetermined future date.  So I agree with Governor Duke and Vice Chairman Dudley that it could be extremely advantageous to deal with this quandary and, more generally, to switch to a framework that would focus on a different short-term rate as a target and one that we could control without having to drain enough reserves that the funds rate becomes less idiosyncratic and thin.  And the suggestion that we could focus on the GC repo rate and use standing repo and reverse repo facilities to establish a narrow corridor is something that I really think is deserving of staff study.  It could make sense to be operating in this way not only at the time of liftoff and over the longer run, but also, as Vice Chairman Dudley suggested, possibly even sooner as a way to establish control over a short-term rate. April 30–If we revise the exit principles now, we face the question about what to do in terms of references to the funds rate.  I thought that the proposal circulated by President Kocherlakota very nicely finessed this issue by referring to our acting primarily, in his words, “by influencing the federal funds rate and other market interest rates.”  For now, I think this would be a satisfactory solution, given that the funds rate currently does take center stage in our forward guidance. Over time, it may make sense for us to inform the public that we are considering a number of longer-run options, and that we’re debating their various merits and drawbacks based on our own recent experience and that of other central banks operating with different kinds of procedures. President Kocherlakota’s proposal for a revised exit strategy strips almost all detail of implementation out of the exit principles. I think this has some attraction. At the same time, I think it is important to keep in mind that our exit principles are a communications tool, and that they have worked to reassure the public that we’ve carefully thought about the issues, that we’re confident we have a plan that will work, and that we intend to make sure that any asset sales that we undertake will not disrupt financial markets.  But I agree with the general point that, as far as the normalization process is concerned, it would be helpful simply to convey that we have a range of tools available to drain reserves, including sales of Treasury securities close to maturity, but that we’ll decide on and communicate the specifics of such operations only as the time approaches. Returning to the questions, on question 3, my preference would be to return in the long run to a SOMA portfolio consisting predominantly, but not necessarily entirely, of Treasury securities. In normal times, I agree that the Fed should not be seen as engaging in credit allocation, although, in the circumstances we’ve been in, I think our MBS holdings have been   April 30–doing a lot of good.  Even after exit, a severe downturn could again confront us with a need to resort to balance sheet policies.  And I thought the staff made a convincing case that, to maintain analytical and operational expertise, it would be prudent to hold, in normal times, at least a modest share of MBS securities in the SOMA portfolio. On question 4, I’d favor eliminating the commitment we’ve made to sell MBS.  First of all, I consider our MBS purchases the most efficacious part of our asset purchase program, and eliminating our commitment to sell them would, on the margin, provide a bit of additional accommodation now.  Second, we’d diminish the risk that we’ll be locked into a program that, when the time comes to execute it, could fuel a sharp backup in MBS yields and mortgage rates.  And of course, from the perspective of reducing capital losses, focusing any sales on securities that are close to maturity is beneficial. So, for these reasons, I would recommend that we eliminate from the revised exit principles our promise to sell MBS, and that we add the possibility that, sometime during exit, we may sell shorter-dated Treasuries.  Given the various uncertainties we face during exit, preserving optionality is valuable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: In this passage, there is some disagreement or contention among the speakers about the best approach to revising the exit principles and the strategy for the Federal Reserve's monetary policy. Some of the points of contention include whether to de-emphasize calendar dates and intervals in the exit principles, whether to switch to a different short-term rate as a target, and whether to eliminate the commitment to sell mortgage-backed securities. The speakers present different perspectives and arguments for their positions, indicating disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 287.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Raskin.


Passage number 288.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Some of the current exit strategy principles appear out of date.  This is not meant to kick ourselves too much, but principles are supposed to be timeless.  So, in some ways, I think, like President Lockhart and others, that we misnamed the last exit strategy document when we created and adopted it.  Principles are supposed to be statements of outcome that drive tactics, rather than the tactics themselves. What we prepared, I think, were some statements of outcome and some statements of tactics, rather than the statements of outcome alone that drive the tactics.  And now we see that these tactics of exitApril 30–sequencing and composition do not make perfect sense, given the consequences of the Committee’s set of policies as articulated in our FOMC statements. To start with the questions, in order to answer question 1, about the best time for the Committee to adopt and release any revision to its exit strategy principles, I would back into an answer by saying that I think that, if revisions are undertaken now, the Committee should craft them with three guideposts in mind.  The first guidepost would be operational flexibility, the second guidepost would be policy neutrality, and the third guidepost would be to not be confidence depleting as compared with what we have now with our current set of principles.  First, if we’re to tackle revisions now, I think we should do everything we can to maintain maximum operational flexibility during the extended period of time that will span the exit process.  The time of exit isn’t imminent, and the process of exit will be a protracted one.  So the last thing we should do is to pretend to presume that we will know exactly what steps, with what tools, and in what order and what operating framework will be necessary several years hence. Second, any revisions, if they’re undertaken now, shouldn’t contain embedded policy choices.  Any revisions would be prompted by a perceived need to update the existing set in light of the size and composition of the balance sheet, as well as in light of the need to harmonize the principles with policy actions that have been taken since the time of the initial set of exit strategy principles.  So, considering flexibility, policy neutrality, and not being confidence depleting together, it seems that, in order to adopt and release any revision, we don’t need to, nor should we, come to any final decisions about our operating framework, nor about the particular mix of draining tools and contractionary devices that we’d be implementing. From this perspective of the exit strategy principles—in other words, conceived as a broad statement of principles rather than a set of defined, in-sequence steps—the timing for April 30–adoption and release of any such revision doesn’t seem as important as the conceptual distinction between a release of such revised principles and the adoption of any policy action, such as adjusting or calibrating in the future. Ideally, by maximizing the timing between a sequencing document and a policy announcement, we would minimize the possibility that the exit strategy revision gets interpreted as a policy action.  For example, we could first make an adjusting/calibrating decision and then release revised principles, or we could first release the revised principles and then make the adjusting/calibrating decision.  I don’t think it matters which comes first, as long as they appear conceptually distinct so as not to be viewed as part of the same package of policy choices. To increase the possibility that we not inadvertently communicate that the exit strategy revisions constitute a policy step, after this meeting, the minutes will reflect the fact that there was extensive discussion about revisions to the exit strategy principles.  The Chairman could then ask the staff to prepare such revisions, and, assuming that the new statement is in fact a statement that preserves operational flexibility and is policy neutral and is not confidence depleting, the statement could be adopted and released at any time.  However, to the extent that we embed policy into the exit strategy, I’d argue that we have to stay conscious to the possibility that our revised strategy will be perceived as part of a bigger set of policy moves and then could have unintentional and confusing and confidence-depleting effects on the market’s perception of our policy choices. To answer question 2, about the approach for revision, I can imagine an operationally flexible and policy-neutral set of revisions, like those proposed by President Kocherlakota.  I can also imagine a set that would start with the existing set but would be silent on any required sales of mortgage-backed securities, or that might explicitly note a connection between lifting the  April 30–federal funds rate and thresholds for unemployment and inflation, and that could note that the tools that could be used to manage the exit could consist of a combination of things, such as the IOER, the use of reverse repos, a term facility, and the use of required reserves. Following from this more general set of exit principles, I would prefer to introduce flexibility to maintain some agency MBS on the balance sheet, subject to future Committee decisions.  Retaining agency MBS provides some benefits in terms of market functioning, financial stability, and fiscal costs that are raised by the prospect of selling longer-term securities.  Even though we have discussed these benefits, as a Committee, we haven’t yet weighed them.  So I’d be reluctant to reduce our flexibility in using the MBS portfolio to achieve some of these benefits.  If none of these reasons for retaining MBS seem persuasive to the policymakers of the future, or if they choose to weigh differently the different benefits that retaining MBS may confer, I wouldn’t constrain them in the exit strategy document to not sell them. If we were to revisit the exit principles, given the size and composition of the balance sheet, I would not favor announcing specific plans with regard to those securities but would instead introduce flexibility to permit the possible retention of MBS as an explicit policy action that could then become reflected in the appropriate FOMC statement.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the need to revise the current exit strategy principles and suggests some guideposts for crafting the revisions. The speaker also discusses the timing and approach for revising the principles but does not express disagreement with any specific points.


Passage number 289.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude towards Governor Stein.


Passage number 290.
 MR. STEIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Basically, on almost all issues of substance, I find myself in very close agreement with the points that Vice Chairman Dudley first set out and that have since been echoed by many others.  So let me just go through them. First, with respect to MBS holdings, my preference would be to eliminate any commitment to sell them over the near-to-medium term and to clarify this sooner rather than later. This seems to me like a very straightforward call.  It gets rid of potential problems and has   April 30–no real downside, as far as I can see. I want to say, though, that to the extent that we explain this decision publicly, I would much prefer to emphasize the market-functioning and financial stability considerations—the simple fact that, why do we want to be selling securities that are now seasoned and in a more illiquid part of the market, which is only going to cause disruption, put us on the wrong side of the bid–asked spread, and cost taxpayers. That’s all not good.  I wouldn’t be emphasizing the fact that we’re doing this to smooth remittances.  That’s a byproduct, fine, but I don’t think it should be a rationale. On pretty much everything else discussed in the memo, I would prefer to retain optionality, as would many others.  We’ll just know more later, and we’ll be in a better position.  That applies to whether we want to run a floor or a corridor system.  That applies to whether we want to ultimately have a small, token inventory of MBS to be playing with. I’m completely agnostic at this point; I just don’t see any reason to decide now.  It also applies to something that President Rosengren brought up, which is, do we want to have, on the Treasury side, a somewhat larger balance sheet than we need even for, say, a floor system, simply because we want to have Treasuries of different maturities that we can move around in an MEP-style way, say, for financial stability considerations. I personally am kind of fond of it, but, look—it’s just a gleam in the eye at this point.  So one certainly wouldn’t want to put that out there as something you want to affirmatively do.  You might want to be careful not to say something that absolutely precludes it, and again, I think that just goes to the flexibility point. Again—obviously, flexibility is good.  Opportunities to learn are good.  At the same time, anything we can do to accelerate the learning process affirmatively is also good. Here I want to agree with the points that Governor Yellen, Governor Duke, and others have made about the reverse repo stuff.  I see no reason not to push forward affirmatively with figuring out if we   April 30–can make that workable. I don’t see any reason to wait to do that until we’re at the point of actually having to raise rates.  I don’t think it should confuse anybody that we’re getting ready to exit. We’re just getting the plumbing in order, in some fundamental sense.  So that’s a useful thing to do.  We don’t need to talk about it.  That falls under tactics, but we should preserve the flexibility and then get to work on taking advantage of that.  I think that’s how to think about it. Then, on the question of how we best communicate all of this, in a first-best world, as Dan said, if we can do this with a set of simplified, high-level principles that are not overly committing, pretty much in the spirit of what Narayana had, that’s the ideal. If we find ourselves getting bogged down, if we have to go a subcommittee route, then I would prefer to short-circuit this—again, as Dan said—with something in the statement or in a press conference and not spend a lot of time litigating all of this and then inevitably getting drawn into probably more specificity than would be ideal.  That’s where I am.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 291.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "Thank you. Governor Powell" does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Powell.


Passage number 292.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would agree with others that the June 2011 statement served its purpose very well over time, but it no longer reflects where the Committee is, decisions that we’ve made, or where we intend to go.  We have signaled the market that we’re thinking about it, and we need to follow through in some way.  Let me say what I think the objective is, and that is to increase confidence—on the part of both the general public and the marketplace, which are different audiences—that we can exit, that we can do it in an orderly fashion, and that we have the tools and all of those sorts of things.  That’s really what we’re trying to do.  And I think that naturally breaks down into a stripped-down set of principles.  I would start with what President Kocherlakota had and work out from that, rather than working in from the larger, mixed set from June 2011.  There are also going to be tactical decisions, which April 30–we should make only when it serves us to.  I think it does serve us to make some of them now, and I’ll come back to that.  I actually don’t have a great feeling for whether those belong in the minutes or in the statement of principles.  But anyway, I do think that they’re separate, and I would prefer to keep the principles as simple as possible than to do it in a statement of principles. I guess I’ll start with a question:  What does the market really need to hear from us now, in the summer—almost summer—of 2013.  It’ll be summer, if not fall, by the time we’re done with this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is the speaker expressing their agreement with others and sharing their thoughts on the topic.


Passage number 293.
  [Laughter] MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  It’s still winter in Minneapolis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of "laughter" indicates a friendly or lighthearted atmosphere. The statement about it still being winter in Minneapolis is a simple statement of fact.


Passage number 294.
 MR. POWELL.  I think it’s three things.  First, we’re confident that we have the tools to manage the exit, particularly that we can tighten policy and exert control over short-term interest rates when the time comes.  That gives us a chance to talk about the development of the tools, which is a really important message.  Again, different audiences: There’s the elevator speech that President Evans referred to, but market participants also need to get a growing sense of confidence over time, as we approach normalization, that we can do this.  Second, everyone needs to understand that we’ve thought quite carefully about this and have a credible plan, and that we’re going to move predictably in a stately pace, minimizing volatility, disruption, costs, and all of that.  And, third—I think importantly—during exit, we are going to adapt to circumstances as they evolve and not just blindly follow past practices or return to past practices or follow a battle plan that was authored years ago, before the process began.  If we can’t reach agreement—and I certainly hope that we can; it seems as though we ought to be able to, but we’ll see—then I would support doing something like what Dan, Jeremy, and others referred to, which is to have a stripped-down thing where the Chairman talks about various decisions in a press conference and that kind of thing.  But I see that as a far less attractive alternative.  April 30–To talk about a couple of things in particular, let’s talk about MBS.  Frankly, the most important aspect of the MBS decision, to me, is the financial stability aspect, and I think it serves us to make the decision now along the lines of what Vice Chairman Dudley said—make a decision not to sell MBS until a certain point.  It’s not a commitment never to sell them—and regarding a commitment to return to an all-Treasury balance sheet, I’m fine with that—but I would commit not to sell them as part of the normalization process.  This, to me, is the very place where financial stability could erupt.  You’re selling into an illiquid market.  You’re forcing the new buyers to hedge—whereas we don’t hedge—which will involve shorting securities.  So I just think that’s a good thing to do, and frankly, I believe we should decide it now even though it is obviously tactical.  If we are going to say that now, I also like the idea of offsetting it with the sales of short-term Treasuries.  Pulling that in allows us to say that normalization won’t really take a whole lot longer.  So I like pairing those two up and making a decision now. Thresholds—they’re out there.  I don’t know whether anything needs to be said.  They shouldn’t be in the new principles statement.  They’re out there now, and that probably is not something you need to address. I would echo others that I would walk away from our too-strong embrace, I think, of the federal funds rate as the single policy tool of choice.  As Governor Duke pointed out, the market now expects that reserves are going to be $2½ trillion.  If that turns out to be what happens, it’ll take several years to reduce reserves to the point at which they have any scarcity value, let alone to “the smallest levels that would be consistent with the efficient implementation of monetary policy.”  In the meantime, there is going to be slippage between interest on reserves and the federal funds rate, and the relationship may not be a stable one.  I don’t doubt the efficacy of theApril 30–tools in the memo, and I don’t doubt the quality of the work that’s been done on that, but this is just not something we need to decide right now.  So I would just loosen that statement because I think Narayana did very well to suggest that we use interest on reserves to tighten financial conditions by raising a range of short-term interest rates.  And again, I do have confidence in that.  The decision whether we’re going to manage monetary policy through the federal funds rate, as in the days of old, or through a corridor system or a floor system or some other means is going to be the subject of many years of happy discussion, but it’s just not a decision we need to make now. As far as the timing of announcing a rethought exit strategy, I guess I think it should come either after or contemporaneously with a decision to reduce purchases.  Today’s discussion has added to my confidence that it’s probably not going to be ripe for an announcement before a decision to reduce purchases.  And I wouldn’t see it as a way of making a significant comment about the timing of normalization.  The strategy should be independent of the timing.  But there is a risk that talking about it will convey a sense of an earlier departure to the market, so I would say that it’s better to wait until after we taper.  That’s where I am.  Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Powell is explaining his own thoughts and opinions on various aspects of the exit strategy, but he does not contradict or argue against any of the ideas presented by others.


