Passage number 1.
 Hetzel, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of RichmondTranscript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on December 17–18, 2013 December 17 Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good afternoon.  This is Mark Sniderman’s last FOMC meeting before he retires from the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland in January.  Mark started attending FOMC meetings in 1985, and, including today’s meeting, he has attended 115 meetings since then, which makes him the current record holder for both staff and policymakers.  This seems like it should violate the Constitution’s “cruel and unusual” clause.  [Laughter] Mark was appointed Cleveland’s director of research in 1995 and executive vice president and chief policy officer in 2007.  In his distinguished career, Mark has served five presidents of the Cleveland Fed:  Willis Winn, Karen Horn, Lee Hoskins, Jerry Jordan, and, of course, Sandy Pianalto. Mark, we want to thank you especially for your dedicated service and wish you the very best in your retirement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement expressing gratitude towards Mark Sniderman for his dedicated service and well wishes for his retirement.


Passage number 2.
  [Applause] MR. SNIDERMAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It has been my privilege to have a career in the Federal Reserve System and an honor to serve under your leadership.  I would like to thank everyone in this room for their fellowship over the years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude and appreciation towards the chairman and everyone in the room.


Passage number 3.
  [Applause] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I have a second, preliminary item that relates to FOMC information security.  I sent a September 12, 2013, memo to the Committee, which, among other things, asked President Plosser to work with the Conference of Presidents to develop a plan to identify best practices in FOMC information security at the Reserve Banks. Charlie, I understand you are ready to report briefly on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker sent a memo to the Committee and asks someone named Charlie to provide a brief report on the matter.


Passage number 4.
 MR. PLOSSER. I would just like to share with the Committee that in October, in response to your request, Mr. Chairman, the Conference of Presidents met and discussed these items at some length. We worked with David Wilcox and the SRAC, which has a subcommittee  working on this, and we have instructed them to complete their analysis and report back to the COP early in the new year. When that is completed, we will fill the Committee in on the results of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply sharing information about a meeting and discussing future plans.


Passage number 5.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you.  All right.  Unless there are any other questions or comments, we can go to item 1, Financial Developments and Open Market Operations, and I will turn the floor over to Simon Potter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply thanking someone and confirming that they can proceed to the next item on the agenda.


Passage number 6.
 MS. LOGAN. Thank you, Simon.  I’ll turn to your third exhibit.  The Desk’s Treasury and MBS purchases continued to progress smoothly, though a network disruption did prompt the Desk to extend the close of one Treasury operation by 15 minutes.  This garnered some public attention but had no material market impact. Broad market liquidity tends to decline around year-end, as shown in the top-left panel.  Given this, the Desk front-loaded its December purchases to minimize the need to operate amid less liquid conditions. Separately, as part of a small-value exercise, we conducted our first MBS purchase operations over FedTrade, our proprietary trading platform, completing four purchase operations without issue.  Conducting the operations over FedTrade allows us to transact simultaneously with the full set of primary dealers and in a larger per-operation size than we currently do today.  We plan to conduct additional purchase and sale operations in January as part of the exercise in order to evaluate FedTrade’s use in ongoing MBS operations.  Ahead of the meeting, we circulated several memos on various areas of operational readiness.  These included a discussion of the Desk’s intended plans for the treatment of Treasury floating-rate notes and an update on the overnight RRP exercise and recommendations to modify its terms. First, regarding FRNs, the introduction of this product in January 2014 will have modest implications for Federal Reserve operations and the SOMA portfolio.  In the second quarter of next year, the Desk plans to be ready to reinvest proceeds from maturing Treasury securities into FRNs, although the dollar volume of such reinvestments will be quite small as a result of the maturity extension program. We will also be ready to accept or use FRNs as collateral in various operations.  Additionally, by the fourth quarter of next year, the Desk will be operationally ready to purchase or sell FRNs in outright transactions. Unless there are objections, we will plan to proceed with a Desk statement on these issues in January, as presented in the appendix of the FRN memo circulated ahead of this meeting. Second, regarding the overnight RRP exercise, the operations continue to proceed smoothly.  The exercise has provided the Desk, clearing banks, and counterparties with valuable experience in the auction and settlement processes.  We continue to seek feedback from our counterparties and are considering a variety of ways to potentially increase the effectiveness of the operations, including considerations related to the time of day at which they occur. Results of the exercise thus far suggest that counterparty demand for overnight RRP investments with the Federal Reserve is somewhat sensitive to the spread between market rates on overnight repo and the fixed rate offered in the exercise.  As shown in the top-right panel and excluding the period around the debt ceiling impasse in October, this spread has predominately been several basis points and usage has generally been low, averaging around $9 billion per operation.  Nonprice factors also appear to affect demand at the operations.  In particular, some dealers typically reduce their borrowing in the repo market ahead of financial statement reporting dates, such as quarter-end and, to a lesser extent, month-end.  This prompts money funds and other cash lenders in repo markets to increase their take-up in our operations, as indicated by the light blue bars in the middle-left panel.  However, market contacts suggest that one factor that may be limiting usage is the limited time period over which the exercise is currently authorized, in conjunction with a desire by repo market investors to maintain their relationships with dealers. As shown in the middle-right panel, participation in the exercise continues to be driven primarily by the 94 money market fund counterparties. MMFs have contributed 72 percent of the total bid volume, followed by GSEs, which have accounted for 20 percent. Participation by primary dealers and depository institutions has remained relatively limited, with modest increases on month-end dates. Overall, sensitivity to the spread between prevailing market rates and the operation fixed rate appears to vary across counterparty types, with usage by Treasury-only MMFs exhibiting the strongest relationship to the spread. Some market contacts have commented that, even with the current $1 billion allotment cap, the operations may be having a marginal impact on the minimum level of rates lenders in money markets are willing to accept.  Available data on individual triparty repo transactions marginally support this view.  This is an issue we will continue to examine closely as we gather more data. One concern that has been raised around the use of an overnight facility, and to a lesser extent around the exercise, is the potential for it to cause further reductions in the volumes of brokered federal funds trades, which are shown in the bottom-left panel.  Such a development might adversely impact the reliability and usefulness of the effective federal funds rate produced by the Federal Reserve.  To date, however, there has been no noticeable impact on volumes in the brokered federal funds market.  In addition, overnight federal funds continue to generally trade several basis points above the operation fixed rate. The bottom-right panel highlights the staff’s recommendations to enhance the assessment of a potential overnight RRP facility. The staff recommends a modest expansion of the counterparty limits for the current exercise, to $3 billion, while leaving other terms of the resolution unchanged.  If the Committee agrees with this, the staff would release a Desk statement on December 19, with operations under the new parameters beginning December 20.  The delay in the announcement would allow for separation between monetary policy communications from this meeting and the announcement of updated terms to the technical exercise.  In advance of year-end, the Desk will lower the fixed rate to 3 basis points; this change would also be included in the announcement on the increase in the caps or, if the caps are not increased, in the standard Desk statement for announcing changes in the operation rate. Looking ahead, under the existing resolution, the last operation in the exercise would be conducted on January 29, 2014.  Market participants are already seeking guidance regarding the possible future of these operations and, as noted, the staff sees benefits to further expansion of the exercise.  Assuming operations continue to go well over the next several weeks, we would likely recommend an extension beyond January; other potential revisions to the terms include further increasing the counterparty limits—with the possibility of going to full allotment—as well as removing the fixed end date of the exercise.  These revisions would help us gain additional insight into demand for a potential facility and its ability to put a floor on money market rates. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  That completes our prepared remarks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 7.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Are there questions for Simon or Lorie.  Anyone.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude and opening the floor for questions without expressing any contradictory or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 8.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I just have an observation.  I think it’s very important that we do extend the end date of the reverse RP facility, because it seems to me that we have just begun to dip our toe in the water in terms of exploring and understanding how this works.  And in the longer run, this could be very important in terms of how we actually conduct monetary policy.  I would very much want to go on record saying that it is important that we do extend this past the January end date.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and observation about the importance of extending the end date of the reverse RP facility.


Passage number 9.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply contains a thank you message from someone named President Lacker.


Passage number 10.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.  I just want to ask a couple of questions about what we have learned and what we are going to learn from an extension.  Do you have a sense of our ability to control market interest rates with this facility.  You’ve got a demand curve.  You’ve got observations with negative spreads.  What do you know about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a series of questions being asked, there is no clear contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 11.
 MR. POTTER. The Lucas critique is massive for that demand curve.  This is a demand curve under market participants being capped at $1 billion.  The full allotment idea would be a quite different environment for them to be in, in terms of the bargaining power that they would have. In addition, it is clear that many of them, as Lorie pointed out, are unprepared to renegotiate with existing counterparties, because even though 5 basis points is relatively high compared with the 1 basis point with which we started, 5 basis points on $1 billion for a day is not that much money compared with the counterparty relationships. We view this as showing that it is a minimal test and that there is a demand curve there. It is somewhat surprising to me that we have seen negative rates with this amount, but this has happened toward year-end.  There were special factors last week when this first happened.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's perspective and observations.


Passage number 12.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes, I understand.  So we didn’t learn much, and, short of full allotment, what are we going to learn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply acknowledges that they didn't learn much and asks what can be learned without full allotment.


Passage number 13.
 MR. POTTER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement as it only states "MR. POTTER" without providing any further context or information to suggest any disagreement.


Passage number 14.
 We have learned a lot about the operational capacity to run— MR. LACKER. I was asking about the ability to control interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The individual asking the question is seeking clarification and further information on a specific aspect.


Passage number 15.
MR. POTTER. The theory, as you know, is that if there are a sufficient number of counterparties who have access to this, then the bargaining power that that produces should put a floor on short-term rates.  There are aspects of what we observe with the Treasury bills, which have been trading quite a bit below the 5 basis points, that suggests there may be some leaks. It is not clear to us right now.  What we would like to be able to do is learn more in this sort of practice stage with what this facility offers, whether we have to offer it later in the day to get a firmer floor, whether we might perhaps do a clean-up operation later in the day, which many of the market participants have said they would like us to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing a theory and potential actions without any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 16.
 MR. LACKER.  But are we going to learn more by extending the allotment to $3 billion. Or are we going to get another chart like this and hear you say that we are not going to learn much until we get to full allotment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Lacker is posing a question to clarify the possible outcomes of extending the allotment to $3 billion.


Passage number 17.
 MR. POTTER. We will learn some over the year-end, because we will have some of the counterparties, as we discussed in the memo, who are likely to go to the $3 billion maximum.  We will get some evidence from that.  And then, through January we will get some feeling for how many people were capped out at $3 billion versus $1 billion.  The facility will still not have that much usage, but it will make the counterparties quite likely believe that the facility will stay in place for longer, and that would lead them perhaps to assess whether they want to use the facility more relative to some other counterparties.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the expected usage and potential perceptions of a facility.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 18.
 MR. LACKER. What about quantitative information about portfolio shifts.  Do you have a sense of what effect this has had on the banking system and banking deposits.  Are you going to learn more about that with the $3 billion cap.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is potential for contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking for more information about the effect of quantitative information on portfolio shifts and how it has impacted the banking system and banking deposits. The mention of "learning more" with the $3 billion cap suggests that there may be differing views on the effectiveness or limitations of such measures.


Passage number 19.
 MR. POTTER.  I don’t think we will learn materially more on that.  Until market participants believe that this facility is in place for some time and potentially moving to full   allotment, it will be hard for us to estimate some of that.  The quantities we are talking about now are relatively small compared to the reserves that have been added just over the last month or so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Potter discussing the difficulty in estimating certain quantities due to market perception.


Passage number 20.
 MR. LACKER. In light of that, you are asking for an extension for another month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No
Explanation: The passage simply states a fact or request without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 21.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Not right now.  Not today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that something is not happening at this moment or on the current day.


Passage number 22.
 MR. POTTER.  No, we’re just asking for an increase in the cap right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating that they are simply asking for an increase in the cap, without any opposition or argument.


Passage number 23.
 MR. LACKER.  All right.  We are going to expand the experiment.  Are we going to expand the experiment every meeting by some measure.  You are asking for an extension.  Is there a longer-run plan for these experiments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage suggests that there is a plan to expand the experiment, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 24.
 MR. POTTER.  The analysis that was contained in the staff memo was trying to think through the consequences of running this exercise without a terminal date; the Committee could decide at any point to stop the exercise.  But instead of having this date of January 29 stuck in your head, as we have now, you wouldn’t have that.  Similar to the operational testing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing an explanation about the analysis contained in a staff memo and the potential consequences of running an exercise without a terminal date. There is no evident contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 25.
 MR. LACKER.  I’m not sure I understand what you’re saying.  Are you saying, at the next meeting you’d propose that we make it indefinite.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Lacker is expressing confusion and seeking clarification on a certain proposal.


Passage number 26.
 MR. POTTER.  That’s one of the possibilities.  We don’t know yet.  It depends what we learn over the next few weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there are possibilities and uncertainties that will be clarified in the upcoming weeks.


Passage number 27.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay, because you just said that we are not going to learn much until people are confident this is going to be around a while.  But we are not doing that experiment yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 28.
 MR. POTTER.  Well, we are going to learn more about the high level of operational flow that we can complete, and the clearing banks can complete.  We should have closer to $30 billion to $40 billion, on average, which would allow us to get that last feeling of completion on the operational aspect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It's a statement about the potential high level of operational flow that can be achieved by Mr. Potter and the clearing banks.


Passage number 29.
 MR. LACKER.  Let’s say interest rates are really low until 2019.  Do you think you will have done enough experimenting by then. I mean, is there some time when you are going to sort of say, “We know enough and we can put it on the shelf and then we’ll have it for when we want to raise rates”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question about whether enough experimenting will be done by a certain time.


Passage number 30.
 MR. POTTER.  If that’s what the FOMC decides to do, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a conditional statement regarding the decision of the FOMC.


Passage number 31.
 MR. LACKER.  I’m asking about your process of inquiry.  When are you going to know enough to be able to say, “We don’t want to do more experiments, and we don’t need to raise the cap by another $2 billion”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question about the process of inquiry and when a decision will be made.


Passage number 32.
 MR. POTTER. We can learn a limited amount over this intermeeting period.  The FOMC will have to decide in January whether it wants to learn quite a lot more, which it could do by moving to taking off the caps, or if it wants to hold off on that.  And that will be a decision that the Committee makes in January. My feeling is that the staff recommendation, particularly the Desk one, is that we would like to understand more about how this would affect money markets without the caps in place.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 33.
 MR. LACKER.  I would like to understand more, too.  I would feel more comfortable supporting this if there was a long-range plan and I had a more definite sense of what you were learning or what you were about to learn with the next incremental expansion of the experiment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: Mr. Lacker expresses his desire for a long-range plan and a better understanding of the purpose and outcomes of the experiment, indicating a sense of disagreement or contention with the current lack of information.


Passage number 34.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But if you knew what you were going to learn, you wouldn’t be doing the experiment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The sentence states a hypothetical situation where knowing the outcome of an experiment would eliminate the need for conducting it. There is no contention or disagreement presented in the statement.


Passage number 35.
  MR. LACKER.  What you are learning is the answer to a question.  You should have a sense of the question before you do it.  Of course, you don’t know what the answer is going to be, but you ought to know what the question is going to be.  Ridiculous.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing advice or guidance to someone, suggesting that they should understand the question before finding the answer. The last sentence, "Ridiculous," is likely the speaker's personal opinion on the matter, rather than expressing disagreement with another person's viewpoint.


Passage number 36.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 37.
 Chairman— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 38.
 MR. FISHER.  Just to make clear, this request and this resolution only goes through January 29.  Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply seeks clarification about the duration of a request and resolution, and there is no indication of any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 39.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. That is correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 40.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude.


Passage number 41.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the provided passage.


Passage number 42.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have one extension on what President Lacker was saying, which is that at least some of the staff analysis we have seen about lowering the interest rate on excess reserves suggests the overnight RRP facility would buttress it in helping to put a floor on money market rates.  So it is not just in terms of raising rates. It might be actually even in the process of lowering rates that we would come to use the facility.  That’s a possibility, I’m not saying that that’s what the Committee would choose to do. I have a specific question, which is, is it possible to delay the announcement and implementation by a longer time after the monetary policy announcement on December 18. Could we go to December 23. What was the idea behind making the announcement on December 19.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply adding to a point made by President Lacker and then asking a question for clarification.


Passage number 43.
 MS. LOGAN.  We would like to make the announcement before the following Monday because over the holidays we are going to have a small staffing at our counterparties and, more importantly, at the clearing banks.  We could move it to Friday, but I think that would be the latest we would want to go, given the year-end circumstances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. LOGAN is expressing her opinion about the timing of making an announcement, considering the staffing situation at counterparties and clearing banks during the holidays.


Passage number 44.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. I guess, Mr. Chairman, I would counsel going as late as we could, given the considerations that Lorie just mentioned.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 45.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Is that something you’re willing to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is a question asking for the willingness of the person being addressed. There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage.


Passage number 46.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think the question is, what’s the value of that additional separation of time, in your opinion.  That’s really the question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply poses a question and seeks an opinion.


Passage number 47.
 MR. POTTER.  Small.  But if you want to go later and it doesn’t hit a barrier there, I don’t think it will make that much difference whether it’s on Thursday or Friday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Potter is expressing his opinion that the timing of the event (Thursday or Friday) wouldn't make a significant difference.


Passage number 48.
 MS. LOGAN.  We’ve done a series of technical announcements related to small-value tests, and they have been very successful.  Market participants seem to understand that these actions and these Desk statements are technical in nature.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any sign of contention or disagreement. It simply states that the technical announcements related to small-value tests have been successful and that market participants understand these actions and statements are technical in nature.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 49.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let’s ask you to look into that unless there’s some important technical barrier.  Do it Friday morning then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. 

The statement "Let’s ask you to look into that unless there’s some important technical barrier" suggests that the speaker wants the person being addressed to investigate something, but only if there are no significant technical obstacles. However, the second statement "Do it Friday morning then" implies that the speaker is giving a directive to perform the task on Friday morning without considering any potential barriers. This contradiction or disagreement between the two statements shows a lack of agreement or alignment in the passage.


Passage number 50.
 MS. LOGAN. Yes, we can do it Friday morning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply agrees with the suggestion of doing something on Friday morning.


Passage number 51.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 52.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Yes.  I just want to make a broader observation.  I find this experiment very interesting, and I think it’s potentially very important going forward for the Committee to think about the nature of the operating environment in which we would want to work.  I think that’s important.  But we haven’t really talked about that a whole lot.  I would think that in parallel with these experiments, this Committee ought to be talking about the consequences of the experiments and the models for operating environments that we would like to see.  This would bear on which ones we would choose, but we need to have a discussion here about the tradeoffs of different strategies, whether it be going back to the funds rate or going back to a repo rate. I think we ought to get that on the table for discussion with the Committee as a whole.  That’s really my only point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and suggesting that the Committee should have a discussion about the consequences and tradeoffs of different strategies.


Passage number 53.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No - There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Without further context, it is simply mentioning Governor Yellen, likely referring to someone's title or position.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 54.
 MS. YELLEN.  I very much agree with that suggestion and think we ought to look at what role a facility like this could play, at least in our medium-term operating environment.  After all, we’re going to have a very large balance sheet for a very long time regardless of what the end state of our operating regime looks like, and I think there are a whole bunch of questions we need to consider around this. First of all, I think we absolutely need to assure ourselves that this would work to set a floor if we go to full allotment.  And, when you think about it, if we end up beginning to reduce our asset purchases, people are going to begin to ask questions about our exit strategy again and about all of the things we have left unspecified.  Are we going to keep our balance sheet at its current size until after we have raised our funds rate target.  Well, we can’t really comfortably do that unless we know that this facility is going to work. There are also very important questions about the fed funds rate when we go to full allotment, especially if we narrow the gap between the IOER and this rate.  The funds market could begin to dry up or become dysfunctional, which could mean that we’re going to need to or want to move to a different rate that’s our target rate which is, at a minimum in terms of communications, a big step, I think.  And given that market participants use the fed funds rate as a reference rate in a lot of contracts, we need to consider what happens if it starts to become idiosyncratic. I just want to say, I really endorse the notion that we have to look very seriously at these medium- or longer-term issues.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement or contention in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Yellen, raises several questions and concerns about the potential facility and its effects on the balance sheet and the fed funds rate. These questions and concerns suggest a lack of agreement or consensus on the issue.


Passage number 55.
MR. PLOSSER.  I agree with all of that.  One of the things I wanted to do was to get that discussion started in this group because what I’m worried about is—and you alluded to this, Janet—that if we continue to push on the experiment, we may find ourselves in a spot where the funds market actually has dried up to the point where we may not have a choice of whether we want to restore it or not.  And if so, I don’t want to back us into a corner before we make some more positive decisions about what it is we’d like to be able to achieve through all this.  That’s really all I meant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Plosser is expressing agreement with the points made by Janet and is discussing his concerns about the potential consequences of continuing the experiment without careful consideration.


Passage number 56.
 MS. YELLEN.  I agree, and when I say I think we should look at it, I’m thinking about sooner rather than later—namely, within the next couple of meetings, probably, as opposed to, oh, let’s wait a year or so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Ms. Yellen agrees with the idea of looking at something and states her preference for doing so sooner rather than later.


Passage number 57.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any statement or indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 58.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions.  [No response]  Simon, in your liquidity picture there, figure 13, I’d like to ask if that little dip at the end is this week or next week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 59.
 MR. POTTER.  That’s the 52nd week of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact without any conflicting viewpoints or opposing statements.


Passage number 60.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Christmas and New Year’s.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Christmas and New Year's without providing any additional information or suggesting any form of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 61.
 MR. POTTER.  Christmas and New Year’s.  So it’s going to be a bit hard depending on which business week it is.  The amount of people staffing desks in the last week of the year will be low.  They will be very reluctant to come back in and do more volume.  Usually we see trading conditions which are less liquid.  Most people have squared up before Christmas.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply discusses potential challenges and conditions during the Christmas and New Year period in a business context.


Passage number 62.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It seems like they’re still on the job for the moment, though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting or contradictory information. It simply states that "they" are still on the job for the moment.


Passage number 63.
  [Laughter] MR. POTTER.  They are there right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or indications of contention or disagreement. It only mentions that someone is there right now, which does not imply any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 64.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Good to know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "All right. Good to know" simply conveys acknowledgement and agreement.


Passage number 65.
   MR. POTTER.  Particularly tomorrow, I believe, around two o’clock.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Potter believes something will happen around two o'clock the following day.


Passage number 66.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Any other questions.  [No response] All right.  We have two motions on the table.  The first is to approve the extension of the experiments with the overnight RRP facility, and the second is to ratify open market operations.  Are there any further questions on either of those two. [No response]  Seeing none, are there any objections from Committee members to extend the RRP facility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The lack of response and objections indicates agreement among the Committee members.


Passage number 67.
 MR. POTTER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage provided. The phrase "MR. POTTER" does not provide enough context or information to ascertain if there is disagreement or contention.


Passage number 68.
 Change that one aspect of the terms— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Raise the cap.  Sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Raise the cap" suggests a potential change or adjustment to the terms, but there is no indication of opposition or disagreement.


Passage number 69.
 Say precisely, again—we’re just raising the cap but leaving the— MR. POTTER. Leaving all other terms the same, including the January 29 end date of the resolution.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve contention or disagreement. It is simply restating the terms of a resolution without any conflicting points.


Passage number 70.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 71.
 MR. LUECKE.  The resolution has been passed out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the resolution has been passed out, without any indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 72.
2 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Are there any issues or concerns.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if there are any issues or concerns.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 73.
 MR. LACKER. I’ll just register, for the reasons that President Plosser and Governor Yellen outlined and that I outlined when we first discussed this facility, it strikes me that this would be more appropriate after having done some work to study the effects.  That would be my preference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, Mr. Lacker expresses his disagreement with the idea of implementing the facility without conducting prior studies to assess its effects. He argues that it would be more appropriate to study its impact first.


Passage number 74.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Well, there’s been some discussion about doing that very soon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that there has been some discussion about doing something soon.


Passage number 75.
 MR. LACKER.  Good. 2 The resolution is appended to this transcript (appendix 2).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the resolution is attached to the transcript.


Passage number 76.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I also need a vote to ratify domestic open market operations.  [No response]  Without objection, thank you. All right. Let’s turn to item 2, Economic and Financial Situation.  Let me explain the complicated choreography we have here. We have five presentations:  Stacey Tevlin, Trevor Reeve, and Nellie Liang will talk about the economic situation and financial stability; then we’ll hear from Marnie DeBoer and Gretchen Weinbach on the SEP submissions and the survey on the cost and efficacy of asset purchases, respectively. After hearing all of those five submissions, we’d like to take questions on the last two, on the surveys, so that these two folks can exchange places and have Bill English and Simon back at the table.  And then we’ll take questions on the economic and financial issues, if everyone followed all of that.  [Laughter] All right. I’ll remind you later. Let me call now on Stacey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing an explanation of the agenda and the order in which presentations will be given. There is laughter at the end, indicating a light-hearted tone, but no disagreement is expressed.


Passage number 77.
 MS. DeBOER.4 I will be referring to the packet labeled “Material for Briefing on the Summary of Economic Projections.” Exhibit 1 shows the trajectories of your forecasts for key economic variables.  The top panel shows a pickup in real GDP growth over the next couple of years. Subsequently, in 2016, real GDP growth begins to converge back toward your estimates of its longer-run rate.  Your projections for the unemployment rate, shown in the second panel, decline gradually over the forecast period, reaching levels by the fourth quarter of 2016 that are generally close to your individual judgments of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment.  The bottom two panels show inflation moving back toward your 2 percent longer-run goal over the next few years, with a large majority of you seeing headline inflation running close to 2 percent by 2016. Exhibit 2 compares your current projections with those in the September Summary of Economic Projections and the December Tealbook.  As reflected in the top panel, in general, the revisions to your forecasts for real GDP growth were small, although most of you revised up your projection for the second half of this year (not shown).  As suggested by the second panel, nearly all of you made a modest downward revision to your projected path for the unemployment rate.  Moving to the bottom two panels, most of you also marked down a bit your inflation forecasts, especially in 2013, but the central tendencies for 2014 and beyond are similar to those in September.  The Tealbook forecasts of economic growth are near or slightly above the upper end of your central tendencies over the projection period, and the unemployment rate moves to the low end of your central tendency by 2016.  For 4 The materials used by Ms. DeBoer are appended to this transcript (appendix 4).   inflation, the Tealbook projections are at the low end or below your central tendencies throughout the projection period. Exhibit 3 provides an overview of your assessments of the appropriate path for the federal funds rate.  As shown in the top panel, while two participants believe that the federal funds rate should be increased next year, the rest of you continue to think that it will not be appropriate to begin raising the funds rate until 2015 or later.  The middle panel of the exhibit provides your current assessments of the appropriate level for the target federal funds rate at the end of each year of the forecast period and over the longer run.  Although your expectations about the year in which the federal funds rate should lift off from its effective lower bound have not changed much since September, seven of you lowered your view of the appropriate level of the federal funds rate at the end of 2015.  As a result, the median federal funds rate projection at the end of 2015 moved down 25 basis points to 75 basis points; the median projection for the end of 2016 remained at 2 percent.  Twelve of you judge that the unemployment rate will be at or below 6 percent at the end of the year in which you view the initial increase in the federal funds rate to be appropriate, and all but one of you judge that inflation will be at or below the Committee’s longer-run objective of 2 percent.  As in September, all of the participants who see the first tightening in 2015 or 2016 judge that the funds rate at the end of 2016 will still be below its longer-run level. With regard to securities purchases, 11 of you indicated that your assessment of appropriate policy is about in line with the assumption regarding asset purchases in the Tealbook baseline forecast, which assumes that the pace of purchases will be reduced in the first quarter of 2014 and that purchases will end in the second half of next year, with the cumulative amount of purchases under the program reaching about $1.4 trillion.  Five of you think it would be appropriate to end the asset purchase program earlier and buy fewer securities than assumed in the Tealbook; in contrast, one participant favors a more accommodative path for asset purchases. The final exhibit reviews your assessments of the risks and uncertainty surrounding your economic projections.  As shown in the panels in the column on the left, nearly all of you judge the current level of uncertainty about real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation to be broadly similar to the average level over the past 20 years.  As shown in the top two panels on the right, more of you now judge the risks to real GDP growth and the unemployment rate to be broadly balanced, reflecting a shift from your September projections.  A range of factors was cited as contributing to this change in view, including a lower likelihood of an impasse over fiscal policy, an improved global economic and financial outlook, and improved prospects for consumption growth.  Continuing down the right column, the majority of you continue to see the risks to inflation as broadly balanced. Gretchen Weinbach will now present the results of the survey on the costs and efficacy of asset purchases that we conducted over the intermeeting period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 78.
MS. WEINBACH.5 I will be referring to the packet labeled “Material for Briefing on the Survey on the Costs and Efficacy of Asset Purchases.” As shown in exhibit 1, in November you were asked to assess the magnitude of six marginal costs of asset purchases on a scale ranging from “very low” (1) to “prohibitive” (5).  Most of you associated “moderate” costs with the risks of capital losses and financial instability (the middle two panels); at the same time, most of you judged that the costs associated with the other surveyed risks were either “low” or “very low.” None of you judged that any of the costs were “prohibitive.” The first row of the table in exhibit 2 shows the average of your numerical responses for each cost.  By this measure, you were most concerned about the marginal costs of purchases stemming from issues related to financial instability (column D), noting that highly accommodative policies provide an incentive for risk-taking.  As shown in column C, you were nearly as concerned about the potential costs of capital losses to the Federal Reserve.  You noted that such losses, or the associated lack of remittances to the Treasury, could result in increased political scrutiny of the Federal Reserve’s operations and therefore pose risks to its reputation and independence, and so to its ability to achieve its mandate.  You ranked increased difficulty in managing exit third, on average (column E).  Several of you highlighted the Federal Reserve’s lack of experience in managing exit from the current unconventional policy stance.  Some also noted that financial markets could exhibit unexpected responses to steps taken to remove policy accommodation, citing the Committee’s experience in recent months with its communications about purchases. The remainder of the table summarizes your most frequent responses to the qualitative questions about each category of costs.  As shown in rows 2 and 3, most of you said that costs generally increase with the size of the balance sheet, but you held differing views about how rapidly each cost was increasing and about the time frame over which each cost was expected to manifest itself (row 4), ranging from any time now to a number of years from now.  When asked how each cost might be ameliorated other than by ending the purchase program (row 5), some of you offered ideas for how to do so while others said that stopping purchases was the most effective option.  For example, to reduce the risks associated with incurring capital losses (column C) or with difficulty in managing exit (column E), some of you suggested more communication about the benefits of the Federal Reserve’s policies and also about its strategy for exit. Regarding the primary source of the costs (row 6), you generally linked three of the costs—disruption of market functioning, capital losses, and difficulty in managing exit—to asset purchases specifically rather than to highly accommodative policy more generally.  With respect to the source of the risks of increased inflation and financial instability, some of you cited purchases while others cited accommodative policy, and, in the case of financial instability, some pointed specifically to the low level of interest rates.  As shown in row 7, most of you did not distinguish between 5 The materials used by Ms. Weinbach are appended to this transcript (appendix 5). the social and institutional costs that you associated with each cost category, although in the case of capital losses, most saw the costs as primarily institutional. In a second set of questions, you were asked to provide your views regarding the marginal efficacy of the current purchase program in easing financial conditions and providing economic stimulus.  Overall, most of you noted that the program continues to support accommodative financial conditions.  However, some of you indicated that the marginal benefit was currently relatively low, or at least had diminished, while a similar number of you reported that the purchases continued to be about as beneficial as ever on the margin. Many of you noted that at least a portion of the purchase program’s current marginal benefit was coming through a signaling effect, in that ongoing purchases were serving to enhance the credibility of the Committee’s forward guidance about the timing of liftoff and so were helping to shape the expected path of short-term interest rates. A little more than half of you noted that the marginal efficacy of the purchase program in providing economic stimulus—that is, effects of purchases on real GDP, inflation, and employment—was either more difficult to judge or seemed to be small. A majority of you said that the marginal efficacy of purchases was declining as purchases continue, with some saying that the pace of decline was gradual or moderate.  A couple of you said that the marginal efficacy of the program was not declining, noting the recent swings in interest rates in response to news about possible reductions in the pace of purchases.  Several others said they were unsure if the marginal efficacy of purchases declined as purchases continued, with a couple saying that the presence of a signaling channel made it hard to judge declining marginal benefits in the usual way.  Thank you.  That concludes our presentations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is providing a summary of the participants' responses to a survey on the costs and efficacy of asset purchases.


Passage number 79.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  As I suggested before, we would like to start with questions for Marnie and Gretchen about their survey reports.  Are there any questions on the SEP or on the costs and efficacy survey.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite statement expressing gratitude and outlining the plan for the discussion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 80.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a quick question on the SEP projections.  I think it was back in June when our policy statement relied on the outlook coming out of the SEP, and I think the market reaction was that our SEP was stronger than they were expecting.  Is there any risk from these SEP projections that the market is going to be unexpectedly higher or lower or generate any potential increase. I’m trying to guess what type of effect it might have on long-term interest rates by itself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is questioning the potential risk and effect of the SEP projections on long-term interest rates.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 81.
 MS. DeBOER.  Sure.  I can give you two pieces of information that might help answer that question.  The fed funds rate implied by overnight index swaps right now is about 40 basis points lower than the SEP implied rate at the end of 2015 and about 40 basis points below in 2016 as well.  These quotes have not been adjusted for any term premium effect, which the staff believes is negative, so the difference from the SEP could be higher than is indicated by the unadjusted market quotes.  Another piece of information I could bring to bear is: the median primary dealer thought that the fed funds rate at the end of 2015 and 2016 is 25 basis points below where the SEP puts it.  So there is a chance that the market could interpret the SEP as more hawkish than it feels itself to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that the market's implied rate for the fed funds rate is lower than what is indicated by the SEP (Summary of Economic Projections), suggesting that the market may see the SEP as more hawkish (favoring higher interest rates) than it feels itself to be.


Passage number 82.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay.  That’s helpful.  But in terms of the GDP projection and the unemployment rate, are those forecasts pretty much in line with what market participants would expect us to have coming out of the meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification on whether the GDP projection and unemployment rate forecasts align with market expectations.


Passage number 83.
 MS. DeBOER. For the unemployment rate, we are very close to where the primary dealer survey is.  At the end of 2015, we’re within 1 basis point.  The SEP is a little bit more optimistic in 2016.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating different data points regarding the unemployment rate and different surveys without expressing any disagreement or conflicting points of view.


Passage number 84.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude for something said or done.


Passage number 85.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude to President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 86.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  A question for Gretchen about the survey results regarding costs. I want to drill down a little bit on the financial instability part. I’m going to offer a comment and see if I misunderstood some of the responses. It seemed to be that people perceived the financial instability consequences of our policy as being tied to the steepening of the yield curve, as opposed, necessarily, to the level effects per se.  So, for example, reducing the flow of purchases might push upward on longer-term yields,  whereas our fed funds rate policy is keeping yields in the short term low.  That would induce financial instability. That seemed to be the main source of financial instability that people were identifying, but maybe I missed something, and I would be interested in your perspectives on it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification and asking for the perspectives of Gretchen on a particular topic.


Passage number 87.
 MS. WEINBACH.  I think that’s right.  There was a range of views about how it would become manifest and the mechanism by which it would become manifest.  People did comment on that configuration, but some also commented on the basket of unusual policies now, including not just rates but purchases as well, and how the Fed’s steps to exit from the unusual stance and to manage the unusual policies and communicate about the policies could possibly lead to some swings in rates that are unexpected or could lead to some manifestation in particular markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage describes different views and comments about the manifestation and mechanism by which certain policies could lead to unexpected swings in rates or manifestation in particular markets. However, there is no clear indication of contention or disagreement among the speakers.


Passage number 88.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not contain any conflicting or contradictory statements. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 89.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The term "Vice Chairman" does not provide any content or context to suggest contention or disagreement. It simply states a position held within an organization.


Passage number 90.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the position or title of Vice Chairman Dudley.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 91.
  Wasn’t there also a view that the policies could lead to asset overvaluation and those— MS. WEINBACH. That’s right.  That’s what I mean by some particular markets may get overvalued—yes. There was a wide range of views.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that there were differing views on the potential consequences of the policies, specifically in relation to asset overvaluation.


Passage number 92.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes. I was hoping that the survey would be revelatory about costs that apply to our asset purchase tool that don’t necessarily apply to the fed funds rate tool, with the idea that that would be helpful in communicating to the public about why we are taking steps with respect to one that we weren’t taking with respect to the other. I didn’t see that clearly identified in the financial instability part of this survey.  In fact, the opposite could be said to be true.  If you are worried about steepening the yield curve, that actually is a force that ties the two tools a little closer together as opposed to one that separates them, because you don’t want to be pushing upward on longer-term yields and keeping short-term yields low because that is actually going to be inducing reaching-for-yield behavior.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the author's views on a survey and the relationship between different tools used by the Federal Reserve.


Passage number 93.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I read the comments that people put in the survey as suggesting some were just worried about the low level of rates and reaching for yield, while others were more worried about purchases than just about the low level of rates generally.  And there were different stories there, but at least one was we are pushing down term premiums to push down long-term rates.  We don’t really know a lot about how that will work out over time, just because of a lack of experience with the tool.  And it is possible that there will be, as we get to tapering and as we get closer to exit, kind of a snapback in term premiums, an abrupt run-up in long rates that could cause problems that would be difficult to manage.  I think that was the extra thought that stuck in my mind for purchases relative to just accommodative policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 94.
 MS. WEINBACH.  I think that was evident as well in the responses about the time over which financial instability could manifest itself. Some saw it in terms of calendar time, just this low interest rate environment and the policies in general being in place for a long time, and others framed that realization in terms of a Fed action, taking steps or communicating about exiting or tapering.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that there were different views on how long it would take for financial instability to manifest itself, with some seeing it as a result of a long period of low interest rates and others seeing it as dependent on specific actions or communication from the Federal Reserve.


Passage number 95.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there are other questions to consider after mentioning Governor Tarullo.


Passage number 96.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I hesitate to ask this, Marnie, but for internal purposes, did you determine what the distribution of liftoff and interest rates at the end of 2015 and 2016 would be based on voting members of the FOMC.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question.


Passage number 97.
 MS. DeBOER.  I do not have that calculation in front of me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. DeBOER simply states that she does not have a particular calculation in front of her, without expressing any opposing views or engaging in a debate.


Passage number 98.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I can't generate a response to that question.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 99.
   MR. ROSENGREN.  I have a question on the SEP, too, that is related to Governor Tarullo’s question.  We lay out the liftoff tied to calendar date, but we are providing guidance to the public tied to the unemployment rate.  Do you think it’s confusing to have an SEP based on calendar time.  And do you think there would be any value to actually having it more tied to the thresholds that we are using in the forward guidance.  When I look at, for example, 2014, I don’t know if those two individuals thought liftoff would occur because they thought we would be at 6½ percent or lower, or whether they thought the threshold was inappropriate.  And similar to what Governor Tarullo was suggesting, I don’t know exactly why people are picking that liftoff date—is it tied to how strong the economy is, or is it tied to other factors. It just seems like it is a little bit at variance with our forward guidance to be so focused on calendar dates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: In this passage, there is disagreement or contention regarding the guidance provided by the SEP (Summary of Economic Projections) and whether it should be based on calendar dates or tied to thresholds in the forward guidance. The speaker questions if it is confusing to have the SEP based on calendar time and suggests tying it more closely to the thresholds used in the forward guidance. This raises the issue of how the liftoff date is chosen and whether it is aligned with the overall economic conditions or other factors.


Passage number 100.
 MS. DeBOER. In previous SEP briefings there has been a scatter plot that indicates what participants’ views of inflation and the unemployment rate will be at the time of liftoff. It is not included in your briefing this time.  That is one of the pieces of information that is presented to the Committee but not presented to the public right now.  If you were to show that scatter plot to the public, it would show that more of you in December think that the unemployment rate will be at or below 6 percent at the time of liftoff than you did in September.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states that a specific piece of information (scatter plot) was included in previous briefings but is not present in the current briefing.


Passage number 101.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions.  [No response]  Okay.  Thank you.  Now we can turn to questions about the economic outlook or financial stability.  Any questions for our colleagues.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a neutral statement about moving on to other questions.


Passage number 102.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a quick question on the economic outlook.  Under the staff’s economic outlook, when does headline inflation return to 2 percent. What year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a question, so there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 103.
 MS. TEVLIN.  I don’t know that off the top of my head.  I can find that for you.  Obviously, it is outside of the regular forecast range.  We normally go through 2016.  But if you give me a moment, I can put my hands on that, unless somebody here can find it faster than I can.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they do not have the information off the top of their head but is willing to find it. They are also mentioning that the issue being discussed falls outside of their usual forecasting range.


Passage number 104.
 MR. LAUBACH.  It’s 2019.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "It's 2019" is simply stating a fact about the year.


Passage number 105.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  2019. Thank you.  And then I have a question for Nellie.  I thought this presentation was very good, because it helped me sort through some of the risks that were identified in the overall briefing, helped me identify some of the risks that would actually spill over to the broader economy, which I think is very helpful in our thinking about monetary policy.  If you had to think about three of these vulnerabilities or risks that you would identify as being particularly important for the broader economy, which ones would you be thinking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 106.
 MS. LIANG.  I think we identified a number of vulnerabilities here, including in the corporate market, corporate debt, and possible duration risk and liquidity risk problems.  Then I guess I’m also going to put up the municipal market right now, just because there are a lot of underfunded pensions and Puerto Rico could just be the trigger that puts more spotlight on others, like Chicago and Illinois. I think liquidity risk is on that list, only because this is a time of low term premiums and large inflows to long-term funds.  Small banks have moved into longer-terms assets. Insurance companies have moved into longer-term assets. It could be temporary.  It could just be liquidity and it is temporary and goes away, but there is more uncertainty around that, so that’s why we put it on the list.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It merely presents a list of identified vulnerabilities and uncertainties related to corporate debt, duration risk, liquidity risk, underfunded pensions, and long-term asset investments.


Passage number 107.
  MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Maybe you can help me with municipals.  This probably was in the report, and I just didn’t read it carefully enough.  How big could such a shock be in the municipal market in terms of magnitudes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple request for assistance and clarification.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 108.
 MS. LIANG.  Puerto Rico itself is the eighth or ninth largest bond issuer, $70 billion.  It is not huge, but it is not trivial.  The municipal bond market is about $2½ trillion to $3 trillion.  There is Chicago and Illinois, and there is New York, and there are some underfunded pensions, some of which have been helped a lot recently by the stock market and the low rates.  So the underfunding has really closed over the last couple of years—there is that offset.  Some probably have structural problems that you can’t quite address easily without restructuring your debt and changing your pension liabilities, even with the benefits of the rising markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that some underfunded pensions have been helped by the stock market and low rates recently, which suggests that there has been improvement in their funding. However, they also mention that some pensions have structural problems that cannot be easily addressed without restructuring debt and changing pension liabilities, indicating disagreement or uncertainty about the effectiveness of current measures in addressing the issue.


Passage number 109.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: N/A


Passage number 110.
 MR. EVANS.  On the municipal market, is it the risk to creditor losses, is it the leveraged losses somehow embedded in this, or is it the fact that the municipalities themselves will be so challenged that that could have some effect on their economies.  What are their larger vulnerabilities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking a question and seeking clarification on the potential risks and vulnerabilities in the municipal market.


Passage number 111.
 MS. LIANG.  President Kocherlakota asked about economic risks.  And so this is more about raising costs for municipalities to raise funds, because we think the investors are not levered particularly.  Banks do not have big exposures.  There are a couple, of course.  It is mostly high-net-worth individuals, but I do think it would raise the cost of funds for municipalities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents information about the potential impact of raising costs for municipalities to raise funds.


Passage number 112.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  And that would force them to cut back on employment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement suggesting that forcing individuals or organizations to cut back on employment would be a consequence of a certain action.


Passage number 113.
 MS. LIANG.  Yes. We have not worked through that whole analysis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that they have not completed the analysis, but does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 114.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 115.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions "President Fisher," but does not provide any information or context about their actions, opinions, or any potential disagreement or contention.


Passage number 116.
 MR. FISHER.  I want to suggest, Nellie, that you might want to go back and look at New York City from the 1970s, and also the Washington Public Power Supply System.  And even though the markets have advanced and the use of municipals for collateral purposes is much further advanced than it was before, you might look at case studies to get your arms wrapped around this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 117.
 MS. LIANG.  That’s right.  At the time of New York City, banks held a lot of municipal bonds.  But they no longer do.  They don’t get the tax benefit of it, so they have reduced their holdings.  I think that has removed some of the issues related to financial stability per se.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents a factual statement about the change in banks' holdings of municipal bonds and suggests that this change has had a positive impact on financial stability.


Passage number 118.
 MR. FISHER.  And you might look at the WPPSS as well, because that was 5 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a suggestion or recommendation to look at the WPPSS (Washington Public Power Supply System) in addition to something else.


Passage number 119.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Other questions.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply stating that there are other questions to be asked after a previous topic was discussed. The mention of President Bullard does not indicate any disagreement either.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 120.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to refer to exhibit 11, the forward price-to-earnings ratio, which is the upper left-hand panel.  This shows the S&P 500 forward price-to-earnings ratio, and the black line tells a story that I think is one many of us have told, which is, it doesn’t look too out of line compared with historical valuations. But the red line here doesn’t look as good.  How should I interpret this line, and how should I think about this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker mentions that the black line (S&P 500 forward price-to-earnings ratio) doesn't look too out of line compared to historical valuations, but the red line (not specified) doesn't look as good. The speaker is asking for interpretation and guidance on how to think about the red line, suggesting there is disagreement or uncertainty regarding its significance.


Passage number 121.
 MS. LIANG.  That’s right.  The red line, which is the small-cap, is based on the median firm in the Russell 2000.  As you can see, those have risen, and they are a little bit closer to the top end of the range.  We don’t use aggregate earnings, because many firms have projected very negative earnings, so the small-caps are a little hard to capture.  That’s why we pick a median, so we miss some of the variation because of the way those things break down.  We were highlighting the rise, and along with that, that there are some stocks now that seem to have pretty high valuation ratios.  Prices have been rising 80 percent, and we’ve got some P/Es—where you  can measure them—at 100.  But these are pockets.  We were putting this here just as a marker that there are signs, but we don’t think it’s prevalent yet. And this area is still a very small part of overall capitalization.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily provides an explanation and analysis of data.


Passage number 122.
 MR. BULLARD. I guess by definition it’s small cap.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Bullard's observation about small-cap stocks.


Passage number 123.
 MS. LIANG:  Yes, but in 2000 you could see that the valuation pressures were starting to show up in the bigger stocks as well, through that forward P/E there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. LIANG is simply agreeing with a statement or observation.


Passage number 124.
 MR. BULLARD.  I didn’t get the comparison to the late 1990s because it looks like this was relatively low in the late 1990s.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is simply stating that he doesn't understand the comparison being made to the late 1990s, as he believes the current situation was relatively low during that time period.


Passage number 125.
 MS. LIANG.  That’s right.  I think the late 1990s is also a tech story but not a small firm story, necessarily. I think ideally, if we could, we would capture a small tech somewhere, but those valuation measures are difficult because often even projected earnings are negative.  Forward P/Es are just a difficult concept to do well over time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's opinion and difficulty in accurately measuring valuation measures for small tech firms.


Passage number 126.
 MR. BULLARD.  Are we trying to get at froth in the tech sector.  Is that kind of what we’re trying to get at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is simply asking for clarification or confirmation about the subject of discussion, the tech sector froth.


Passage number 127.
 MS. LIANG. Yes.  Smaller tech.  Social media—Twitter and Snapchat, some of those.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the topic of discussion, which is smaller tech and social media platforms like Twitter and Snapchat.


Passage number 128.
 MR. BULLARD. The other thing is they go to the IPO and they become big cap.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement made by Mr. Bullard.


Passage number 129.
 MS. LIANG.  Not quite yet, but they will.  They’re not quite there yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Liang is stating that something has not yet happened but will happen in the future, without any opposing viewpoints or disagreement.


Passage number 130.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing gratitude, indicating a positive tone rather than disagreement.


Passage number 131.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only states that there are other questions, but it does not mention any conflicts or disagreements.


Passage number 132.
 MR. FISHER.  I just wanted to make an observation for Trevor and then ask a couple questions of Nellie. Trevor, in your exhibit 7, you made the differentiation between Brazil and Indonesia, on the one hand, and Mexico and Korea, on the other. It may be that some countries have taken   advantage of this long period of low interest rates and relatively inexpensive capital to achieve structural change.  We’ve certainly seen that in Mexico, and I would argue we’ve seen some of that in Korea, even though it’s further advanced than most other EMs.  Whereas Brazil and Indonesia, and I would add India, have not made structural changes, but rather financed consumption.  Eike Batista in Brazil is a model of wasted effort and excessive leverage. So I would just suggest that you might consider that.  That’s one of the reasons you’ve seen this disparity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply making an observation and suggesting a possible consideration.


Passage number 133.
 MR. REEVE.  I agree with that, and the recent structural reforms in Mexico have been quite impressive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is agreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Reeve, states that he agrees with the statement about recent structural reforms in Mexico being impressive.


Passage number 134.
 MR. FISHER.  And then Nellie, I’m glad you included the equity margin in exhibit 11.  That bottom blue line is pretty daunting. I’m not sure exactly what it means, but by my numbers, New York Stock Exchange margin debt is up 25 percent year over year.  If you look at the green line in your chart, it’s not quite where the dot-com bust came. It is sending to me something of a signal, and I want to thank you for including that. I have questions about high-yield loans.  We didn’t quite go into that a great deal, but I want to make sure I have this right.  In terms of loan bond funds, we’d seen net inflows for 77 months now, and from what I’m hearing in the marketplace, they’re increasingly backed by second liens.  The quality of a lot of these leveraged loans and the quality of these overall investments have been deteriorating. Is that a correct perception or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of agreement and appreciation for including certain information in a chart. The speaker also poses a question for clarification.


Passage number 135.
 MS. LIANG.  I think the chart on the bottom left speaks to that.  It shows the larger loans, meaning $50 million or more, and the distribution of those loans by their debt multiples.  The red portion of the bars shows that the multiples greater than 6 have been increasing this year.  That would be consistent.  And then, of course, we’ve been hearing about looser terms, other kinds of terms, changes in covenants and that kind of thing that could make the loans weaker.  I think that is consistent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply pointing out the consistency between the increasing debt multiples and the potential weakening of loans due to looser terms and changes in covenants.


Passage number 136.
  The supervisors, based on the guidance that was issued, have been going out and doing the SNC exams and the MRAs.  Some of what we see here in the third quarter are deals that were already in the pipeline, and there is some expectation that the riskier part of the business will contract.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a fact about the supervisors conducting SNC exams and MRAs, and mentioning the expectation of the riskier part of the business contracting.


Passage number 137.
 MR. FISHER.  And then last, to President Bullard’s point, Mr. Chairman, we also have to look at what’s driving earnings, and a lot of what’s driving earnings is the restructuring through borrowing money, buying back shares, and paying out dividends.  The buybacks of shares, of course, affect earnings directly. It’s not being driven by top line, in other words; it is driven more by financial engineering.  I think we need to keep that in mind.  The only reason I raise this question is that these are consequences of accommodative monetary policy that I think we just need to be aware of.  I’m not criticizing.  I’m just saying it’s an end result of some of what we do, that’s the point I wish to make.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply raising a point and expressing the need for awareness of certain consequences of monetary policy.


Passage number 138.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. You said buying shares back affects earnings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The statement is a factual claim and does not involve any form of contention or disagreement. It presents a cause-and-effect relationship between buying shares back and its impact on earnings.


Passage number 139.
 MR. FISHER.  Of course.  It will reduce the number of shares outstanding.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a straightforward statement of fact without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 140.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Oh, per share.  I see, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging that they understand the information being communicated.


Passage number 141.
 MS. LIANG.  I would agree with you, but looking at current top-down S&P 500 analysts’ earnings estimates, current estimates for forward growth are only in the 6 to 6½ percent range. So they are not what we would think of as overly optimistic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Liang agrees with the speaker's point that the current estimates for forward growth are not overly optimistic.


Passage number 142.
  At times they’ve been more so, but— MR. FISHER.  I think the greatest concern is the lack of top-line growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact or observation.


Passage number 143.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I had a two-hander from the Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker received a two-hander from the Vice Chairman without providing any additional information or context that would suggest disagreement or contention.


Passage number 144.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes.  I had a question about covenants.  There is a perception that as covenants get loosened, that that’s a bad thing.  But I’ve talked to a number of people who have suggested another explanation:  that the investors, if they don’t value covenants, would prefer to have a higher yield and looser covenants, recognizing that the covenant doesn’t really have value to them. What’s the staff assessment on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not exhibit any direct contention or disagreement. It presents different perspectives or explanations regarding the perception of covenants getting loosened. The speaker acknowledges both views without expressing personal disagreement or taking a clear stance.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 145.
 MS. LIANG.  I would say it is mixed.  The institutional part of the loans is going to the pension funds and insurance companies, who don’t value the covenants.  Many of these are maintenance covenants.  I think banks, though, do still value some of these covenants, and to the extent they’re losing them on the revolver piece, that’s potentially a problem.  I think it’s a mixed bag.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that the pension funds and insurance companies do not value the covenants, while banks still value some of them. This suggests that there is disagreement between different entities regarding the importance and value of these covenants.


Passage number 146.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think it’s a more nuanced story than how it’s normally told.  That’s the only point I wanted to make.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses their opinion and states that they want to make a specific point.


Passage number 147.
 MS. LIANG.  That’s right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. LIANG is simply agreeing with someone's statement.


Passage number 148.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans, I’m sorry to keep you waiting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is apologizing for making the President wait, but there is no indication of any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 149.
 MR. EVANS.  I wanted to ask President Fisher about the earnings viewpoint.  You talk to a lot of CEOs, and when I talk to CEOs we don’t talk about earnings, of course, but I think you’re exactly right that the top line hasn’t been growing, but they’ve been doing very well on the strength of all of the restructuring and right-sizing their businesses.  I get lots and lots of commentary about that, and that’s what’s driving it.  I’d be surprised if they put much weight on the buyback as driving anything like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their agreement with President Fisher's viewpoint and stating that they receive similar commentary from CEOs.


Passage number 150.
 MR. FISHER.  I think it’s a combination of both.  They’re driving down their SG&A expenses dramatically, but they’re also engineering their earnings, and this is a standard practice, by the way. I’ll walk through some numbers during my presentation.  They’re pretty large  numbers.  Basically, the summary is a combination of share buybacks and dividend increases that is getting almost to the level we saw at the peak of 2006.  We’re very close. It helps, and that’s the way they engineer their earnings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents an observation and acknowledges that the mentioned practice of engineering earnings is a standard practice.


Passage number 151.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Are they funding it by issuing debt or are they funding it out of earnings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is asking a question about how something is being funded. It does not express any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 152.
 MR. FISHER.  You issue debt.  If you have 1 percent inflation, you get a tax write-off, and the cost of your short-term debt is negative.  You and I would do that all day long.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, is simply stating a fact about the benefits of issuing debt in a low inflation environment.


Passage number 153.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But do you see it in leverage. Do you see them giving the company more leverage. I guess that’s the question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking the reader if they see an increase in leverage for the company and stating that it is the question to consider.


Passage number 154.
 MR. FISHER.  It’s also becoming cheaper. It’s a better cost structure in terms of the balance sheet. I’m not sure I’m worried about the amount of leverage as I am that they have reengineered their balance sheets, which means they’re more fit, ready to proceed. I would like them to spend that money on job creation and cap-ex.  I’m just trying to point out that it’s not being utilized to the full extent one would hope, but instead it’s being used—I’ll give you an example, if I may, Mr. Chairman.  Let’s take a big company like AT&T.  Their budget for 2013 and 2014 is for $36 billion in cap-ex.  Their budget for dividend extensions and also for share buybacks is $40 billion over that two-year planning period.  This is inside information.  It’s off the record, or it’s on our record but not for outside use.  That is a very abnormal ratio.  By the way, most of that cap-ex will not be in the United States.  What we would prefer is for them to spend money on job creation, but they’re managing their earnings to the greatest extent possible, and therefore the price of their stock, by planning over two years in their budget to buy back stock and increase their dividends.  It’s simply an observation.  I would much prefer to see job creation come from these numbers than simply to see a reengineering of the balance sheet.  Their balance sheet is long.  It gives them more purchasing capacity further down the road.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is offering observations and preferences regarding the use of funds by companies like AT&T.


Passage number 155.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think I could stipulate that everyone around the table would feel the same way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that "everyone around the table would feel the same way," indicating agreement among the people present.


Passage number 156.
 MR. FISHER.  I’m just pointing that out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher is simply pointing something out.


Passage number 157.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting views or opposing arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 158.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a couple of questions about inflation.  On exhibit 3, you have the Tealbook projections for core PCE now versus the June Tealbook.  The December forecast is about two-tenths lower than it was in June, and I’m reminded, I think, that in our June FOMC statement we took note of the fact that inflation was a little bit low, and we said that we think there are transitory reasons why that’s the case. Now, is the lower path of inflation in part due to more persistence of those transitory influences, or is there something else going on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. Mr. Evans is questioning the reason for the lower path of inflation and whether it is due to more persistence of transitory influences or if there is something else going on.


Passage number 159.
 MS. TEVLIN. It’s not because of more persistence of the transitory influences that we were looking at at the time. One of the big things we reported at that time was how medical costs were being held down by the sequestration, and we don’t think that really has any persistence.  That’s not going to repeat.  The most important reason we revised down the medium-term forecast two-tenths has to do with news that we learned at the time of the comprehensive revision during the summer.  At that time, we learned that the BEA had revised down the prices of imputed banking services—banking services that aren’t provided at the regular price—basically all through history, and the procedure suggested that BEA will continue to measure inflation in that way going forward.  And we marked down our forecast a tenth  because of that. It’s really just like BEA changed the yardstick, and we used that same yardstick going forward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining the reasons for revising down the medium-term forecast, with no indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 160.
 MR. EVANS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any statements or ideas that can be contested or disagreed upon. It simply states a name without providing any context or information.


Passage number 161.
  So it’s not just a one-time markdown, and then you go back— MS. TEVLIN.  That’s right.  We think they are going to continue to measure those services’ prices in the same way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 162.
 MR. EVANS. How does that factor into your thinking about calibrating the overall inflation rate associated with core PCE.  I mean, they’ve got a component now that is always going to be a little bit lower relative to what it would have been.  How are we supposed to think about it overall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking a question and seeking clarification on how to think about the overall inflation rate associated with core PCE.


Passage number 163.
 MS. TEVLIN.  I assume that if your target is still that you want total PCE inflation to be 2 percent, that you will support the economy until it reaches 2 percent even by this new measurement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making an assumption about the target of the individual being addressed and asking if they will support the economy until it reaches 2 percent inflation, based on a new measurement.


Passage number 164.
 MR. EVANS.  Right.  I guess we don’t really have great theories about how individual components catch up to the changes in inflation.  I was kind of driving toward—it is transitory now, and then when it goes away, something else takes its place.  And then maybe it just takes some time to figure out how all of this is going to make its way into inflation adjustments and if there is some downward headwind for inflation that we should be worried about.  But it is hard to assess that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of uncertainty and the speaker's difficulty in assessing a specific aspect of inflation.


Passage number 165.
 MS. TEVLIN.  Right.  I think in general we do want to be careful when we revise down inflation not to pull out the things that went down and say, well, if you exclude the things that went down, then it didn’t really go down.  [Laughter] So I totally agree with you on that.  But this particular one I think has a little bit of a different feel to it. It is not just pulling something out.  It is actually looking at the long history.  And then the other reason we revised down is that  this past year we have been surprised a couple of times on, as I said, the medical price series. One of those was completely transitory, but it did cause us to take a good look at that medical price trend, including the news that we have received more recently, and we decided that we thought there was probably going to be a more persistent downtrend in medical prices.  These are the administratively set prices, and we think that the government will continue to squeeze the prices for Medicare and Medicaid. So we took another little bit out of our inflation rate in the medium term for that reason.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining their perspective on revising down inflation and stating that they agree with the listener on being careful not to exclude things that went down in order to make it seem like inflation didn't really go down. However, they believe that in this particular case, the revision has a different feel to it and is based on the long history and recent surprises in the medical price series. They explain their reasons for revising down, such as the expectation of a persistent downtrend in medical prices due to government actions. There is no clear disagreement or contention expressed in this passage.


Passage number 166.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply thanks someone, showing a polite and positive tone.


Passage number 167.
 MR. WILCOX.  And that is worth about half a tenth.  We are talking about small numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wilcox is providing a statement about the value being discussed, which is about small numbers.


Passage number 168.
 MR. EVANS.  All right. My other question is about the other advanced foreign economies and inflation. In exhibit 7, it’s the case that most of these countries have lower inflation, and now we see the projections for inflation coming back up to the target.  And this also seemed to be an environment where their policy rates are going to be moving up.  Maybe you could add a little more color to the few sentences that you mentioned on this.  Is it the pull of longer-term inflation expectations that is bringing inflation back up to target.  Is it something more tangible than that. If they are going to experience a recovery, that would be one side of it.  But you also mentioned a triple-dip risk for the euro.  How do you square all of this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for more clarification and information on the topic of inflation in other advanced foreign economies.


Passage number 169.
 MR. REEVE.  Sure.  On the latter point, I would categorize that triple dip as pretty much just a risk and not part of the baseline projection.  As I mentioned, a big part of the deceleration in inflation across these economies has been declines in energy prices.  And the deceleration has continued even to a greater extent than the declines in prices, say, of crude oil, because there has also been a compression of refining margins globally throughout this period.  And that in our   view is something that is not going to continue, and so, mechanically, as that effect passes out, you get some move back up in inflation. Another big part of this deceleration is the eventual ending of tax increases that many of these countries put in as part of fiscal consolidation efforts.  And in Europe or the United Kingdom, those were actually quite large.  For the euro area as a whole, the passing through of those tax changes, by the rough constant tax metrics, which have their own caveats, is worth a good ½ percentage point on inflation from 2011 and 2012, to the present. In thinking about inflation going forward, the pull of inflation expectations is a factor in our models.  That is a piece of it, as is the economic recovery itself. It is true that slack persists throughout the forecast period, but it is projected to diminish going forward.  And those are sort of the main influences operating here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is providing an explanation of factors that have contributed to the deceleration in inflation across certain economies.


Passage number 170.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage consists of a straightforward statement/question by Mr. Evans and does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 171.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 172.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes. Relevant to the imputed banking services discussion, as a purely methodological change, I would just point out that we ought to reduce our target by two-tenths.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 173.
 MR. WILCOX.  One-tenth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a simple statement of a fact or opinion.


Passage number 174.
 MR. LACKER.  I stand corrected.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, is acknowledging that he was wrong or mistaken about something, indicating agreement instead of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 175.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context about President Plosser that would indicate contention or disagreement. It only states his title or position without further details or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 176.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Yes.  I just want to follow up on this inflation discussion a little bit, and see if I can add to President Evans’s question in a slightly different way just to get a little more insight into what is really happening.  The answer was about inflation returning to 2 percent in the forecast but not until 2019 or 2020 or something.  Was that the answer we got a little earlier. PARTICIPANTS.  2019.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser is simply asking for clarification on the forecasted timeline for inflation to return to 2 percent.


Passage number 177.
MR. PLOSSER.  Something like that.  In the forecast, we also have unemployment returning to full employment, at least by our long-term standards, in 2016, or something like that, and we’ve got inflation expectations relatively stable.  Asking the question a slightly different way, why isn’t the full employment and the stable inflationary expectations driving inflation back toward target faster in the way you have modeled inflation rather than so slowly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no direct contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply questioning why the full employment and stable inflation expectations are not causing inflation to reach the target faster according to the model. However, this does not indicate a strong disagreement or argument.


Passage number 178.
  Can you just give me some insight as to what the dynamics are here that sort of— MR. EVANS.  Oh, you mean like the Phillips curve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple request for information and does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 179.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Yes.  Like that.  [Laughter] I thought that is what we based our models on, the Phillips curve, right.  But where it is in the model is what I’m asking.  I thought we were relying very heavily on that, at least some of us were.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser is simply asking for clarification on where the Phillips curve is located in the model and expressing his belief that some members of the group rely heavily on it.


Passage number 180.
 MR. EVANS.  Fair enough.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The response "Fair enough" suggests agreement or acceptance.


Passage number 181.
 MR. WILCOX.  Glad to have you aboard, President.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wilcox expresses his satisfaction and welcomes the other person.


Passage number 182.
  [Laughter] MR. PLOSSER.  Well, where did it go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The presence of laughter indicates a light-hearted or joking atmosphere, rather than a serious disagreement. The response from Mr. Plosser does not indicate any disagreement either.


Passage number 183.
 MS. TEVLIN. We do have the Phillips curve operable in this forecast, but we think the Phillips curve is very flat right now, and so even with the unemployment rate gap closing over this period, the effect on inflation is very gradual.  And then on top of that, for at least the next few years, we have energy prices declining.  And with energy prices declining, they are kind of offsetting the upward tilt we would see from slack.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an explanation of their forecast, stating that the Phillips curve is flat currently, the effect on inflation is gradual, and energy prices declining offsets any upward tilt from slack. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 184.
 That at least gets us through the next few years, and— MR. PLOSSER.  That’s probably far enough.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing agreement with the previous statement.


Passage number 185.
 MS. TEVLIN.  And beyond that, I think it just continues to be a very gradual process.  Obviously, you’re asking about the mechanism that we are using, and that is important.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing a gradual process and acknowledging the importance of the mechanism being used.


Passage number 186.
 MR. PLOSSER. In DSGE models, you’ve got a mark-up variable that would be driving this, right. It would be a different mechanism in different types of models.  And I am just trying to figure out what is driving it in this model, or is it just the belief that inflation is, like Atkeson and Ohanian tell us, a random walk and that is what you are forecasting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Plosser, is simply seeking clarification on the driving mechanism behind inflation forecasting in the model being discussed.


Passage number 187.
 MR. WILCOX.  As Stacey emphasized, these are really small numbers, and these are very drawn-out processes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Wilcox is agreeing with Stacey's statement about the small numbers and drawn-out processes.


Passage number 188.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  What does the cone look like.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a straightforward question that asks for a description of the cone's appearance.


Passage number 189.
 MR. WILCOX.  Way bigger than the numbers that we’re talking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Wilcox about the numbers being discussed.


Passage number 190.
 MR. PLOSSER. So why are we worried about this.  Should we be worried about this at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Plosser, is posing a question and seeking clarification or consensus on whether there is a reason to be concerned about something. However, it does not indicate any disagreement or contention among individuals.


Passage number 191.
 MR. WILCOX.  Given that we are talking about tenths of percentage points, I would also note that the unemployment rate actually slightly descends below the model’s effective NAIRU by a couple of tenths, and that is what’s required to give the upward lift to inflation to get the job done and get it back up to 2 percent.  But, to Vice Chairman Dudley’s point, the confidence intervals around our central narrative are really very wide.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing additional information and stating that the confidence intervals around their central narrative are wide.


Passage number 192.
 MR. EVANS.  Could I ask a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Evans wants to ask a question.


Passage number 193.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage is not providing any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 194.
 MR. EVANS. We use the term “uncertainty” a lot, and the cone is like that.  The cone is symmetric around your forecast, isn’t it.  I mean, it doesn’t allow us to just say, “The cone is big, so I’m going to draw my preferred path like this.”  The probability of that path isn’t necessarily as high as you would think, just because it fits within the cone, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is seeking clarification on the concept of the cone and how it represents uncertainty, but there is no argument or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 195.
 I mean, there is a difference between bias and— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Why is it symmetric, though. I mean, presumably, there is price rigidity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply posing questions and expressing curiosity about certain aspects (bias, symmetry, price rigidity), but there is no clear conflict in ideas or viewpoints.


Passage number 196.
 MS. TEVLIN. Actually, it is not quite symmetric in the near term.  We are at the zero lower bound, so the cone that I showed around GDP, for instance, is not perfectly symmetric.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the symmetry of the cone around GDP in the near term.


Passage number 197.
 MR. EVANS.  Oh. It is even worse on the downside. So, our tendency to say, “Well, it could be up,” is even less probable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement made by Mr. Evans is expressing a negative viewpoint and there is no conflicting opinion stated.


Passage number 198.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It is 3:00 p.m.  I wonder if anyone would like to join me in a cup of coffee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 199.
  [Laughter] MR. ENGLISH.  Mr. Chairman, I wanted to answer President Rosengren’s question from the SEP.  You asked whether the people who are early in raising the funds rate were raising it before the threshold was reached.  The answer is “no.”  Those two folks have the unemployment rate at the end of 2014 at 6.2 percent.  They are interesting, though, because they are both more optimistic than the rest of you.  Those are the lowest projections of the unemployment rate at the end of 2014 across all 17 projections.  They are also pulling the trigger a little earlier.  That 6.2 percent is at the high end of the range of unemployment rates for the end of the year in which liftoff occurs, again, across the 17 projections.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information and clarifying a question.


Passage number 200.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Bill, what is the range on the unemployment rate when liftoff occurs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 201.
 MR. ENGLISH. It ranges from 6.2 percent all the way down to 5 percent.  There is only one person down at 5 percent.  There are a couple of people at 5.5 percent.  No pointing fingers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents information about percentages without expressing any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 202.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right. Coffee is available. Let’s start again at 3:20 p.m.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 203.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Why don’t we recommence.  We have an opportunity at this point, before we go into the general go-round, for anyone who would like to comment on financial stability issues to do so.  Is there anybody who would like to make observations on that.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply suggests resuming the discussion and inviting anyone to comment on financial stability issues. President Kocherlakota's statement does not indicate any disagreement either.


Passage number 204.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to thank the staff for having done their usual excellent job of providing FOMC participants with a thorough and thoughtful overview of the shocks and vulnerabilities of the financial system.  Given their assessment and given the projected slow rate of progress toward our dual mandate goals, my conclusion is that financial stability considerations should not influence the current stance of monetary policy.  But I do agree with the suggestion in the box on pages 32 and 33 of Tealbook, Book B.  We should anticipate that financial stability will loom larger in FOMC deliberations as the economy continues to improve.  This conclusion means that the Committee will need to do even more to integrate financial stability risks into our monetary policy deliberations in a systematic fashion. Of course, other central banks are struggling with the same issue, and I think there is much that we can learn from one another.  I recently had the chance to read the July 2013 monetary policy report from the Riksbank, and that report contains a concrete implementation of a two-step approach to integrating financial stability more fully into monetary policy deliberations.  I think that my conversation with Nellie Liang earlier was an example of how the first step would work. That first step is to focus our attention on financial system risks that could plausibly have material dual mandate consequences. Go through the whole QS report.  I think it’s a useful report in its entirety, but many of the risks simply don’t seem large enough to have a significant  impact on our dual mandate variables:  prices and employment.  Thinking about the three or four that are probably the most material from that point of view could well be useful.  An important issue, which I think is challenging, is that these financial system risks might well manifest themselves beyond the usual medium-term horizon of monetary policy—more like five years out, rather than two years out.  In other words, as noted by some around the table, the Committee has to allow for the possibility that current financial market conditions could be associated with longer-term risks to dual mandate outcomes.  So that’s the first step:  to try to focus our attention on risks and vulnerabilities that actually translate materially to our dual mandate. The second step is to gauge the elasticities of these possibly longer-term dual mandate risks with respect to current monetary policy.  For example, Tealbook, Book A, has a very nice alternative simulation about a credit boom.  We could ask ourselves, suppose the Committee were to raise the fed funds rate by 100 basis points over the next two meetings—how much would that monetary policy action today produce of the sharp fall in 2017 employment that occurs in that alternative simulation. That kind of elasticity analysis would allow policymakers to formulate a tradeoff between medium-term dual mandate outcomes of our benchmark outlook and longer-term dual mandate tail risks.  Policymakers could then adjust monetary accommodation in light of this tradeoff. Now, to be clear, both of these steps—figuring out the risks to the dual mandate outcomes and the effects of monetary policy on those risks—are likely to take the form of rough assessments rather than precise estimates.  Nonetheless, these rough assessments will provide a better basis for our deliberations.  I don’t think these kinds of future tail risks are likely sufficiently large at this time to affect the current stance of monetary policy, but I think we have to be ready for the possibility that this situation may well change as the economy improves. Forthis reason, Mr. Chairman, I think that this financial stability go-round and the surrounding staff analysis are likely to prove to be one of your most important legacies to this Committee. The approach to financial stability that I’ve talked through is based on a very particular perspective toward financial stability, and it’s grounded in our current longer-run goals and policy strategy statement.  That statement emphasizes that we’re making monetary policy to influence the progress of the economy toward goals regarding prices and employment.  Financial stability is only relevant to that conversation insofar as it’s a factor that affects that progress in the way that I’ve tried to talk through.  Now, many observers have suggested that financial stability should be an entirely separate goal of monetary policy from prices and employment.  If this Committee wants to adopt such a framework, where financial stability is an additional objective of monetary policy, I think we will need to go about amending our framework of longer-run goals and policy strategy accordingly. As you emphasized yesterday in your remarks at the centennial celebration, Mr. Chairman, I think that transparency is a very important part of effective policymaking, and I don’t think we can be making policy effectively if we’re being guided by some kind of goal that we haven’t shared with the public.  So if we want to think about financial stability as a separate goal, we actually have to be articulating that to the public, and, given the likelihood that financial stability is going to start to become more and more a part of the conversation, I think that’s something that we should start sharing with the public relatively soon.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own views and opinions, but there is no disagreement with others or opposing arguments presented.


Passage number 205.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Just for accuracy, was that your go-round comment as well, or was that just your financial stability comment. [Laughter] I have you here   first under the go-round, too.  Is there anyone else who wants to speak on financial stability. [No response] Seeing none, I’ll call on President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply clarifying the previous comment and asking if anyone else wants to speak on a different topic.


Passage number 206.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. This would actually make decisionmaking considerably easier at the meeting.  But I suspect this streak is not likely to last. Mr. Chairman, I will be brief in this go-round. In November 2013, the employment-to-population ratio was 58.6 percent.  This is basically the same as it was two years ago and well below its level in early 2007. Admittedly, the stability of this ratio is due in part to downward demographic pressures, but even if we look at those aged 25 to 54, we see little improvement in EPOP over the past two years, especially relative to the decline since early 2007.  And these numbers ignore the fact that was just highlighted in the staff briefing—that an unusually large fraction of those who are employed would actually like to work more hours. Many Americans would say that the state of the labor market that I’ve described is a cause for significant concern.  Given that concern, it’s natural for much of the public dialogue about monetary policy to focus on whether additional monetary stimulus can increase employment. In my public remarks I’ve argued that it can, and my perspective on this issue has been shaped by a wide range of empirical evidence, including much work that has been done by people in this room. More recently, researchers at the Minneapolis Fed have added to this body of evidence in an important way.  Usually, Phillips curve estimation relies on aggregate data and is contaminated by the endogenous response of monetary policy to aggregate shocks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing employment and the state of the labor market and presenting their perspective on how monetary stimulus can increase employment. They also mention that their perspective is shaped by empirical evidence and research done by others.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 207.
  The new Minneapolis Fed research by Fitzgerald, Holtemeyer, and Nicolini uses cross-SMSA evidence to eliminate this contaminant because monetary policy does not respond to a particular SMSA’sinflationary pressures and demand pressures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The use of cross-SMSA evidence is meant to eliminate the contaminant in the research, but it implies a disagreement with the idea that monetary policy responds to a particular SMSA's inflationary pressures and demand pressures.


Passage number 208.
  Using this cross-SMSA evidence, the authors document the existence of a stable and plausible Phillips curve relationship between inflation and unemployment.  According to their estimates, monetary policy stimulus that increases the medium-term outlook for inflation by 10 basis points will decrease the unemployment rate by about 25 basis points.  I encourage you all to take a look at this very nice work. But notwithstanding this very compelling work, I have to admit that this issue—to what extent, if at all, monetary stimulus can boost employment—is likely to remain a subject of controversy in monetary economics, as it has been over the past two centuries.  The good news is that the data on inflation suggest that the answer to this thorny question is largely irrelevant for our current policy deliberations.  Over the past two years, core and headline inflation have fallen to around 1 percent, and the outlook is that inflation will remain muted.  The DSGE models all project that inflation will be below 1.8 percent through 2016.  The Tealbook predicts that inflation will remain below 2 percent through the end of 2018.  In other words, the Tealbook forecasts that inflation will be below target for seven consecutive years, and my own forecast is about the same.  Disturbingly, that forecast has slipped since the last meeting. In terms of other people’s outlooks around the table, if you look at the Summary of Economic Projections, about half of those submitted projections actually have inflation below 2 percent as of 2016.  That’s under appropriate monetary policy. Given these inflation outlooks, this issue of whether monetary policy can influence employment is really off to the side.  The main question for us is, can monetary policy influence the price level over the medium term.  I believe that virtually all macroeconomists would say that the answer to this question is “yes,” but if we accept the view that we can influence the price level over the medium term, and we agree that our 2 percent target is to be, in fact, a target,  should we not be doing whatever we can to foster higher inflation over the next few years. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The author is presenting evidence that supports the existence of a Phillips curve relationship between inflation and unemployment, and acknowledges that the issue of whether monetary policy can boost employment is controversial. However, the author then emphasizes that the current focus should be on whether monetary policy can influence the price level, particularly in relation to achieving the 2 percent inflation target.


Passage number 209.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a polite statement expressing gratitude from President Rosengren.


Passage number 210.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  There has been some positive economic news since the previous FOMC meeting.  The November employment report indicated that we are again creating roughly 200,000 jobs per month and that the unemployment rate continues to decline, now standing at 7 percent. Incoming data on the real economy also highlight the fact that the fiscal issues in October have not had a significant longer-lasting impact on households and businesses, and it appears that fiscal discussions are unlikely to be disruptive to the economy, at least in the near term. Despite this positive news, incoming data have only confirmed our forecast of a slowly improving economy.  The Tealbook forecast for real GDP in 2014 is virtually identical to that of the previous Tealbook, as is the forecast for final sales.  Thus, the data have not improved the Tealbook forecast for the real economy, and my forecast, like that of the Tealbook, has not changed much from the last meeting. My forecast, again like the Tealbook, projects real GDP growth next year to be close to 3 percent, which is significantly faster than the 2.3 percent average during the recovery to date. This forecast is based on reduced fiscal restraint and increased household spending that is bolstered by improving payroll employment growth and higher stock and housing prices.  It also receives continued support from low interest rates, with the strongest growth occurring in the interest-sensitive housing and consumer durables sectors. We need to be humble about our forecast for real GDP, however.  Over this recovery, the Tealbook has been overly optimistic about growth in the out quarters, as has my own forecast.  Some, but not all, of the forecast errors for real GDP can be explained by the staff’s assumption of less fiscal restraint than actually occurred. While we may now have less uncertainty concerning fiscal policy over the next two years, I am concerned that monetary policy could become the newest potential source of risk that the economy will not achieve at least 3 percent growth. My forecast is based on the assumption that the Committee will wait to reduce purchases until March 2014, when we hope to have more compelling evidence in the data that real GDP is growing at 3 percent. In addition, my forecast assumes that our tapering will be gradual and that we will not raise the federal funds rate from its lower bound until the unemployment rate is below 6 percent.  This enables residential investment to grow a bit faster than 15 percent and producer durable goods to grow just under 10 percent. However, if our tightening is more aggressive than I have assumed, or if the market reacts more to a reduction in purchases than is assumed in the Tealbook, we risk getting another year of growth only modestly above potential, a pattern that has been an unfortunate hallmark of this recovery. Even with my monetary policy assumption, I forecast that we will remain below our inflation target throughout the forecast horizon.  In part, that reflects how low the inflation rate is now.  With PCE inflation at 0.7 percent, we are now further from our publicly stated inflation target of 2 percent than the Bank of Japan is from its publicly stated target of 2 percent for the CPI less fresh food, which is currently at 0.9 percent.  Furthermore, although our SEP forecasts have been predicting that PCE inflation would be rising, this has yet to appear in the data.  There are several reasons to be concerned with this low inflation rate.  First, we have drawn significant attention to adopting an explicit 2 percent PCE inflation target and reaffirmed that target at the beginning of this year.  One wonders how long we can keep missing such an explicit target before the credibility of our commitment to inflation targeting becomes questioned.  Particularly notable is that other central banks with inflation rates below target, but higher than our rate, are much more aggressively affirming their commitment to raise inflation to the 2 percent target and are expressing their willingness to undertake additional easing to attain their target.  Meanwhile, we’ve been talking about reducing our purchase program.  Second, at such low inflation rates, we risk slipping into deflation if we are hit by a large negative shock.  You may recall that a premature tightening of policy was associated with the onset of Japan’s deflationary problems.  Third, low inflation rates at the zero lower bound have important implications for real short-term interest rates. If large negative real interest rates are what is necessary to return the economy to full employment and our target of 2 percent inflation, low inflation rates are a major impediment to achieving sufficiently low real interest rates. Overall, the very low inflation rate simply adds to the rationale for very accommodative monetary policy.  Of course, the primary reason for retaining accommodative policy is the elevated unemployment rate, which, at 7 percent, remains above the peak unemployment rate of the previous recession. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is presenting information and expressing their own opinion and forecast.


Passage number 211.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage "Thank you. President Evans." It is a simple expression of gratitude towards President Evans.


Passage number 212.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is simply a polite expression of gratitude from the speaker towards President Lockhart.


Passage number 213.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will start with anecdotal inputs from our District contacts.  The downbeat mood reported by our contacts before the October meeting has abated, and their expectations for growth in the near term have returned to September levels, which is to say, they expect growth to be in the range of flat to slow. Most contacts expressed skepticism that growth will accelerate in any meaningful way in the near term. Reports about holiday season sales were mixed, but now that it has begun, the season appears more upbeat than the previous cycle would suggest.  Reports from auto dealers, auto retailers, outlet stores, and retailers with significant online capabilities were strong. Likewise, contacts connected to the industrial sector reflected the strength we have seen in the manufacturing data.  A number mentioned the benefit of renewed export demand.  Although the   pace of housing sales has slowed, most builder contacts and mortgage bankers expect continued growth in 2014. In this cycle, I heard of more instances of labor shortages, notably in the construction and energy sectors.  We also heard reports of shortages in nursing and some manufacturing trades.  That said, I did not detect a widespread pickup in hiring intentions or wages.  Employers continue to be cautious about growing their staffs.  We heard a repetition of concerns about the Affordable Care Act.  These concerns seem to be driving the use of labor-substituting technology, contract and temporary labor, and increased overtime.  Our contacts continue to report that cost pressures, including labor costs, are well contained.  Low energy and industrial commodity prices are said to be contributing to subdued price pressures in the manufacturing sector. Considering the prominent role played by the inventory buildup in the third quarter and the expectation of an output-constraining drawdown in the fourth quarter, we asked a number of contacts about recent inventory patterns in their supply chains.  We did not hear reports that would indicate a significant inventory overhang with consequences for 2014 growth.  However, a very large national auto retailer, the nation’s largest, suggested there is the potential for an inventory-driven drop in auto production in 2014.  I noted that in the “Material for Staff Presentation on the Economic and Financial Situation,” the upper-left panel in exhibit 1 might give the impression of output momentum coming from auto-related consumer spending.  This contact suggested quite the opposite—a slowdown of output because of an inventory overhang in autos. Regarding the outlook, I did not make substantial changes from my September SEP submission.  My growth forecast is basically the same as the Tealbook’s in 2014.  I lowered my   unemployment rate projection a little over the forecast horizon, but the distinction between my unemployment outlook and that of the Tealbook is not significant.  I did, however, adjust my assessment of the balance of risks.  I adjusted my view of the risk to my GDP growth projection from “weighted to the downside” to “balanced.” Regarding inflation risk, the disinflation trend in the consumer price data definitely has my attention, and my staff interpreted today’s CPI report as still being on the soft side. I lowered my inflation projection significantly in my SEP projection, but I still have the rate of inflation moving higher over the forecast horizon.  I submitted a balance-of-inflation-risk assessment of “balanced” to be consistent with my growth assessment, but I have an asterisk indicating weak conviction beside my view on inflation because of the recent downward slope of readings and the lack of clear indications of any firming in the inflation data.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply presenting the speaker's observations and assessments of various economic factors. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 214.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 215.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "Thank you. President Williams" does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude.


Passage number 216.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in the passage without further context or information.


Passage number 217.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 218.
MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have become accustomed to saying that the economic data since our last meeting have been mixed, but today I can finally say that the economic data since our last meeting have been a little better than mixed. I have been particularly encouraged by the strength of auto sales, the continued recovery of the labor market, and the negotiation of a budget deal that should reduce some of the uncertainty surrounding fiscal policy. My District contacts have also become more upbeat about the economy.  Even the recent slowing of housing construction does not greatly concern them.  They believe that the fundamentals, such as household formation, will drive a decent pace of recovery in residential investment. Based on the better economic data, I have edged up my growth forecast to a pace of a little more than 3 percent in 2014.  I have also nudged down my unemployment forecast to reach 6.2 percent in the last quarter of 2015. With recent inflation readings remaining subdued, I have slightly lowered my forecast of inflation over the next few years to a little less than 1½ percent next year and about 1¾ percent in 2015.  I continue to expect GDP growth to pick up over time, which will bring the unemployment rate down toward its natural rate, which I estimate to be 6 percent, sometime in 2016.  These forces, coupled with stable inflation expectations, will slowly pull inflation up toward our 2 percent objective. When we launched our current asset purchase program in September 2012, we indicated in the statement a desire for sustained improvement in labor market conditions and a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market. As I described in recent meetings, I believe the progress in the labor market since that time represents a sustained improvement in conditions and a substantial improvement in the outlook.  The October and November labor market reports have reinforced my belief.   When we launched the current asset purchase program, we also said that we were looking to achieve our labor market objectives in the context of price stability.  At that time, inflation was higher than it is today, and for much of this year inflation has been slowing, according to a range of measures that include the median and trimmed mean CPI inflation rates.  To assess the unexpected decline in inflation since 2012 and its implications for the period ahead, my staff conducted a study using one of their forecasting models.  While I could make it more complicated, the bottom line of their analysis is that most of the falloff in inflation can be explained as a result of the pace of economic recovery falling short of expectations. At this point, as several have already pointed out, inflation is running well below our long-run inflation objective, and there is a risk that it could either fall further or simply remain very low for an extended period.  However, as long as our projections of the pickup in the pace of recovery are borne out, inflation should gradually rise from its current low levels.  The stability of inflation expectations helps give me some confidence in such a forecast.  Also, forward measures of inflation expectations from the Cleveland Fed model have actually risen a little, indicating that financial markets expect CPI inflation a few years from now to rise from the current low levels.  Forward measures of inflation compensation from TIPS remain within the fairly narrow bands that have prevailed in recent years.  And, finally, the Michigan survey measures of consumer expectations for inflation appear to be stable. The risks around my economic growth and unemployment projections are broadly balanced.  While I have been encouraged by the recent progress on a budget deal, the real economy does still face a number of downside risks, including fiscal challenges beyond the near-term budget, cautious business spending, and tepid wage gains for households.  But the economy has also shown some resilience in the face of considerable fiscal drag in 2013.  As fiscal drageases, the housing recovery progresses, and labor markets gain momentum, upside surprises are certainly plausible. The risks to my inflation outlook are broadly balanced.  On the one hand, a continuation of the recent low readings could keep inflation at lower levels for longer than I am projecting.  On the other hand, faster economic growth or an unanchoring of inflation expectations could pose some upside risk to my inflation outlook.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Ms. Pianalto, is providing her assessment of the current economic data and offering her forecasts and analysis.


Passage number 219.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage only expresses gratitude towards someone identified as President Bullard.


Passage number 220.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude from President Plosser.


Passage number 221.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser, I have to acknowledge that you talked about sticky wages and the Phillips curve in the same meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply acknowledges President Plosser discussing two topics in the same meeting.


Passage number 222.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I don’t want to become totally predictable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses a personal preference or desire of Mr. Plosser to not become predictable.


Passage number 223.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We’ll keep your secret for you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage shows a lighthearted and friendly interaction, with the statement being made in a joking manner. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 224.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Tenth District economy has expanded modestly overall since the last meeting and continues to grow at a rate a bit slower than the nation.  Two regions of the District, the Denver and Oklahoma City metro regions, however, continue to grow quite a bit faster.  These areas, which account for about one-third of District employment, have accounted for almost two-thirds of job growth this year.  More broadly, unemployment rates remain below the national average in nearly the entire District, and wage pressures are higher than earlier in the year. District energy activity remains strong, with rapid productivity growth arising from technological improvements, but another bottleneck has emerged at Cushing that is damping regional prices.  The gap between Brent and WTI prices, which had narrowed considerably this summer, has widened again in recent months.  District manufacturing continues to grow and factory expectations are solid, even though recent growth has not been as strong as in the nation.  Finally, District farm incomes are softer because of low crop prices this fall, as corn prices have fallen nearly 50 percent from a year ago and production costs have remained relatively high.  Farmland values continued to grow through the third quarter, though I am beginning to hear anecdotal comments that suggest that some of the intense demand for farmland may start to wane.  My outlook for the national economy is little changed from October.  I now expect GDP growth to slow in the fourth quarter as inventory accumulation moderates, but I expect growth in final sales to accelerate. In the next two years, I continue to see growth rising gradually toward 3 percent as the fiscal headwinds fade and private demand strengthens.  A reduction in fiscal drag should contribute significantly to a pickup in growth in 2014.  My staff estimates that the fiscal headwinds are subtracting 1½ percentage points from growth this year, but the drag will decline to less than 0.5 percentage point in 2014.  In addition, the recent budget deal should provide some further impetus to growth through both higher federal spending and reduced policy uncertainty. Several factors also appear to support a strengthening in consumer spending over the forecast horizon.  In terms of income and wages, real disposable income growth has picked up notably since August, and average hourly earnings in the private sector have begun to firm this year.  Overall payroll growth this year increased at a similar pace to that in 2012 despite this year’s fiscal tightening.  This steady progress has led to an improved labor market outlook.  For example, the December Blue Chip consensus predicts average monthly payroll gains in 2014 of 194,000, compared with the January survey earlier this year that reported 159,000 as the expectation for 2013.  Rising household wealth, less debt, and some rebuilding of savings have also better positioned households to increase spending in the year ahead. Labor force participation remains a key issue.  As others have noted, the recent decline in participation appears to be driven primarily by longer-term trends such as the aging of the population.  My staff, too, has estimated that about two-thirds of the decline in participation this year has been structural, a share that has steadily increased since the recession.  Consistently, the number of people not in the labor force who report they want a job has also declined this year, which is a notable reversal from 2012, and my staff’s comprehensive index of labor market conditions, which includes the participation rate and other variables, signals continued improvement in activity with momentum in the labor market remaining at historically high levels. I see other indicators of strength coming from manufacturing, the housing market, and car sales.  The ISM manufacturing index in November reached its highest level in 2½ years, and the increase in manufacturing employment was the highest in a year and a half.  Available measures of housing market activity and house prices have continue to trend up, while car sales jumped in November to their level right before the recession.  With ample pent-up demand remaining, I expect growth in these sectors to continue. Turning to inflation, the current softness in core PCE inflation is reminiscent of 2010, but one reassuring difference between the two episodes is that the TIPS five-year, five-year-forward inflation rate has remained more stable than it was in 2010.  With measures of inflation expectations holding steady and the labor market continuing to gradually normalize, I expect inflation to firm next year and move toward 2 percent over the next few years. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and observations about various aspects of the economy.


Passage number 225.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude from President Lacker.


Passage number 226.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Between our Fifth District boards and roundtables, we have received a relatively large batch of anecdotal reports over the last few weeks.  Broadly speaking, they indicate that economic activity in our District is improving, but still mixed, and they are very similar in tone to what President Lockhart reported. Some of the improvement reflects the waning of the effects, albeit limited, of the government shutdown in the northern part of the District.  The southern part of the District, the Carolinas, is now doing better, too, particularly in manufacturing.  Much but not all of the improvement appears to be auto related.  More generally, our manufacturing index is now solidly in positive territory after some weakness in previous months, and readings on expected future conditions have improved.  Consistent with recent observations at the national level, our retail survey index showed dramatic improvement in November, although preliminary readings for December—which are going to be released next Tuesday—show a sharp fallback into negative territory.  So that has me a little apprehensive about consumer spending, which I’ll talk about more in a minute. For the national economy, reports since the last meeting have also, on balance, indicated improvement.  Employment growth for November was above 200,000, and employment growth for previous months was revised up.  So we have now averaged about 200,000 new jobs per month for the last four months.  Friday morning’s report on retail sales was so strong that the staff felt compelled to revise an already weather-delayed Tealbook.  Nevertheless, it’s worth noting that business investment and new capital goods orders have been relatively weak of late, and housing has been relatively weak as well. Overall, the U.S. economy seems to be showing modest fluctuations around a modest average growth rate.  It remains to be seen whether the recent pickup in PCE growth is the leading edge of the Tealbook scenario of a consumption-driven pickup in GDP growth or just the typical fluctuation around a modest trend that we’ve been seeing for the last few years.  I’m still a bit skeptical of the Tealbook’s consumer spending scenario.  It is hard to find any direct evidence that it’s happening yet or about to happen.  Moreover, even with the acceleration in income that the Tealbook projects, consumption is projected to grow so fast that the personal saving rate falls to around 3½ percent, a range last seen in the years 2005 to 2007.  It seems to me that it’s more likely that the personal saving rate remains in the high 4s, in which case   consumer spending is unlikely to accelerate much at all in the near term. As a result, my SEP submission hasn’t changed much and has GDP growing just a little above 2 percent for next year and beyond, but I’d like to make use, Mr. Chairman, of the “Lockhart asterisk,” reflecting weak conviction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is mostly providing information and reporting on economic conditions in the district and the country. There is no clear disagreement or contention.


Passage number 227.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’m sorry.  The Lockhart asterisk. Is that like Roger Maris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It consists of a simple statement and a question about a topic that may require clarification.


Passage number 228.
 [Laughter] MR. LACKER.  President Lockhart noted that he wanted to attach an asterisk to his inflation forecast—reflecting weak conviction.  I’d like to apply the Lockhart asterisk to my forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply mentions that they would like to apply the same asterisk to their forecast as President Lockhart did to his, indicating a similar level of uncertainty or weak conviction.


Passage number 229.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I see.  Can we put an asterisk on the policy decision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply asks a question and makes a suggestion.


Passage number 230.
 [Laughter] MR. LACKER.  Unless you’ve got conviction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of "[Laughter]" suggests a lighthearted atmosphere, and the subsequent statement by Mr. Lacker does not indicate any kind of conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 231.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "Vice Chairman" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply refers to a position or title without providing any further context.


Passage number 232.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 233.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude towards Governor Tarullo.


Passage number 234.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Stein.


Passage number 235.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards someone named President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 236.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I appreciated Governor Stein’s asking the staff to perform those experiments, although I was surprised by his use of 6 percent   where 5½ percent seems much more natural.  [Laughter]  But I have a question for you:  Was your line of argument that we should be thinking about some kind of Bank of England–like knockout clause. I wasn’t sure where you were ending up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker is expressing surprise and asking for clarification on a point made by Governor Stein.


Passage number 237.
 MR. STEIN.  You can go different places with it. I think at first blush, it’s either an argument against doing it unconditionally or an argument for putting in a knockout clause. I don’t want to front run the discussion tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their thoughts on possible different approaches without opposing or contradicting any existing viewpoints.


Passage number 238.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Okay, thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple expression of gratitude, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 239.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage provided does not contain any information about Governor Powell, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 240.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The narrative supporting a reasonable pickup in growth has strengthened since the last meeting.  Consumer spending and sentiment are stronger; industrial output and the ISMs are stronger.  As for the ongoing fiscal negotiations, given the political realities, there was no possibility of reaching a grand bargain.  So the upside case was that the Congress would do nothing.  It was a low bar.  And they got over it.  The deal is close to neutral in its effects on near-term GDP as an accounting matter, but if you think that uncertainty about fiscal policy may have been a significant restraint on animal spirits and, thus, on activity, as I think, then it is potentially much better than neutral.  And the big vote margin in the House suggests that there won’t be a shutdown or a debt-ceiling crisis early next year, although, as Dan pointed out, there are more recent reports that do suggest that that unhappy possibility remains alive.  So we may be looking at a period of fiscal calm.  And combined with a reduction in fiscal drag for next year, that’s potentially a big improvement. On the other hand, I get no sense of a meaningful pickup in activity from the bankers and industry people that I talk to, and I am inclined to give some weight to that.  Therefore, I am  forecasting 2.8 percent growth in GDP for next year, which is the low end of the central tendency and less than the Tealbook baseline scenario. On unemployment, I want to add a couple of things.  The first is that while monthly and quarterly payroll measures move up and down, the trailing 12-month payroll average has been remarkably stable around 190,000 per month, plus or minus 10,000 or so.  And I can’t really think of a good reason not to expect something like that to continue.  Another implication of that is probably that policy ought to be much less affected by the first estimate of monthly payrolls, particularly when there are so many broader indicators of labor market conditions that are much more stable and show continued improvement. I was also struck by the discussion in the Tealbook of recent forecasting history.  What has been consistent since 2009 has been a faster decline in unemployment for a given amount of GDP growth, which has led the staff to substantially downgrade its assessment of the supply side of the economy.  We discussed this puzzle at the September meeting at some length, and numerous factors may be at play.  But the longer it goes on, the stronger the case is for still more supply-side adjustments.  In that connection, I was struck both by the recent Board analysis and by a paper by Shigeru Fujita of the Philadelphia Fed that shows that the surprising and unwelcome declines in the labor force participation rate since 2011 are entirely due to retirements and not to an increase in discouraged workers.  Empirically, retirees have been very unlikely to return to the labor force.  Let me add that Dan’s caveats around those data are both welcome and appropriate to consider.  I have learned that you can never look at any one paper, any one argument, or any one set of data, until you hear all of the sides.  But it is, to me, very interesting and troubling information.   All of that leads me to expect payrolls to gradually increase above a couple hundred thousand per month as the economy improves, but with good months and bad months around that trend, accompanied by fairly rapid declines in the unemployment rate.  I project that it will go down to 6.3 percent at the end of this year and to 5.7 percent at the end of 2015. I do see a substantial improvement in the labor market since September 2012, and so it does seem to me that labor market conditions are supportive of a decision to gradually reduce purchases beginning tomorrow.  It also seems to me that the incoming data and, particularly, the supply-side damage story do weaken the argument that the U3 unemployment rate is sending a misleading signal about labor market slack. Turning to inflation, the fourth-quarter deceleration in core inflation is troubling, particularly at a time when growth is picking up and slack is decreasing.  The baseline view is that the reasons for this decline are things that don’t give us much of a signal about the future direction of inflation—medical prices, import prices, and the like.  So the baseline forecast for PCE and core inflation continues to be a gradual return to 2 percent.  I am inclined to agree, and I draw support from the fact that hourly earnings are growing at 2 percent and also that inflation expectations remain grounded.  But this will clearly bear close watching. Finally, based in part on an expectation of inflation moving only very slowly back to our longer-run objective, on rate policy I find myself predicting a somewhat slower return to normal levels of the federal funds rate.  So I’ve got the federal funds rate at 75 basis points at the end of 2015 and 1.75 percent at the end of 2016.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that there are positive signs of growth in the economy, such as consumer spending and sentiment being stronger, and industrial output and the ISMs being stronger. However, the speaker also mentions that they don't sense a meaningful pickup in activity from the bankers and industry people they talk to. This indicates a disagreement or difference in opinion between the positive indicators of growth and the speaker's own observations.


Passage number 241.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or information that indicate contention or disagreement. It only states the name of a person and their title.


Passage number 242.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, the passage does not contain any statement or mention of President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 243.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I thought, as usual, your summary and lead-in to our discussion tomorrow was excellent.  The one comment I would make, to build on what you said, is that I think the observations you described about how the situation has changed since December 2012 are exactly why the 6.5 percent was a threshold and not a trigger.  And I think we should be thinking of ourselves as taking advantage of the optionality that the threshold offers us.  We’re taking advantage of the fact that we allowed ourselves the optionality to face exactly these kinds of considerations, and now we’re trying to figure out language to allow ourselves to build on that.  That was the only gloss I would offer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is merely a comment and reflection on the Chairman's summary.


Passage number 244.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  I’m sorry, I should have allowed any other questions or comments.  [No response]  Okay.  Bill.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 245.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I enjoyed them very much.  [Laughter]  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The mention of laughter indicates a positive response, suggesting that the speaker found the subject enjoyable.


Passage number 246.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  First of all, they were excellent.  So, this is a question for both Simon and Bill:  Relative to market expectations, we’re going a little sooner, but we’re also implying that we’re going slower.  What’s the net-net of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply posing a question to Simon and Bill.


Passage number 247.
 MR. ENGLISH. It is not a whole lot slower.  If you look at the first page of the handout, in the dealer survey, they are expecting the decline in purchases not to begin until the middle of the first quarter, but then it winds down by September.  I think the staff was assuming a month or two later.  And you get a little bit more purchases, but not a huge amount—if you’re talking about the quantity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 248.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 249.
  No, I’m talking about the time frame, because you finish later, right, under— MR. ENGLISH.  Under alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, this passage does not show contention or disagreement. It is a clarification or confirmation of the time frame in question.


Passage number 250.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Under B, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only provides the information "Under B, right." without any further context or information, so there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 251.
 MR. POTTER. No, I’m not sure that’s true under B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the given passage, there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 252.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. It’s about the same.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contentious language or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 253.
 MR. ENGLISH.  It’s about the same.  I think what we wrote down was one meeting later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that what they wrote down was one meeting later, without any opposition or contradiction.


Passage number 254.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I just feel like there are two signals that we’re sending.  One signal is “earlier,” but then we’re also sending the signal “slow,” so I’m trying to understand what you think the net-net of those two things is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing confusion and seeking clarification about the two signals being sent, but there is no obvious disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 255.
 MR. POTTER.  I think the dealers with the higher probability of a reduction at this meeting have a very small reduction in purchases.  There are four dealers, I think, at 50 percent  or above.  There is one with a 65 percent chance you would take an action at this meeting, but it’s a very small reduction that they are thinking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion about the likelihood of a reduction in purchases by certain dealers at a meeting. There are no conflicting viewpoints or arguments presented.


Passage number 256.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So the net-net is a risk that they would take it as a more hawkish signal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presenting a possible risk or concern without opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 257.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  What’s the definition of “very small”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question asking for the definition of "very small."


Passage number 258.
 MR. POTTER. $5 to $10 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only presents a statement or proposal by Mr. Potter regarding a monetary amount.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 259.
 MR. EVANS.  Which direction, Bill.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 260.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. They would take it as indicating that we are being more aggressive in reducing the pace.  We are not tightening, but we are reducing the pace.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It states that "we are not tightening, but we are reducing the pace" as a clarification, without conflicting views being presented.


Passage number 261.
 MR. POTTER.  I think what Bill emphasized about the SEP is also important.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that what Bill emphasized about the SEP is important.


Passage number 262.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I saw President Rosengren first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement is a straightforward observation of the speaker seeing President Rosengren first.


Passage number 263.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  If your goal was to minimize the chance of tightening financial conditions, how much of an effect do you think there would be from having a quantitative rather than a qualitative forward guidance—moving to a 6 percent threshold—relative to what we currently have in option B.  I know it is a highly speculative question, but I’m just asking for your own sense of whether that would make a big difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no evident contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for the opinion or speculation of the other person.


Passage number 264.
 MR. ENGLISH.  My sense is that market participants see a quantitative change in the forward guidance to a lower threshold as a little bit firmer—as something that would give a little bit more confidence that rates would stay low for a long time, relative to the qualitative guidance that we have written down.  I’m not sure that’s a big difference, but I expect that’s the direction it goes in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's opinion and expectation regarding market participants' perception of a quantitative change in forward guidance.


Passage number 265.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 266.
 MR. PLOSSER.  If you look at alternative B as crafted—in terms of the asset purchases, what is the cumulative size of purchases in 2013 and 2014.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is asking for factual information about the cumulative size of asset purchases in 2013 and 2014. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 267.
 MR. POTTER. Do you mean what the staff assumed or what the market would assume.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply poses a question to clarify whether the speaker is referring to the assumptions made by the staff or the assumptions made by the market.


Passage number 268.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Well, either.  Give me both if they’re different.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser is simply requesting two possible options, with the understanding that they may be different.


Passage number 269.
 MR. POTTER. It’s about $1.4 trillion total, I think. It’s similar to the number that you floated in the memo you sent around.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges the amount mentioned by Mr. Potter and compares it to the number in a memo.


Passage number 270.
 MR. ENGLISH. The total from January 2013.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact about the total from January 2013.


Passage number 271.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes.  So, actually, $1.375 trillion plus $143 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states two numbers without any conflicting information or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 272.
 MR. PLOSSER. Alternative C, paragraph 3′—the paragraph that converts purchases to a stock—actually gives more total purchases than paragraph 3 of alternative C because you have a higher pace through midyear.  You’d essentially get the same amount of purchases as you’d get in alternative B. That’s what I was getting at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Plosser, is providing an explanation and clarifying their point.


Passage number 273.
 MR. ENGLISH.  That is probably pretty close to right.  If you look at the chart that we have on page 1 of my handout, cumulative purchases under alternative C is a little below alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any indication of contention or disagreement. The statement is merely stating a fact.


Passage number 274.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Yes.  But the slower tapering in alternative C, paragraph 3′ gives you basically the same quantity added to the balance sheet as under alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that alternative C, paragraph 3 provides the same quantity added to the balance sheet as alternative B.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 275.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But one has conditionality, and the other doesn’t, so they’re not really the same. You’re comparing apples to oranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains contention or disagreement. The statement "But one has conditionality, and the other doesn’t, so they’re not really the same" suggests a contrast between two things and implies that they cannot be compared directly because they have different characteristics. This indicates a disagreement or contention between the two compared items.


Passage number 276.
 MR. PLOSSER. I’m just saying they give you the same size balance sheet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no evident contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states Mr. Plosser's opinion or statement.


Passage number 277.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Assuming in alternative B that you don’t pause, because of data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a hypothetical scenario and offers an assumption about what might happen in that scenario.


Passage number 278.
 MR. LACKER.  It’s the same in expectation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "It's the same in expectation" suggests that there is agreement or consensus on a topic.


Passage number 279.
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It’s not the same thing as an expectation of looking at all of the possible distributions.  It’s only in a modal sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage is simply stating that something is not the same thing as another thing, and that it is only applicable in a specific sense (modal sense). There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 280.
 MR. PLOSSER.  My second question was about the effect of the SEPs.  I think we made the point earlier that in the SEPs, the median forecast for the funds rate in 2016 was the same now as it was in September.  So we haven’t really changed.  You said something about the market may be a little bit surprised by the fact that our funds rate path is higher than theirs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Plosser is simply stating a fact and seeking clarification on a previous point.


Passage number 281.
  But ours is the same as it was in September, so— MR. ENGLISH.  But market participants have come down.  One other thing about the difference between the fixed program in C and in B is that I think there is some effect of having the last purchase, in people’s minds, being at midyear or being out in the fourth quarter, because that pushes back how quickly they think you could switch to raising the funds rate.  It does move back the sense of, when is this thing going to end.  When is normalization going to begin. By having the purchases continue further into the second half of the year, it probably helps prevent a rise in the expected path of the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is providing additional information and discussing potential effects of the fixed program.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 282.
 MR. POTTER.  One other point on the SEP, which is a controversial point, is that some people trend.  They will take the four highest dots and not include those in the calculation.  And I think if you take those out, there might be a slight drop in the SEP number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Potter, presents a controversial point about removing the four highest dots from the calculation of the SEP number, implying that it might result in a slight drop in the number. This suggests that there is disagreement or contention regarding whether those four highest dots should be included or excluded.


Passage number 283.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage provided only contains the phrase "President Fisher" and does not provide any other information or context that could indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 284.
 MR. FISHER.  I’m encouraged that the odds are equal for December, January, and March, particularly when you look at the next slide regarding the expectations of forward guidance.  So this is a question for the Desk, although, again, I have never believed that our course should be determined by dealers.  In terms of the way that alternative B is currently phrased, by strengthening the sentence on forward guidance—obviously, term premiums we   don’t fully understand—we are still encouraging people to think that it is worthwhile to go out further on the yield curve.  Is that a sufficient offset in your opinion, Simon, for this small reduction in the rate of purchases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It consists of a statement and a question, with the speaker expressing their opinion and seeking the opinion of someone else.


Passage number 285.
 MR. POTTER.  The market moves we’ve seen since September suggest that this should work really well.  That was the thought in the briefings, so I would give it maybe a two-thirds chance because we had the experience in June when we were surprised.  And one of the things I was trying to indicate is that the distribution of beliefs is quite wide.  We don’t know how people are positioned relative to that distribution of beliefs.  So we could get surprising moves, depending on who the marginal investor is right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is describing their thoughts on a particular market move and stating that there is a wide range of beliefs and uncertainty about how people are positioned relative to those beliefs.


Passage number 286.
 MR. FISHER.  And beyond the dealers, in terms of our assessment of the overall investment community—the same.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not present any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 287.
 MR. POTTER. We’ve looked at some different surveys.  The questions are not as precise, particularly when it comes to forward guidance, so it’s hard to assess those surveys.  We can’t see a material difference that would be useful for you, other than additional confusion about where the market is.  So there’s nothing where we can say a different type of market participant has a different viewpoint.  It’s varied across the buy-side surveys.  The CNBC survey came out today.  The only encouraging thing there is that they asked a pricing question, and they think that the tapering is more priced in than the previous time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that different surveys have different levels of precision and it is difficult to assess the results regarding forward guidance. They also mention that there is no significant difference in viewpoints among different market participants in these surveys.


Passage number 288.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude towards the Chairman.


Passage number 289.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage provided does not contain any information or context to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 290.
 MR. LACKER. I read somewhere that someone was speculating that we would be reluctant to move because markets are thin.  We talked about that chart earlier that showed trading volume falling off.  Is that widespread, or is that an idiosyncratic view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker is simply asking for confirmation or clarification regarding the speculation about the reluctance to move due to thin markets and falling trading volume.


Passage number 291.
  MR. POTTER.  I spoke to two former heads of the New York Desk who thought that was a big issue.  And I think it’s in some people’s minds in the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In the given passage, Mr. Potter is simply stating his conversation with two former heads of the New York Desk and sharing their thoughts on a particular issue. There is no indication of any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 292.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Not me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage.


Passage number 293.
 [Laughter] MR. POTTER.  I was sort of surprised, given the history of the FOMC, which has usually moved when it’s appropriate to move and has not taken into account these issues.  There’s this folklore out there that the FOMC is very worried about the liquidity of markets at certain times.  Just as around presidential elections, I believe this analysis doesn’t support a move by the FOMC at the current time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing surprise and disbelief towards the FOMC's decision-making, but there is no explicit disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 294.
 MR. LACKER. I can’t recall our ever factoring that in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply mentions that they cannot recall factoring something in, without any indication of conflict or differing opinions.


Passage number 295.
 MR. POTTER. Yes. But there is a perception out there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement made by Mr. Potter.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 296.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But what you said before about a particular difference in trading volumes doesn’t even seem to be factual.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker is disputing the accuracy of a statement made by someone else.


Passage number 297.
 MR. POTTER.  Well, definitely, because we don’t usually have a meeting between Christmas and New Year’s.  If it was a telegraph move, we would just be unpopular with the people who wouldn’t be on vacation, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents an observation or statement about the absence of meetings between Christmas and New Year's and the potential unpopularity of a telegraph move during that time.


Passage number 298.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I will keep that in mind.  Any other questions.  [No response]  Okay.  We begin tomorrow at 8:30.  Please submit any revisions to the SEP as soon as possible.  Let me mention to you that if you are in fact enamored of any particular kind of guidance, you might want to check to see if your rate projections are in fact consistent with that guidance.  I only raise that point.  In any case, we will start tomorrow at 8:30.  There is a reception upstairs and dinner.  No business will be conducted.  And I will see you tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing information and giving a reminder about submitting revisions. The mention of rate projections is a suggestion or point to consider, rather than a disagreement. The mention of the reception and dinner also does not indicate any disagreement.


Passage number 299.
 [Meeting recessed]December 18 Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  Let me start by calling on David Wilcox to update us on some data.  David.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply starting the session and calling on David Wilcox to provide an update on data.


Passage number 300.
 MR. WILCOX.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  One of the more obscure and peculiar consequences of the government shutdown was that the Census Bureau was in the unusual situation this morning of publishing not only housing permits for November, but also starts for three months—September, October, and November.  The permits numbers, which we pay much more attention to, were right in line with our expectations.  Single-family permits edged up about 10,000 to 634,000 in November.  Multifamily permits reversed some of their extraordinary gain in the prior month and fell back to 373,000. In judging the underlying trends, we pay much less attention to the starts numbers because they’re much noisier than permits, and this morning they lived up to that reputation.  They were weak in September and October, but we’d already guessed that that would be the case, based on other information Census had already released.  They jumped in November to 727,000, which is the strongest reading on single-family starts since early 2008, when construction was on the way down. It’ll be interesting to see whether the market this morning is distracted by the strong starts number or they manage to look through that.  But for us, given the permits numbers, I’m expecting that there’s likely to be very little news for our forecast, with maybe just a few billion dollars shifting between this quarter and next quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating some facts and observations about the housing permits and starts numbers published by the Census Bureau after the government shutdown.


Passage number 301.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.7 Thank you.  You have a new, slightly changed variant of the alternative statements in front of you.  In alternative B—in B(2), in the blue—we’ve added as 7 The materials used by Chairman Bernanke are appended to this transcript (appendix 7). an alternative the language from A(2):  “The Committee . . . will monitor inflation developments carefully for evidence that inflation is moving back toward its objective over the medium term.” I think that’s an accurate statement. It’s part of an attempt to try to increase the sense that the Committee is paying close attention to the inflation situation.  And this is important language to one of our colleagues, so I hope that we can either do this or do something similar to that. I suggested at the end of yesterday that we make a point in B(4) of the possibility that asset purchases could be stopped if inflation was not moving back toward target.  On consultation, it seemed as though adding more conditionality might make it too complicated.  So I’m proposing a relatively simple modification—changing “the Committee’s economic outlook” to “the Committee’s outlook for the labor market and inflation” to show that these are the things that we’ll be paying most attention to.  In the press conference, I can elaborate the point that, of course, conditional on this morning’s statement, our policies remain contingent on continued progress. So those are just a couple of additional suggestions.  Of course, we’ll go around and have any other comments and suggestions from all participants.  If we’re ready, then, we can begin our go-round with President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting a modified version of a statement and suggesting some additional changes. There is no indication of any disagreement or opposition from other participants.


Passage number 302.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B, with some reservations.  My reservations are not deal breakers, so I support B, along with the statement substantially as drafted, including the new inflation verbiage.  But I will mention some concerns. As I stated in my economy-round statement, I am concerned about the disinflationary trends in the price data over the last few months.  This trend, as I read it, is problematic on two counts in that it not only represents a widening deviation from our price-stability target, but it also is a worrisome red flag that I, or possibly we, are misreading the economic signals and therefore could be overly optimistic about the underlying trend in real activity.  For this reason, I have some sympathy with waiting another meeting or two to see if we get some firming up of the inflation statistics as well as stronger confirmation of accelerating growth. But I also recognize that our communications seem to have achieved substantially what was intended, and market expectations appear to be as well aligned for a tapering decision at this meeting as we can hope. At the last meeting, I stated my preference for being as concrete as we can about the path for asset purchases once adjustments to the LSAP program begin.  I believe that financial market uncertainty will be minimized and our policies will be more effective if we lay out as clear a path as possible for winding down our purchases.  I feel that we should set a high bar for any decision to suspend the wind-down or reverse course, and that we should signal that this is the case. I think there are changes to alternative B that would nudge expectations in the direction of seeing a decision today to taper as the beginning of a reasonably predictable process for exiting the LSAP program.  For one, I think there is a case for starting by reducing purchases by the amount of $20 billion, as presented as an option in an earlier draft of alternative B, rather than $10 billion.  Assuming that actual reductions in purchases begin in January, the pace suggested by this first taper would take us through the June or July meeting, with an end of the LSAP program completed by sometime in the third quarter. It seems to me that a pace of reduction of $10 billion, if that’s the assumed meaning of “measured steps,” would drag out the process for longer than desirable and longer than markets expect.  To my mind, starting at $10 billion and describing it as modest conveys a tentativeness that may generate uncertainty about our intentions.   Now, I know the likely outcome today is $10 billion, but if $20 billion was the downstroke, my suggestion would be to replace “further measured steps” in paragraph 4 with thephrase “similar steps.”  Paragraph 4 would then read, “the Committee will likely reduce the pace of asset purchases in similar steps at future meetings.” That said, overall, the plan is more important, in my mind, than the amount.  As a general statement, the markets are going to make guesses about future steps, and it is better to tell the markets what we can to avoid wrong guesses. So efforts to preserve a great deal of optionality may just create confusion and unwanted volatility.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any overt contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Lockhart, expresses support for alternative B with some reservations and provides his reasons for those reservations. However, he also acknowledges the effectiveness of the current communications strategy and mentions potential changes to alternative B that could align expectations with the tapering decision. Overall, his tone is one of thoughtful consideration and suggestion rather than direct disagreement.


Passage number 303.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Rosengren.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 304.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My goal for this meeting would be to leave financial conditions unchanged until we see data that clearly indicate real GDP growth above potential and clear movement of PCE inflation back toward our target of 2 percent. My forecast is that such evidence will be more apparent in the data by our March meeting. I have three reasons for waiting. First, we have been consistently overestimating how quickly we will get above-potential real GDP growth with inflation moving toward our 2 percent target.  We should wait until these outcomes are in the data, not just in the forecast.  Second, the cost of patience is quite low. In my estimation, we have little evidence that the costs associated with increasing our balance sheet will be much higher if we wait until March to begin tapering. Third, with inflation so low, we should be doing whatever we can to more quickly return both elements of our mandate to their goals.  My forecast is that even waiting until March to reduce purchases would still leave us below our 2 percent inflation target and the unemployment rate just above my estimate of the natural rate three years from now. I am concerned that, by reducing purchases at this meeting, we risk tightening financial conditions, possibly significantly.  I certainly hope I’m wrong.  Such a tightening would put atserious risk the 3 percent growth in most of our outlooks and thus push the attainment of our dual mandate goals even further into the future. My strong preference is to do nothing at this meeting. But quantitative forward guidance, such as lowering the unemployment threshold in our statement to 6 percent, would mitigate my concerns.  There does not seem to be sufficient support for that now.  However, I cannot support the current alternative B, which risks a further and, in my view, premature tightening of financial conditions. In summary, with the unemployment rate still elevated and the inflation rate well below the FOMC target, changes in the purchase program are premature until incoming data more clearly indicate that the economy has sufficient momentum to sustain GDP growth faster than its potential rate.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Rosengren, presents his reasons for not wanting to reduce purchases at the meeting, expressing concern that it could tighten financial conditions and risk the attainment of their dual mandate goals. However, he also mentions that quantitative forward guidance, such as lowering the unemployment threshold, could mitigate his concerns. Overall, Mr. Rosengren does not support the current alternative being discussed.


Passage number 305.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply includes a statement of gratitude, followed by a person's title.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 306.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  As I listen to this conversation, I’m going to be thinking about how I’m going to talk about these things in the press conference.  Let me just make a comment here on the use of the unemployment rate. An early version of the statement said something to the effect that gains in the unemployment rate had overstated progress, which we eliminated, and I think the discussion yesterday suggested that that really wasn’t the right way to think about it.  In a speech about a month ago, I actually said something like, “The unemployment rate is the best single indicator   that we have, and that’s why we’re using it to essentially trigger the broader conversation about what’s happening in the labor market.”  So, assuming we do not lower the threshold, if I’m asked why we didn’t lower the threshold, my plan is to say something like, “Well, again, the unemployment rate is the best single indicator.  It tells us when to begin looking.  But we don’t want to tie our entire analysis of the labor market to a single variable.  The sense of the Committee was that, once we get to 6.5 percent, we want to look at a broader set of variables at that point”—so, without downplaying the accuracy of the unemployment rate, I would just suggest that it’s a good signal to think about looking at the whole range of variables, without saying there’s any kind of bias in the unemployment rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker initially mentions that they had removed a statement about gains in the unemployment rate overstating progress, implying that there was some disagreement or contention about this issue. Additionally, the speaker mentions that the discussion yesterday suggested that the initial statement was not the right way to think about it, indicating that there was disagreement or differing opinions on the matter.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 307.
 MR. PLOSSER.  That’s fine, Mr. Chairman.  I agree with all of that, and that’s okay.  My reading, though, of the statement is that the language in paragraph 5 seems stronger than that.  It seems to be making a much stronger statement—that we will not do anything when we get to 6½ percent.  It’s not definitive, but, to me, it sounds stronger than what you just said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser is expressing his disagreement with the language in paragraph 5, stating that it seems stronger than what the Chairman just said.


Passage number 308.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, but it says “anticipates.” So the notion is that once we get to 6½ percent, thinking about the configuration of labor market variables at that time, our best guess is that an overall assessment of the labor market will not yet precipitate an increase in rates. It’s not really meant to be a time-dependent statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage, as it is explaining the meaning behind a statement and providing an interpretation.


Passage number 309.
 MR. PLOSSER. Okay.  That’s fine.  I think those comments would be helpful in your press conference, so I support that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing agreement and support for something, indicating that there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 310.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a brief expression of gratitude from President Evans.


Passage number 311.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  I do intend to say that if financial conditions move in a way that’s inconsistent with our objectives, we will obviously respond to that, which is something I also said in June.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is indicating agreement and affirming what was said previously.


Passage number 312.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m hoping to cheer up President Rosengren later today when I pay off my bet on who would win the World Series.  I do owe him a beer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a friendly bet between two individuals.


Passage number 313.
 MR. TARULLO.  Just one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 314.
 [Laughter] VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Big stakes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage consists of only two phrases, "[Laughter]" and "Big stakes." There is no clear contention or disagreement expressed in these phrases.


Passage number 315.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 316.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 317.
 MR. PLOSSER. First, just to clarify, President Bullard, there is no optimal policy design for asset purchases that I’m aware of. I know of no theory according to which we can write down an optimal control problem with asset purchases and derive optimal control policies for asset purchases.  So I’m not sure we’re able to determine what is the right rule, if you will, or conditioning statements, that purchases ought to go by. The second point I would make is that our asset purchase programs are conditional and have been conditional.  We’ve tended to announce programs and have always been able to add another program or restart a program when we chose to do so.  We did QE1, and then we did QE2 because the economy was not responding.  Subsequently, we did Operation Twist, and then we started QE3. In fact, I wouldn’t even taper.  I would just keep the $85 billion and then stop it at some point, with the clear knowledge that if the economy was not cooperating, we could restart the program and do it again.  I don’t think it’s clear that the path here is not optimal, but it’s clear that it’s very confusing by not specifying what our reaction function really is, and that’s part of the problem— we haven’t been able to do that.  So I would say that we don’t have a Taylor rule for asset purchases, much as we might like to have one.  We don’t know how to specify that optimal control problem, either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser states that there is no optimal policy design for asset purchases and that the Federal Reserve has not been able to determine the right rule or conditioning statements for these purchases. He also disagrees with the current approach of tapering and suggests keeping the asset purchases at $85 billion and potentially restarting the program if needed. This viewpoint contradicts the current approach taken by the Federal Reserve.


Passage number 318.
 MR. BULLARD.  Mr. Chairman, if you’d let me respond briefly, and then we’ll get off this subject.  It’s true that we don’t have a Taylor-type rule for asset purchases, but if we could write down the model, we know that the optimal policy would be some kind of mapping between what’s going on in the economy and how you’re going to adjust the policy instrument.  In that sense, that’s why I’ve been an advocate of state contingency for the pace of asset purchases, and I think we’ve managed to get that expectation into markets.  So in some sense, we do have a dial that we can turn in a modest way, as we’re doing today.  We can turn this dial in a modest way in reaction to developments in the economy.  At least that has the flavor of what the optimal policy rule would look like, even if we can’t exactly specify the rule. Your points about state contingency, in the sense that we can start new programs, are valid, but, to me, that’s a more volatile way to conduct policy, as we’re going to entirely stop programs, and then come back with new programs later as developments don’t go in our direction.  I think you need to have a more continuous process, and the pace of asset purchases gives us a dial that provides a more continuous process.  So with that, I’ll stop.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement does not involve any disagreement or contention. The speaker simply presents their perspective and reasoning regarding the optimal policy rule and the use of asset purchases as a policy instrument.


Passage number 319.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply thanks President Williams.


Passage number 320.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 321.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  September was a close call on whether to reduce the pace of asset purchases.  Although I was in favor of a modest   reduction in the pace of purchases at that time, there were good arguments for waiting.  Incoming data hinted that the economy might be losing momentum, and the budget and debt ceiling debates were looming. Developments since then clearly shift the balance toward tapering.  Labor market and consumer spending data have been solid, and the budget agreement means less fiscal drag and less policy uncertainty.  Reducing the pace of purchases is fully justified by the cumulative improvement in labor markets and our greater confidence in the economy’s underlying momentum.  And here I would echo the comments of President Bullard that our message should be clear and strong.  Assuming that the taper is begun, our action is based on the success of the program and the substantive progress we’ve made on our employment objective.  It also addresses a concern I now hear from my contacts—that the ongoing “taper on/taper off” chatter has become a heightened source of uncertainty and distraction, even as uncertainty about the economy and fiscal policy has waned. Of course, we can’t eliminate all uncertainty, and I think paragraph 4 appropriately makes clear that policy is not on a preset course.  Indeed, to be consistent with this point, I would actually omit the word “further” in the second sentence of paragraph 4.  I would say that “the Committee will likely reduce the pace of asset purchases in measured steps,” not “in further measured steps.”  At best, the word “further” is unnecessary.  At worst, it could be construed as locking us into a path of $10-billion-per-meeting cuts.  Everybody knows that two data points make a trend, and, with the language of “further,” if we did $10 billion reductions for two meetings, I fear that the perception would be that we’re locking this in. Now, I’m not sure what we really want to do in the future.  It could be that the economy does a lot better than we’re thinking and that we might want to taper a little faster than $10billion a meeting.  As everyone knows, the math is, if you do $10 billion a meeting, we end the program in December of next year. It could also be, as President Bullard has mentioned and as others have mentioned, that inflation is not going to behave the way we want, and we might want to slow the pace of tapering.  So I want to have that optionality in there as much as possible. I recognize that this is not a big change, but I do think that the language should show, as best we can, that we may adjust further actions based on economic events.  Now, the $10 billion reduction is an appropriate small first step, but again, we should be leaving it open to the possibility that we’ll change the pace in the future. Getting to the issue that President Plosser has brought up, I do think that the language in this statement is the right thing.  But at a future meeting, when we’re closer to hitting the substantial labor improvement mark and to ending the current purchase program, I would support shifting away from the open-ended policy and stating an end date and total remaining quantity of purchases. At that time, stating the specifics of how the program will end should provide clarity and reduce uncertainty.  I don’t think the time for that is now, but I do imagine that, at a certain point, that might be the best end game. Of course, there’s no question that unemployment is still too high and inflation is still too low, and the situation continues to call for substantial monetary accommodation.  For this reason, we need to make it crystal clear that reducing asset purchases does not imply an earlier funds rate liftoff. And I think the language in paragraph 5 does exactly that.  It appropriately highlights our expectation that we’ll keep the funds rate at its current range until the unemployment rate is well below 6½ percent.  Such guidance on what we expect to happen after we reach the threshold should reinforce the perception that we’re providing continued substantial policy accommodation.  Furthermore, it puts low inflation as well as the elevated unemployment rate in   the spotlight, and I think that’s a very good thing. It shifts the conversation toward a more standard reaction function for policy rather than the single threshold that we’ve been relying on.  In my forecast, we reach 6½ percent unemployment in late 2014 but do not lift off until the second half of 2015, and that delay reflects in part, in my forecast, the very low underlying inflation pressures.  So one of the statement’s virtues is that it’s consistent with a range of views on why we may need highly accommodative policy even as the unemployment rate comes down quite a bit. And, finally, in paragraph 2, I would describe the risks as “more nearly balanced.” I think that’s consistent with what people said around the table and with the SEP responses.  In terms of the inflation language in paragraph 2, I can support the new language in blue that President Evans so passionately spoke about.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own opinions and making suggestions, but there is no direct disagreement with anyone else's views.


Passage number 322.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Fisher.


Passage number 323.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any information that could imply contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards President George without expressing any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 324.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Given ongoing improvement in the economy and the labor market, I support a reduction in the pace of asset purchases at this meeting.  The case for alternative C in terms of the size of the reduction is a solid one, I believe, based on data that continue to confirm the economy’s underlying strength.  That said, I am prepared to support alternative B in the spirit of its recognition of the cumulative progress realized in labor markets and the broader economy. I would prefer that our statement not try to cushion the announcement about asset purchases with enhanced forward guidance.  Stating that the funds rate will remain in its current range well past when the 6½ percent threshold is reached may intend to signal patience on the Committee’s part.  But as President Kocherlakota noted in his memo, the language may also imply a date-based commitment and ignore other key factors that must necessarily influence the Committee’s decisionmaking in future meetings about the funds rate liftoff and path. The SEP already provides guidance about the likely timing of liftoff and path for the funds rate, as well as indicates that the liftoff is likely to occur well after the 6½ percent threshold is hit.  This point could be articulated at the press conference and would seem preferable to changing thresholds or using new language such as “well past,” which may convey a quasi-commitment that rates will remain low for longer than markets already anticipate or result in tension between the message in the statement and the SEP, as we’ve experienced before. We could well face circumstances at future meetings in which the SEP forecast for the funds rate and unemployment rate may not be entirely consistent with the “well past” language, resulting in  challenging communication issues and potentially undermining the guidance provided by this language. Instead of wrestling with a qualitative description of how the Committee views the funds rate path, I continue to think there is an opportunity to use the SEP by incorporating the median estimate of the funds rate from the SEP into the FOMC statement.  Communicating the median estimate via the statement could reduce some of the uncertainty about the timing of liftoff and the path afterward.  For example, even at the end of 2015, the expected level of the funds rate reported in the SEP ranges from ¼ to 3¼ percent. Instead, indicating in the statement that the median estimate of FOMC participants is for a funds rate of ¾ percent at the end of 2015 and 1¾ percent at the end of 2016 conveys both the likely timing of liftoff and pace of increases.  Of course, these estimates will move with incoming data, as they should.  I see this approach, however, as providing the flexibility the Committee will need to adjust policy as the economy and financial system adapt to a more normal rate environment, as well as eliminating the risk of the statement and SEP sending conflicting messages. Even as I support alternative B, with this modest initial reduction, I’m mindful that we will continue to add significantly to our balance sheet and to signal near-zero rates into the future.  I believe that the conditions will remain for the risk of imbalances to grow, notwithstanding the shift we’ve seen earlier this year that may have slowed the momentum in some asset markets. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Ms. George is discussing her support for alternative B and her preference for using the SEP to communicate the median estimate of the funds rate. She also expresses her concern about the risk of imbalances growing in the economy. However, there is no disagreement or contention present in her statements.


Passage number 325.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "Thank you. President Pianalto" does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing gratitude toward President Pianalto.


Passage number 326.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B. I have been ready since our September meeting to slow the pace of asset purchases to acknowledge the substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market.  That said, I also believe that a gradual start to the reduction in asset purchases is warranted so that markets don’t think we are shifting the overall direction of policy, especially in light of the current low-inflation environment.  In that regard, I think strengthening our forward guidance is also sensible.  I regard the new language in paragraph 5 as establishing a soft inflation floor, in the sense that we would be willing to hold back from the first increase in the fed funds rate until projected inflation is approaching our 2 percent longer-term objective. In my SEP, appropriate monetary policy has the fed funds rate first lifting off about two quarters after the unemployment rate crosses the 6½ percent threshold.  More specifically, my current projection anticipates liftoff in the second half of 2015.  I would wait until then, as opposed to starting in early 2015, because I anticipate that inflation pressures will be quite subdued at the time the unemployment rate reaches the 6½ percent threshold.  By the second half of 2015, the unemployment rate will have declined well below the threshold and will actually be nearing my estimate of the natural rate.  The second half of 2015 is also the point at which, in my SEP, projected inflation approaches our 2 percent longer-run objective.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their support for alternative B and providing their reasoning for their stance.


Passage number 327.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply expresses gratitude towards President Lacker.


Passage number 328.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  If left to my own devices at this meeting, I would prefer a clean taper. I like alternative C with no interest rate pushback or enhanced forward-guidance language.  I find myself agreeing with much of what President George said on this subject.  But if we are going to push back—and it looks like that’s what the sentiment is for at this meeting—I think alternative B does it with as light a touch as I could imagine and is preferable.  So alternative B is a statement I can support.  I think it’s important to avoid trying to convey too much about interest rates beyond the point at which the unemployment rate crosses our threshold.  We are already at 7 percent; 6½ percent might be right around the counter.  We haven’t talked much about policy-setting after we pass the threshold.  I mean, sure, there’s stuff in the SEP, but we haven’t had a chance to really hash that out.  So I think saying rates will remain low well past the time we cross the threshold is probably the best sort of minimalist approach to this that does something to enhance forward guidance. It doesn’t provide much new information, but I think it avoids spurious precision.  I think we have well enough established a precedent at this point that our programs and our actions are data dependent.  So I don’t view this as calendar-based guidance like we adopted in late 2011.  I think this is very different than that. I will say that I’m intrigued by President George’s suggestion to include the median SEP funds path in the statement.  We actually did get tangled up in early 2012 with seemingly conflicting messages in the statement and the SEP.  And this would be a nice clinical approach to meshing the messages in the two documents.  So my own preference would have been to reduce the pace of purchases by at least $20 billion, a little more of an aggressive move, and, of course, take it all out of MBS first.  But I can support the smaller reduction and the balanced approach. Also, there is a collection of editing suggestions, and I will try and comment on the highlights among them.  Forgive me if I don’t address your particular editing suggestion.  Regarding the option in paragraph 2, that the downside risks have diminished versus risks are more nearly balanced, I would go with the second option that they are more nearly balanced.  I just think the odds of growth coming in on one side or the other in my outlook are roughly the same, so it just seems like a better approach to me, a more realistic approach. I like President Plosser’s fixed-size plan, but I agree that if we don’t adopt it at this meeting we should maintain it as a live option—I am sort of where President Williams is.  I think when we get about halfway done, fine distinctions in the amounts at which we reduce the pace of purchases is going to look like slicing the salami awfully thin. At some point it is going to be attractive to avoid agonizing about going from $40 billion to $30 billion or to $25 billion.  That just seems like spurious precision. Just to comment on the exchange between President Plosser and President Bullard, I welcome continuity.  But if we do end up increasing the fed funds rate above zero, President Bullard, your argument would take us to the return of eighth-percentage-point moves in the funds rate, or sixteenth-percentage-point moves.  And there has got to be a limit there.  There has to be some humility about how finely we can calibrate our tools.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any disagreement or contention. It is a statement expressing the author's opinion and preferences on different matters related to monetary policy.


Passage number 329.
 MR. BULLARD.  There is a limit.  It’s $10 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard simply states a fact, which is that there is a limit of $10 billion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 330.
  [Laughter] MR. LACKER.  I see.  I look forward to some analysis.  Let me talk about the end of paragraph 2.  I would prefer not to do this blue language.  I like the original language better.  It is not quite as anxious.  But if we are going to do this language of President Evans, I would strongly suggest that we replace “is moving” with “moves.”  The “is moving” suggests that we detect some increase in inflation that is in train.  And I’m not sure we do. I think where we are around the Committee is that we expect, we hope, that inflation will increase.  But I don’t think we believe it is in train, and the “is moving” suggests that we think something is in train.  And I think it would be a little more felicitous to make it clearly future tense there. On the change at the end of paragraph 4, in blue, changing “economic outlook” to “outlook for the labor market and inflation”—I like that. That leaves out output growth, which is something that I have wanted for some time.  Once you have talked about labor markets, you  have said it all except for productivity growth.  And we don’t really view that as something monetary policy can do a lot about, which is why I have been arguing for that for a while. And then the other thing in paragraph 4 that Presidents Lockhart and Williams commented about, this “further measured steps” phrase.  The concern I have about that language would be that whatever our step is now, that language might convey that we are not going to do anything bigger in the future.  And “further measured steps” kind of has that flavor, and I’m not sure if President Lockhart’s or Williams’s suggestions get around it.  I think President Williams’s suggestion of deleting “further” helps because it doesn’t make it sound like we think this is a measured step.  It sort of leaves it open whether the step we just took is measured or not.  So I would support President Williams’s suggestion there.  And I think I would support President Lockhart’s suggestion as well to change “measured” to “similar.” I believe that’s the end of my list of options to comment on.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement or contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, expresses his preference for the original language over the proposed language by President Evans. He disagrees with using the phrase "is moving" as it suggests an increase in inflation that is already happening, which he does not believe is the case. He also expresses concern about the phrase "further measured steps" conveying the idea that future actions will not be bigger, and supports President Williams's suggestion to delete "further" to leave it open. Additionally, he supports President Lockhart's suggestion to change "measured" to "similar."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 331.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker, you confused me on that last comment.  I view “further measured steps” as the intermediate option.  If we take out “further,” that would seem to give more flexibility.  But then you just said replace it with “similar,” which I think makes it less flexible.  So I’m not quite sure which way you want to go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is confused and expresses disagreement with President Lacker's statement about replacing "further measured steps" with "similar." The speaker believes that the replacement makes the approach less flexible, while President Lacker might have suggested it as a more flexible option.


Passage number 332.
 MR. LACKER.  I think that’s right.  Yes, that’s compelling.  Taking out “further” from “further measured steps”—but “measured steps” harkens back to the 2004–06 sequence, and I have a marginal sort of aversion to “measured” on those grounds.  But you’re right.  I’m sorry.  Deleting “further” unties it from the current move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, initially expresses a slight aversion to a certain phrase but ultimately agrees with the other person's suggestion to delete a word.


Passage number 333.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statements are all polite and express gratitude. There is no indication of conflict or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 334.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota, you raise a couple of interesting questions.  And since I am going to have to address them in a few hours, let me try a couple of answers. First, on whether or not we are tightening policy, we say, in the first sentence of paragraph 5 that the Committee “reaffirmed its view that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will remain appropriate.”  I encourage participants to say externally that we are not intending a meaningful tightening of policy, that we are trying to maintain a highly accommodative policy.  If you think about the components, on the one hand, we are still going to be adding to the balance sheet, and the total amount of assets that we will buy and hold is probably higher than was anticipated either in September 2012 or in June 2013.  On the other hand, obviously, we have this guidance that is trying essentially to preserve market expectations about rates.  So I think a rough approximation of the intent of this action is to try to keep accommodation reasonably close to where it is now. Now, the risks I think are toward tightening, at least in the short run, for a number of reasons.  One reason in particular is that people, as they did in the summer, may take, as you  said, a signal that we are in fact thinking of raising rates earlier.  That is something we saw in June that we were able to push back against verbally, and I would ask for everyone’s help in doing that if, in fact, that problem arises. I think one thing I am going to try to emphasize is that we have not abandoned accommodative policy and that we want to maintain a high level of accommodation; in particular, I will try to reinforce the progress we have made in separating the asset purchases and the rate guidance. The other part of your question, which I think is very good, and I have been spending some hours when I should have been sleeping thinking about it, is how do we explain this in the context of our longer-run goals and policy strategy statement.  And the way I would say it is something like the following:  The Committee views asset purchases as a supplemental tool because it believes that, as the balance sheet expands, the benefit–cost ratio essentially is likely to go down because of the difficulties of managing a large balance sheet and the risks of exiting from a large balance sheet.  Consequently, what the Committee did from the beginning was to explicitly state an objective for this program, which was not maximum employment and price stability; it was a sustainable improvement in the outlook for the labor market.  We think we have achieved that.  We have made that progress, and now we believe that we can achieve similar levels of accommodation using the continuing purchases plus our guidance.  Now, that may not be true, in which case we will have to come back, and I hope that we would consider additional measures if in fact things do tighten unduly.  But I put these out there as a review for my press conference.  If anyone has any suggestions to make the answers better, or disagreements, I’d be happy to hear them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is addressing questions and concerns raised by President Kocherlakota and is providing answers and explanations. The speaker also invites suggestions or disagreements but does not explicitly state any disagreements himself.


Passage number 335.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Well, I will offer my own feedback.  On the first point, I think that it’s very helpful for you to say that, Mr. Chairman.  I think your words will be very helpful  in that dimension.  Without it being in the Committee’s own statement, I think there is always more ambiguity than not. I think having you say it is certainly a real positive—that the level of accommodation is intended to remain the same, that we are intending to keep financial conditions the same—I think it’s extremely helpful.  But I think there is ambiguity and maybe I’m misreading it. I sense ambiguity around the table in terms of what people are trying to accomplish.  But it’s very helpful for you to say that in the press conference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the chairman's statement and finding it helpful. They also mention a sense of ambiguity but do not indicate disagreement or contention over it.


Passage number 336.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You don’t think the first sentence in paragraph 5 gives the general thrust of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage doesn't mention any disagreement or contention. It simply asks for the reader's opinion on whether the first sentence in paragraph 5 accurately describes the general thrust of something. It is a question seeking subjective interpretation rather than expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 337.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. I think that the tendency of financial market participants in reading these statements is to ignore sentences that are the same as in prior statements, so it’s really the changes that they focus on.  So I think there’s a limited amount of comfort in that.  That’s a very articulate explanation of why we see asset purchases as being different from the fed funds rate, and I could not hope to do better myself, so I think you’ve done as well as one possibly could on that dimension.  The issue is that our actions are very powerful, more powerful than any one person’s words can be.  I think the question that will come up is, “Boy, do you really see asset purchases as being that costly right now that you’ve got inflation trending downward and unemployment still elevated. Well, you must find this to be a very scary tool if you’re not willing to keep using it at the same flow.” I’m sure you have a good answer prepared for that, but it’s not a question of your answers, it’s a question of what the mindset will be of the people receiving the signal through our action.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the potential interpretation and impact of the Federal Reserve's statements and actions.


Passage number 338.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no statement or indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 339.
 MR. EVANS. If I could just offer a comment, on the first sentence in paragraph 5, I cannot improve upon your statement that this continues to maintain highly accommodative policy.  But, we know from what we’ve done over a long period of time and research on monetary policy that you can easily say with a straight face, “We’re going to continue to have highly accommodative policy even when the funds rate starts to go up to 1 percent,” right.  You can measure it against what Wicksell’s natural rate is or whatever. That statement is operative for a very wide range of different policies. I think that the way that you will express it will be understood as genuine, but you can imagine that some people would react to it and say, “Well, you know, it’s not the strongest statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Evans is suggesting that while the statement about maintaining highly accommodative policy may be true, some people may react and argue that it is not the strongest statement.


Passage number 340.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: This passage simply consists of a phrase expressing gratitude. There is no indication of any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 341.
 MR. BULLARD.  Mr. Chairman, I’m sensing on this issue about “in further measured steps” that the Committee is maybe a little bit uneasy. I just wanted to put something on the table as we go around the rest of the discussion here, which is, just eliminate “in further measured steps” and say “the Committee will likely reduce the pace of asset purchases at future meetings.”  Then I think what would happen would be that the markets would assume $10 billion is sort of the norm, and then we wouldn’t get locked into the measured-pace language of 2004– 2006, as President Lacker noted.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply a suggestion or proposal made by Mr. Bullard.


Passage number 342.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  If there are no other comments, I’ll turn to Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that if there are no other comments, the speaker will turn to Governor Yellen. There is no contention or disagreement present in this statement.


Passage number 343.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B with the changes you’ve proposed.  In September, I began my policy remarks with the statement, “I did not find today’s policy decision an easy call.” I can repeat those words today.  I suppose that existential angst over our initial tapering decision is simply unavoidable.  Were it not for signaling considerations, the precise timing of our first move to taper would not be very important, but in the current  unprecedented environment, the signal we’ll be sending is both very important and very difficult to assess. On the merits, as I noted in the economy go-round, since the inception of the purchase program we’ve seen meaningful progress in the labor market based on a wide range of indicators, and current data reveal that the pace of payroll gains has been running near 200,000 per month for an entire year now without any sign of a letup.  We’ve also seen clearer signs of a pickup in final demand since September, and with fiscal policy at home apparently now on a less disruptive course and Europe slowly pulling out of recession, I see reduced downside risks to the economic outlook.  For these reasons, the doubts I’ve long harbored about the sustainability of progress in the labor market have finally subsided to the point where I now feel comfortable with the first modest reduction in the pace of purchases. Paragraph 2 of alternative B indicates that the risks to the outlook have become more nearly balanced since the inception of the purchase program.  I agree that the distribution of shocks to growth now seems reasonably balanced.  Nevertheless, as President Kocherlakota noted, as long as we’re stuck at the zero lower bound, we have considerably less capacity to respond to downside than upside shocks, so the overall risks facing the economy remain weighted to the downside.  And with inflation below our objective, there’s also risk there.  These are reasons to proceed cautiously with an initial reduction that’s modest in size.  The sobering experience of the past several years should have taught us that the data can easily throw us a curve ball.  We should also proceed cautiously with an initial modest step to emphasize that our actions remain data dependent.  A small initial reduction sends the message that we are not hell-bent on winding down the program, but rather that we’ll proceed in additional measured steps, provided the data are consistent with continued progress in the labor market and with inflation moving back toward our objective. Paragraph 4 of alternative B points out appropriately, in my view, that under our modal outlook we do expect to continue reducing the pace of purchases at future meetings.  But it also critically emphasizes that the course of asset purchases remains contingent on both the labor market and the outlook for inflation.  I confess I’m quite uncertain how financial markets will react to this announcement.  Market participants appear to be convinced that a taper is coming, but they’re uncertain just when it will begin and apparently consider January or March more likely than December. I expect our decision will therefore come as something of a surprise, and we need to do all we can to ensure that market participants don’t overreact, similar to June, perhaps incorrectly inferring a reduced commitment on our part to our pledge to maintain accommodation for a considerable time. The consequences for financial conditions could, as then, threaten to undermine the attainment of our objectives, and this is one reason why I support amending the forward guidance in paragraph 5 of alternative B.  I think the proposed language clarifies how we’re likely to set policy after the unemployment threshold has been crossed, even though it doesn’t go so far as to lower that threshold.  The dealer survey is representative of broader market views. Our statement in paragraph B(5) that we expect to wait for some time after crossing the unemployment threshold before liftoff should merely confirm views that are now widely held in the market, and it’s also consistent with what’s in the SEP that we’ll be publishing. Even so, as the June experience suggests, providing explicit confirmation of these views is prudent, especially given how uncertain we are about how markets will interpret our tapering decision and what conclusions concerning the path of the funds rate they might otherwise draw. I also think that the revised forward guidance is appropriate based on my own assessment of all indicators of the labor market, of the overall outlook, and also the fact that inflation is running at such a low level. I think it’s appropriate to wait to raise the funds rate target well past the time that unemployment declines below 6½ percent.  Under my modal outlook, the unemployment rate will reach 6½ percent in the fourth quarter of 2014, around the time when I would expect asset purchases to be completed.  And under that same outlook, one that’s characterized by only slowly lifting headwinds, I consider it appropriate to defer liftoff until late 2015 when the unemployment rate has declined to, or is slightly below, 6 percent. Finally, in purely pragmatic terms, given that the unemployment rate has now reached 7 percent and in some plausible scenarios could reach 6½ percent in just a few months, I think it’s appropriate and, indeed, almost pressing to clarify what will happen once the 6½ percent threshold has been crossed.  Mr. Chairman, I know that communicating this entire bundle of messages is going to be quite a challenge, and I’m very grateful to you for taking this on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their support for alternative B and explaining their reasoning behind their decision.


Passage number 344.
 [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We can wait until March if you’d like.  [Laughter] With apologies to Governor Tarullo, it is a little after 10 a.m.  We can take a coffee break if you’d like and come back at 10:20 a.m.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The mention of laughter and the suggestion of taking a coffee break are lighthearted and do not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 345.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  I think we’re ready to recommence.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply indicates a pause in a conversation or meeting and the readiness to continue.


Passage number 346.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As the discussion yesterday obviously showed, there’s a reasonable case to be made for the proposition that the standard that we set in September of 2012 is at least in the process of being met, which is to say that we’re seeingsubstantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market.  As the Chairman noted yesterday, there’s a certain ironic twist to the qualification that we inserted on that standard—“in a context of price stability”—which I think most people believed would be a possible grounds for truncating the program, and at this juncture, it’s actually an argument for extending the program. I do favor alternative B but, as with many of you, for a somewhat complicated set of reasons that I’ll now try to explain.  I think that there is some risk, as people have already said, that there may be some roiling in the markets.  I think that is quite possible whenever we taper, particularly because of the fact that there will be movement on certain issues with certain maturities, and that’s just inevitable and a price that we’re going to have to pay.  The odds of it are probably a little bit higher now because I don’t think that, as many of you have observed, there’s a consensus around this as a likely date for tapering as opposed to one of the next couple of meetings. The data have helped us some.  Our own communication probably hasn’t.  As I looked at the transcript for the last meeting, I noted that many of us spent a lot of time talking about how to set up market expectations for the taper, and we really haven’t done much of that.  But, as I say, the data have done some of the work for us. There are good arguments for waiting, as Eric and Charlie Evans and Narayana have all, I think, persuasively argued.  I don’t think the costs would rise that much waiting a few months.  We’d have a better chance of avoiding the possibility of having to reverse course. Narayana makes the good point about the zero lower bound.  Additionally, we would have a better chance of being in a position where we were quite certain that we were ready to end.  There could be a very strong presumption in financial markets as opposed to the sort of moderate presumption that we’ll probably include today.  Because there are these uncertainties that people have identified, I don’t think we’re in a position to provide the maximum kind of clarity that is explicit in Charlie  Plosser’s recommendation, which I was conceptually attracted to at the last meeting, but I was attracted to it in the context of a pretty high level of assurance about the initial taper. I think it’s probably worth making the point, though, which I don’t think anybody has made yet today, that while we’ve got a reasonable case that the standard has been met, in September 2012, we did not explicitly, at least, include the idea that we were going to taper as a way of ending the program.  It could have been read as binary, and in that respect I think we can fairly characterize what we’re doing today as beginning the end of the LSAP process rather than actually ending the LSAP process.  And, as people have already explained, there is some optionality in that depending on data that we see over the course of the next several months.  I think it is one way to square some of the tensions in the various positions and statements we’ve made along the way. Well, you can see that, to this point at least, my instincts would lean more with Narayana and Eric, but like Charlie Evans, I tried to look at the situation that we actually confront collectively as a Committee.  While there are going to be some communication problems that many of you have already mentioned, and that the Chairman is going to have to start confronting in a few hours, we definitely run the risk of having another communication problem if things do not improve or things backslide over the course of the next several months yet there is a continued strong view amongst some members of the Committee to want to begin to taper. I think Jim Bullard said that it was good to taper at a moment when the data were making the case for doing so, and I agree with that proposition.  I disagree a little bit with what Narayana said about the problem in the articulation of the LSAP program back in September 2012.  I don’t think the problem lay as much in the generality of the standards put forth as in, as I’ve said before, the fact that there really wasn’t a consensus within the Committee for what we areactually doing, and we have been living with that tension privately but not publicly ever since.  And for a lot of reasons, not the least of which is the coherence of Committee action, I think it’s a good thing that we try to maintain as much of a focus on performance of the economy and on having the LSAP program regarded, as I think it should be, as having promoted the goals that we set forth for it.  And so for that set of reasons, I do support alternative B today. With respect to the language, I think it is important to make the language modifications, including the forward-guidance modifications that have been suggested and the blue language that was inserted at Charlie’s suggestion.  As Narayana said, this is largely about signaling right now, and it is important, I think, to signal that we have not collectively taken a hawkish turn.  I don’t think we have.  There continue to be different views, but looked at collectively, I actually don’t think the Committee is in a different position today than it was in October or September or probably, for that matter, June.  In fact, I will say that although there are a number of reasons for me to vote yes, some of which I’ve already detailed, an additional reason to vote yes is I don’t want a dissent of mine to be regarded as my perception that the Committee has taken a hawkish turn.  So I am in favor of the language as amended in red and blue that was circulated this morning to the Committee. I don’t think there’s a need to say anything more about that.  I’ll just end with two observations that were raised by a couple of you in the course of the conversation that don’t go directly to this decision today, but I thought were worth considering.  One is Esther’s suggestion that it may be useful to publish some of the SEP medians, including the federal funds rate information.  I agree with that, in principle.  I do think though that if we’re going to do it, this is where we really do need to start thinking about distinguishing between voting and nonvoting members because the information value, as I think we saw yesterday, is somewhat limited when  one looks at all 17 participants.  If we go in this direction, we might want to think about publishing the median for people who vote this year and next year and those are presumably somewhat different; that would give the right kind of information for the people who are going to be voting next year.  But if we’re going to move there, let’s do it in a way that allows markets to better predict how the Committee might react in a certain circumstance. And then finally, Narayana in his remarks mentioned the longer-run goals and policy strategy document, which will be coming up again in January.  I must say my skepticism about that exercise has been somewhat reinforced over a number of meetings, including the one today.  Like Narayana, I’ll have more to say about that in January.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It mainly consists of the speaker's thoughts and opinions on various topics.


Passage number 347.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention in this passage. It simply expresses gratitude.


Passage number 348.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Powell.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 349.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am prepared to go ahead with alternative B today.  In my view, the decision to reduce purchases is well justified, as can be seen in the comparison of labor market conditions to those that prevailed in September 2012 and to those that the Committee expected to prevail today. Payroll levels are 1.5 million higher than expected.  Unemployment is almost a full percentage point lower than expected and, as I mentioned yesterday, and others mentioned as well, the trailing payroll numbers are in good shape for 3-, 6-, and 12-month levels.  So it is, in fact, a pretty good hand of cards on that front.  The decision is also justified under the framework that the Chairman articulated at the June meeting.  We have continued progress in the labor market, growth picking up, and inflation that is forecast to return over time to our 2 percent objective. In addition, our reasons for not tapering in September—weaker data and the fiscal negotiations—have been addressed. All of that said, I struggle with two concerns, the first of which is timing, and for me the question then is taper now or wait until the March meeting, and the second is inflation and how to think about the inflation forecast in connection with this decision.  So on the first, on timing, at the last meeting I argued that we needed three things to taper before March: strong incoming data, a successful conclusion of the fiscal negotiations, and communications from the core members of the FOMC that signaled that the December meeting was very much on the table.  So we absolutely got the first two done, and I thought that the third element would be virtually impossible to satisfy, and that was the basis for my confident prediction that we would not be able to taper until March. But I have to admit we’ve gotten there.  Through a sequence of events,   we’ve gotten to a place where it’s expected at one of the next three meetings. But it’s not fully anticipated, although I do believe that the market would see a taper as fully justified based on the Chairman’s framework, based on the improvement in labor market conditions.  So the content is not a surprise.  It’s really that the decision to move at this meeting rather than one of the later meetings is ahead of expectations only in a time sense. It’s a surprise.  It’s probably a tiny hawkish surprise, and I expect there will be a reaction in the market.  Like others, I don’t see that it ought to be a major reaction, and it ought to settle down in a few days.  And the Chairman will communicate strongly at the meeting there is no intended hawkish surprise here.  So I’m comfortable with going ahead from a timing standpoint. As far as inflation is concerned, we are obviously in a very difficult place.  The forecast is for a slow return to 2 percent, and there really is no expectation in the forecast of notably higher inflation in the short term.  So if inflation goes sideways for a while and is mainly held down by factors that send no important signal about slack, I don’t think I see that as a basis for pausing the taper. Going to the language in the statement, I think that the new blue language in paragraph 4 of alternative B gets it exactly right.  It’s about the outlook for inflation.  The inclusion of inflation there will be seen as a signal, and it’s about the outlook.  I think that kind of has it exactly right.  And I actually think that the language at the end of paragraph 2, “inflation is moving back toward its objective,” leaves me a little bit uneasy because there really isn’t much of an expectation that we will see inflation moving back in the next couple of meetings.  So I wonder whether that doesn’t create some uncertainty around the path of purchases in the near term.  As John indicated, one or two or three data points become a trend, and I don’t think it’s intended that way, but some may see it and it may create uncertainty.  So I see that as a concern.In terms of the other language, I do really like all of page 6.  As written, that page is quite good.  I like the original language, “in further measured steps,” because I think it’s a good balance. It creates a fair amount of certainty.  One or two more tapers, it’s going to create a lot of confidence in our path.  I could live with strengthening it, and I think maybe we look at that over time to see if we could become more deterministic in terms of both the time and the amount.  I mentioned I like the blue language.  In terms of the language for after hitting 6½ percent, I’m very comfortable with this.  In my own forecast, liftoff actually happens just after we hit 6 percent, and so I think this gives a strong indication of where we are without giving away discretion for free. That’s it on the statement. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Powell expresses his struggle with two concerns: timing and inflation. He admits that the decision to taper at this meeting is ahead of expectations and may be seen as a hawkish surprise. He also raises concerns about the language in the statement regarding inflation and the uncertainty it may create.


Passage number 350.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 351.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Thanks, everyone.  A lot of interesting discussion, but I don’t think there are too many decision points on the alternative B statement. I think in alternative B, paragraph 2 there was a pretty clear preference for the balanced risks option—“risks to the outlook for the economy and the labor market as having become more nearly balanced.”  This is very consistent with the SEP, which had only one or two to the downside—what is it, Matt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that there is disagreement or contention in the discussion, as there is a mention of "interesting discussion" and a contrasting view from the speaker who believes there are clear preferences in alternative B.


Passage number 352.
 MR. LUECKE.  Two to the downside.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "Two to the downside" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply a numerical value without any conflicting viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 353.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Two to the downside, otherwise balanced. If everyone else is amenable, I think I would be happy to accept President Fisher’s suggestion to strike “since the inception of the asset purchase program,” because I think that is fairly clear. I think people are willing to accept the blue language in paragraph 2. Let me just ask President Evans—“inflation is moving”—I think is defensible.  You could also say something like “is in the process of moving” or “is likely to move” or something like that or “will move”—“evidence that inflation will move back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. The speaker is expressing their agreement and willingness to accept President Fisher's suggestion and the blue language in paragraph 2. The mention of alternative phrasing for "inflation is moving" is simply a suggestion and does not indicate disagreement.


Passage number 354.
” MR. EVANS.  “Will move back” or “in the process” is fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is giving alternative options to express the same idea, providing flexibility in the wording.


Passage number 355.
  Something actionable— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  “Will move”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the phrase "Something actionable— 'Will move'." It does not indicate any conflicting views or opinions. Instead, it suggests that there is a plan or intention to take action.


Passage number 356.
 MR. STEIN.  “Will move” is a little better, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Stein is providing his personal opinion about the phrase "will move" being slightly better. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 357.
 MR. LACKER. It says “will monitor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any obvious contention or disagreement. It is a statement that someone named Mr. Lacker will monitor something.


Passage number 358.
”  MR. EVANS.  Yes.  We’re monitoring whether it will move. I mean, the fact that it’s got “monitor” in it makes it just pretty unobjectionable, it seems to me—“will monitor inflation developments carefully for evidence that inflation will move back”—yes, that’s all right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Evans, expresses agreement and finds the statement unobjectionable.


Passage number 359.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Is that all right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking confirmation or agreement from the listener.


Passage number 360.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I’m okay with “will move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the speaker is okay with something.


Passage number 361.
” MR. LACKER.  Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage. The statement is attributed to Mr. Lacker, but the content of what he said is not provided.


Passage number 362.
 Chairman— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 363.
 MR. LACKER. It says we “will monitor . . . for evidence that inflation will move back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage states what the speaker, Mr. Lacker, says without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 364.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a simple affirmative response.


Passage number 365.
 MR. LACKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without knowing the specific passage, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in this case.


Passage number 366.
  So in the future, we are going to be looking for— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  “The Committee anticipates inflation will move back toward its objective over the medium term, and it is monitoring inflation developments carefully.”  How about that.  Looking at the blue, we are suggesting “. . . and it is monitoring inflation developments carefully for evidence that inflation will move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward statement about the future anticipation of inflation and the monitoring of inflation developments.


Passage number 367.
” MR. EVANS.  Yes, that’s fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Evans simply acknowledges that something is fine.


Passage number 368.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes, that’s good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Lacker simply agrees with the previous statement.


Passage number 369.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Did you get that, Matt.  All right.  The only other thing that I think I would raise at this point, there were a number of suggestions for the language about “further measured steps.”  There were some that made it more rigid and some that made it less rigid. In trying to think about answering questions at the press conference, I think “further measured steps”—it says, first of all, that this was a measured step, so it is suggesting that subsequent steps will be $10 billion, $15 billion, something like that.  President Plosser may not agree, but I think it does actually in practice bow toward a fairly steady sequence of eventsunless, of course, there is some change in the outlook, which then gives us flexibility.  So having thought very hard about “further” and “farther,” and so on, I think I would prefer to keep it as it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different suggestions for the language and expressing their personal preference for keeping it as it is.


Passage number 370.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about Mr. Plosser's statement or argument, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 371.
 Chairman— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The word "Yes" indicates that there is opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions being discussed between the chairman and someone else.


Passage number 372.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I actually am open to “further measured steps” at this point.  But I would like to consider the suggestion I made and Governor Stein made about changing “if” to “as long as.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement from Mr. Plosser expressing his openness to "further measured steps" and his interest in considering a suggestion made by Governor Stein.


Passage number 373.
” I don’t know if there is any— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’m just nervous about an overreaction, a hawkish overreaction to “as long as.”  But is there a strong sense about this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their personal nervousness and lack of certainty, rather than challenging or disagreeing with any specific point.


Passage number 374.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I’d prefer “if” because I just don’t think we want to prejudge the future.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply expresses a personal preference for using "if" instead of making assumptions about the future.


Passage number 375.
 MR. EVANS. I prefer “if.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply states a personal preference of an individual. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 376.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right. I think we will make it purely contingent.  I think, again, in practice, President Plosser, I think that there is pretty much a presumption here that this will happen unless there is some good reason.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In the passage, there is no explicit expression of contention or disagreement. The speaker is merely stating their views and suggesting a course of action.


Passage number 377.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Well, you can add some strength to that in your press conference if you can.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement made by Mr. Plosser suggests that adding strength to something mentioned in a press conference would be beneficial.


Passage number 378.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think it will be evident.  So I think that’s it, unless I have missed something.  All right.  Matt, would you like to summarize the changes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their thoughts and asking for a summary from someone else.


Passage number 379.
 MR. LUECKE.  Yes.  So the vote will be on the directive for alternative B, which was on page 13 of the handout yesterday from Bill’s presentation, and on the language on pages 5 and 6 of today’s handout with these modifications—paragraph 1 as indicated in black and red;  paragraph 2 as indicated.  Sentence 3 would read, “The Committee sees that the risks to the outlook for the economy and the labor market as having become more nearly balanced.  The Committee recognizes that inflation persistently below its 2 percent objective could pose risks to economic performance, and it is monitoring inflation developments carefully for evidence that inflation will move back toward its objective over the medium term.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any controversial or conflicting statements. It is simply providing information about a vote and the specific language that will be used.


Passage number 380.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  There was no “that.”  You said “that” before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that something does not exist.


Passage number 381.
 MR. LACKER.  Third sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The third sentence of the passage is not a source of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 382.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  “The Committee sees the risks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not mention any risks or potential disagreement.


Passage number 383.
” MR. LUECKE.  Yes.  I apologize.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Luecke apologizes without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 384.
  Paragraph 4 would be as written in— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  One second.  There’s a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a neutral statement informing the reader that there is a question being posed.


Passage number 385.
 MR. TARULLO. Did Matt create a compound sentence, whereas there were two separate ones before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a question about whether Matt created a compound sentence.


Passage number 386.
 MS. YELLEN.  Could you just read it again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. Yellen is simply requesting for someone to reread something.


Passage number 387.
 MR. LUECKE.  Yes.  Sentence 3 of paragraph 2 begins, “The Committee sees the risks to the outlook for the economy and the labor market as having become more nearly balanced. The Committee recognizes that inflation persistently below its 2 percent objective could pose risks to economic performance, and it is monitoring inflation developments carefully for evidence that inflation will move back towards its objective over the medium term.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not exhibit any contention or disagreement. It is a statement describing the view of the committee.


Passage number 388.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s right.  Go ahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "That's right" indicates agreement, and "Go ahead" is an encouraging phrase, not suggesting any disagreement.


Passage number 389.
 MR. LUECKE.  Paragraph 3, as written in black and underlined in red; paragraph 4, as written in black, with underlined red and underlined blue; and paragraph 5, as written in black and underlined red.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 390.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Please call the roll.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a simple request asking for someone to call the roll.


Passage number 391.
   MR. LUECKE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 392.
 Chairman Bernanke Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes President Bullard Yes President Evans Yes President George Yes Governor Powell Yes President Rosengren No Governor Stein Yes Governor Tarullo Yes Governor Yellen Yes CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Well, thank you all very much.  Let me call on Simon.  You have a directive to talk about, is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only states the names of individuals and their agreement or approval on a certain matter without any conflicting opinions or contradictions.


Passage number 393.
 MR. POTTER.8 Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We have a Desk statement based on the new directive.  I think it is just about to be handed out. The Desk will reduce the pace of purchases to $40 billion per month in longer-term Treasury securities, and to $35 billion of agency MBS per month, starting January 2, 2014.  The Desk plans to complete the already announced purchases at the previous pace through the end of December; the January schedule of operations is to be released at the end of this month.  The January calendar will reflect the new pace of monthly purchases. We will maintain the existing reinvestment and rollover policies. The Desk intends to release a statement with operational details at the same time as the FOMC statement.  A draft of the statement is provided in the handout for your reference. In January, purchases of agency MBS will continue to be made in the TBA market and concentrated in production coupon MBS where most newly issued MBS trade and longer-term Treasury purchases will continue to be distributed across seven sectors based on the current weights, with an intended average duration of monthly purchases of roughly nine years. We will continue to report regularly on the state of market function, and we will consult with the Committee regarding any material deviation from this operational plan.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 8 The materials used by Mr. Potter are appended to this transcript (appendix 8).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a statement of plans and intentions.


