Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJuly 7, 1987A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, July 7, 1987, at 10:30 a.m.PRESENT:Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Volcker, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellBoehneBoykinHellerJohnsonKeehnKelleySegerSternMessrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey, Melzer, and Morris, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis, and Boston,respectivelyMr. Kohn, Secretary and Staff AdviserMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Loney, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Lang, Lindsey, Prell, Rosenblum, Scheld,Siegman, and Simpson, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, SystemOpen Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, SystemOpen Market Account7/7/87Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Promise1, Senior Associate Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMrs. Zickler, 1/ Assistant Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Brady, 1/ Economist, Division of Research and Statistics,Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Office ofBoard Members, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Hendricks and Stone, First Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland and Philadelphia,respectivelyMessrs. Balbach, Beebe, Broaddus, J. Davis, T. Davis, andMs. Tshinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal ReserveBanks of St. Louis, San Francisco, Richmond, Cleveland,Kansas City, and Atlanta, respectivelyMr. R. Davis, Senior Economic Adviser, Federal ReserveBank of New YorkMessrs. McNees and Miller, Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of Boston and Minneapolis, respectivelyMr. Keleher, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bankof AtlantaMr. Guentner, Manager, Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meetingof July 7, 1987CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's appropriate to say a word before westart about Arthur Burns' passing. He sat at this table with many ofus for a good many years. He sat over there about where Bob Black is;the seating has been rearranged since then. I don't know whether thathad any implication for policy when the Chairman sat over in thatarea. But he was a very forceful Chairman who had a great dedicationto the Federal Reserve and to this Committee. I think you have beennotified that there is a memorial service on July 22 at 11:30 in themorning at the Temple here in Northwest Washington. If people canmake that, I think it would be greatly appreciated. With that, we canget started and approve the minutes.MS. SEGER. I'll move it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a second. The minutes areapproved. May we have the report on foreign currency operations?MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I may interject before we discuss this:I was so preoccupied with Arthur Burns that I forgot to welcome MikeKelley to the table this morning. Sitting there, you're almost[unintelligible] now as a governor; so, I say welcome. The plan ofattack this morning and tomorrow is that I will interject thediscussion on this report on borrowing that you all have after Mr.Sternlight gives his report and we have the discussion on the Desk'soperations. That's the logical place to do that. We will break forlunch at about 1:00 p.m. and discuss extraneous matters informally, aswe usually do, and then go back into session. If we finish thisafternoon, fine; if we don't, we will reconvene tomorrow morning. Andif the discussion proceeds beyond 11:00 tomorrow morning, it will bewithout a Chairman, which may be an advantage for some of you. Let'sproceed to the questions or comments on Mr. Cross' report.MR. BOEHNE. Sam, on this re-emergence of two-way risks,would you categorize that as a fragile re-emergence or does it lookfairly good to you? How is it categorized?MR. CROSS. Well, I think it is still somewhat fragile. As Isaid, I think the market paid a great deal of attention to, and wasreassured considerably by, the willingness of the Federal Reserve tosnug because of the dollar. Looking ahead, it's not clear that themarket would feel that there will be the same kind of maneuverabilityor ability to untighten. I think, for the present, that we have quitea healthy sense of two-way risks in the market. But there is someskepticism; there are these feelings out there that some action willbe taken, either in intervention or another area, if the dollar movesup very far from its present level. And as I said, if that shouldhappen, I think what the trading community then would start to do withrespect to [unintelligible] on the downside. So, I think we have aperiod of stability now, or even firmness, and this may continue for aperiod. Looking beyond that, there is still negative sentiment aboutthe dollar because of the lack of any clear evidence of majoradjustment in our current account position. And I would characterizethe present sense of two-way risks as still rather fragile.7/7/87MR. JOHNSON. In discussions yesterday, the staff pointed outthat for the second quarter we could get more negative current accountnumbers, which could have some effect on that sentiment. I take itthe oil-price situation has been driving a lot of the current account;it has been dominated by that. Even though non-oil exports have beenrising, the whole thing has been overwhelmed by oil volume, to someextent. I take it the second quarter is going to produce a worseningcurrent account balance number and that might add to some of thesentiment. Is there any perception that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We just have one month of [data for] thesecond quarter right now.MR. CROSS. We have one month of trade figures.MR. TRUMAN. Governor Johnson, I'd note that most of thisdeterioration in the current account in the staff forecast is in thenon-trade current account items. It is true that there's a slightdeterioration in the trade balance, which is based on one month, butit's essentially flat--MR. CROSS. There's no question that people are talking very,very intently about what these trade figures will be on the 15th ofJuly when they come out.MR. JOHNSON. I take it we're forecasting a worsening on thecurrent account number?MR. TRUMAN. That's right. But the current account numberfor the second quarter isn't going to appear until September--evenassuming that we are right.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, but that's not that far away. I'm justsaying that September, assuming we're right, could be the periodyou're talking about, then. Right now there is a good healthy two-wayrisk on the exchange rate, but I'm just saying that there might besome numbers in the future that hinge on that; I don't know. If thisis going to be an uneven path on the way to improvement, maybe themarkets recognize that but maybe they don't.MR. CROSS. Well, I think they recognize that in volume termsthere has been some improvement. But they also recognize that innominal terms there has been very little improvement, if any. Andthat, of course, is what you have to finance. Sometimes marketparticipants over-interpret these figures and sometimes they respondby kind of knee jerk [reactions]. So, I think if we have bad tradefigures next week--really bad trade figures--that could change thepicture from what it is.MR. JOHNSON. We're getting numbers next week?MR. CROSS. On the 15th.MR. BLACK. What is your guess on what those numbers willlook like?MR. CROSS. The market is expecting [a deficit of] about $14billion, I think.7/7/87MR. TRUMAN. I would say that April was somewhat over-interpreted--that is, as listed in the forecast. That [deficit]number on a balance-of-payments basis was something like [an annualrate of] $140 billion and we have a little over $150 billion for thequarter as a whole. We think that May and June will be not as good asApril, but not dramatically different in terms of the monthly figures.But to the extent that the market has been extrapolating the trend asthe numbers came down in February, March, and April, even a levelingoff [in the trade deficit] might produce some degree ofdisappointment.MR. KEEHN. Sam, I suppose it's hard to forecast, but on theelement of downside risk, has there been some improvement this timeversus, say, the past several weeks? Is the downside risk about thesame as it has been or has there been some fundamental improvement torelieve that?MR. CROSS. I'm not sure I understand.MR. KEEHN. Well, at the last few meetings we have been veryconcerned about the precipitous free fall, if you will, [of thedollar.] There seems to be some improvement in tone, but I thinkyou're questioning that. And I wonder whether the downside risk nowis as great as it has been.MR. CROSS. Well, no, in the sense that we are nowcomfortable with pressures not moving one way or the other. At someof these earlier meetings we had been sitting here with very heavydownward pressure facing us and the intensification of that raisedmuch more serious problems.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a lot on this in the presentationto be given later, I guess?SPEAKER(?). Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suggest we defer these generaldiscussions of the balance of payments outlook on the dollar untillater. Are there any more operational comments or questions?MS. SEGER. I have one. When you refer to market sentiment,since there are obviously many hundreds or thousands of participantsin the foreign exchange markets on any given day, are you talkingprimarily about traders that are commercial bankers in this country,or commercial bankers from abroad, or corporate treasurers, or centralbankers, or all of the above? I'm just sitting here trying to get aflavor of what are you basing your sentiment comments on.MR. CROSS. You're right that there are probably ten thousandpeople out there in this market and nobody can synthesize the view--MS. SEGER. Right.MR. CROSS. Except that the market reflects the view.MS. SEGER.Yes.7/7/87MR. CROSS. We do talk to large numbers of traders all daylong. We talk to central banks all around the world and get theirassessment of what's going on in their markets and we talk tocommercial bankers and others here. And we try to keep up with whatthe economists are saying and absorb these various views to the extentwe can. Now, there are times when a view sort of gets moving and themarkets seem to all act like turkeys and fly in the same direction.MS. SEGER. Right. I sensed that last time.MR. CROSS. So one can profess a market view. But I don'tthink anybody can profess to be very confident at any one moment aboutwhat all these many different players are thinking. But we do thebest we can by talking to many different kinds of operators. We alsotalk to treasurers of corporations about what they're doing.MS. SEGER. Isn't it true that they are more importantplayers on the scene now than they used to be 5 or 10 years ago?MR. CROSS. They're certainly more important than they usedto be. The market has gotten a lot bigger and a lot more complex; andit involves a lot larger universe than it did some years ago.MR. HELLER. Sam, do you see any changes in the pattern ofthe inflows of foreign capital?MR. CROSS. We can't really tell very much about it, but whatwe hear is that it's still fragile. Even if one is buying a long-termbond, that's not a long-term investment. There is not a lot ofassurance that these present exchange rates are stable enough for oneto be entering into a lot of long-term investments with assurancesthat there are not going to be further changes. At least that is whata lot of people tell us.MR. HELLER. Well, I meant mainly geographically--theJapanese versus the Europeans who--MR. CROSS. The Japanese, of course, are key because they aresuch big players. In the early part of the year, they had long-termoutflows of $10 billion in January and another $10 billion inFebruary. In March it fell down to about half that and in April itdisappeared entirely. In May it has come back up and the last reportswere that in June it was even bigger than ever--$13 billion. So theamounts seem to have come back up to very substantial levels. But thequestion is how solid that is now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The Japanese long-term rates were going upin this period when they resumed their investment in the UnitedStates, presumably?MR. CROSS. Right. The Japanese long-term rates have gone upby about 1/2 point during this period and ours have come down some.If you want to look at it in terms of differentials, at the beginningof the year the differential between U.S. and Japanese long-term rateswas about 2-1/4 percentage points. It went up to as high as 6percentage points and now it's down to about 4-1/2 points--maybe alittle below that. So, it's still a lot higher than it was in the7/7/87early part of this year, but it's well down from the peak that itreached in May.MR. JOHNSON. As long as there's no major downside exchangerate risk that might be plenty.MR. CROSS. I think the exchange rate is the key part of theequation, yes.MR. JOHNSON. Yes.MR. HELLER. And the stock market in Japan, probably?MR. CROSS. The stock market in Japan has declined somewhat.It got up as high as about 26,000; it's now about 24,000 or so--downmaybe 10 percent, which is substantial. And the Japanese have beenvery worried about the liquidity in their whole economy, as reflectedboth in the stock market and the real estate market. It is a veryworrisome and dangerous thing. That's one of the reasons why thereare questions about what they should be doing in terms of their ownlonger-term ranges.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need to ratify the transactions.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Move it.MS. SEGER. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions or comments? If not, we willratify the transactions; that is all we have to do here.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So move it.MS. SEGER. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Why don't youintroduce this report on borrowing just very briefly, Mr. Kohn?MR. KOHN. Okay, Mr. Chairman. The report was requested inresponse to some questions that arose over the previous intermeetingperiod--and perhaps really since last fall as well--about the kinds offederal funds rates and pressures on reserve positions we were gettingrelative to what the Committee and the Desk had specified. The paperbreaks down the difference between actual federal funds rates andthose that you might have expected to be associated with an intendedlevel of borrowing into two separate kinds of misses. One is the missthat stems from the relationship between actual borrowing and thefunds rate that comes to pass. We found that that was a pretty looserelationship. There was a standard error of about 60 basis points;two-thirds of the time you could expect to be plus or minus 60 basispoints from the mean on that. There's a lot of short-term noise inthat relationship, having to do with the pattern of reserves shifting,unusual borrowing that might occur, the pattern of reserve provision,actual demand--7/7/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that on a weekly-average basis?MR. KOHN. A two-week average. There are also some longer-term shifts in that relationship. One was identified during theperiod of the Continental Illinois crisis, when banks obviously becamemore reluctant to use the discount window because they were concernedabout being seen as borrowing in that period. More recently, asmaller shift occurred last year when banks' desire to borrow alsoseemed to be less than might have been expected based on the long-termaverage.A second source of misses involves a deviation of actualborrowing from the borrowing that was intended, that is, the borrowinglevel that was put in the path. There we can have misses in excessreserves and estimates of excess and required reserves. Once again,the pattern of reserves provision and borrowing in the period can giverise to these sorts of misses. I think an important finding in thepaper is that there tend to be some offsets among the different kindsof errors that can be found in this relationship. So, the loosenessof a piece of the relationship--say, the relationship betweenborrowing and the funds rate spread--viewed by itself does not showthrough to the differences or the looseness between the actual fundsrate and the funds rate that was anticipated by the Desk. There areactions by the Desk in supplying reserves and by the market in keepingthe funds rate at levels that it believes consistent with the Deskprojection that tend to reduce quite substantially the standard errorsassociated with the difference between realized funds rates and fundsrates anticipated by the Desk. In the end, I think the relationshiplooks loose, but not all that loose. The current operatingprocedures, and the Desk and market actions that go with them, doprovide an anchor to the federal funds rate. But there is room formarket forces or for unanticipated misses in reserves to show throughin this relationship. Sometimes that can occur in desired ways: thatis, the market can push us toward higher or lower funds rates inanticipation of something we might end up doing; sometimes it couldmove the other way.With regard to the last intermeeting period, the problem wasprimarily the difference between the actual borrowing that occurredand the borrowing that was in the path. I think there were severalparticular problems that built on themselves in that period. One wasthe problem with the Treasury balance and the tax payments, which bothbuilt up the required reserves much higher than anyone had thought anddrained more actual reserves than anyone had estimated as the Treasurybalance came through. As a result, through almost the entire periodthe Desk found itself fighting reserve shortages, and much largerreserve shortages, than anyone--the Desk, the New York Fed, the Board,or the Treasury--was estimating. So it was constantly behind in thatway. Secondly, of course, there were a lot of market expectations atthat time that we would be firming. And the markets tended to pushthe federal funds rate up in anticipation of some firming of policy,given what was happening to the dollar and inflation. In some sense,I think borrowing rose in response to the market's push of the fundsrate up; there was extra inducement to borrow at the window. So,there were a number of factors that came together in the intermeetingperiod before the May 19th meeting that tended to give much largermisses between actual and intended borrowing than we ever hadexperienced before, except at year-end periods.7/7/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments?MR. JOHNSON. First, I want to say that I found this to be areally outstanding review of the issue and a very good report. Forour own purposes, it might be useful to go through this exercise everyso often to re-address the issue and to feel comfortable with it. Ithink it was very useful. I don't have any major questions; the studypretty much explains a lot. But a couple of things struck me as Iread through this that I wanted to bring up today. One is that Inoticed, at least over the period I looked at, that there appeared tobe an upward bias in actual borrowings relative to predicted. Thiswas only over about a 3-1/2 year period, I think--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Relative to intended?MR. JOHNSON. Yes--relative to intended. I wonder if youhave a good feel for what might be causing that? I think the Chairmanmentioned yesterday a very plausible explanation for certain periods:obviously, when you get to very low frictional levels of borrowing--when you're targeting something like $300 million or less--the bias isgoing to be on the upside because there's not a lot of downsideopportunity. But there's a positive bias that appears to occur over along period. Chart 2 summarizes the information, and it does tend toshow that when targeted borrowing levels were fairly low, that's whena lot of positive bias occurred. But I wonder if you went back over alonger period if you'd still see that positive bias and if it'srelated also to periods when targeted borrowings were very high.MR. KOHN. I'm not--MR. JOHNSON. If you look at chart 2 you can see a positivebias there. I just wonder what you sense there.MR. KOHN. I think a lot of the bias occurs in 1985,abstracting from the most recent period, which is a separate subject.MR. JOHNSON. Right. And borrowings were averaging fairlylow.MR. KOHN. Our findings were that low borrowings versus highborrowings didn't really affect that funds rate relationship verymuch. However, when borrowings are low, there is a tendency to comein a little high because if something unusual occurs--for example, acomputer breakdown where some bank doesn't receive a wire and doesjust a little borrowing, particularly if it happens over a weekend--itcan give a big boost relative to a very low two-week average.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I agree. It just seems to me that thatought to be factored into the expected borrowings to some extent.MR. KOHN. We often do that. Peter Sternlight can comment onthis. When we have an unusual amount of borrowings that pushes upborrowing relative to what we expect, we can't take it into accountahead of time because by its very nature we don't anticipate it. ButPeter often takes that into account in his intentions through the restof the period. I think that's one of the offsets that we get thatkeeps the funds rate close to [expectations]. As for the 1985 period,one thing that was going on then was that excess reserves were rising7/7/87through that period more rapidly than we were expecting them to. Wekept writing up the excess reserves numbers incorporated into thepath; but, in some sense, we were lagging a little behind as that washappening. So I think that period has a particular explanation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the question remains--and you maynot know the answer now--but the one period on this chart whenborrowings were fairly high, which was in 1984, that bias didn't seemto exist. Is that typical, in fact, of other periods when the targetwas $900 million, or $1 billion, or $1-1/2 billion?MR. KOHN. I don't know; we can find out.MR. JOHNSON. It would be interesting to know that. I havetwo other questions. One major issue is this: I realize that there'sa standard error plus or minus--I'm talking about borrowings relativeto the funds rate and the standard error you mentioned of about 60basis points--that creates noise in the system. If so, there's acertain amount of that noise that we have to accept; but that's plusor minus. There's a difference between that and the long-term issueof when we detect some sort of shift. I think the question arisesthere [unintelligible] policy shifts, that we're making a monetarypolicy adjustment whether we are doing anything or not. And thequestion is: If we detect a long-run shift in the borrowing functionshould we try and offset that in some way? Otherwise, we reallyaccept a policy adjustment because nonborrowed reserves are going tobe lower or higher.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you equate policy with interest rates.MR. JOHNSON. Well, yes, but nonborrowed reserves would beaffected.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible.]MR. JOHNSON. Maybe borrowings wouldn't, but the nonborrowedpath would be affected to some extent. So I don't know--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This question arose in the summer of '84,for instance. We got a much higher funds rate at a given level ofborrowings than we had anticipated.MR. JOHNSON. My question is: What do we do about it when wedecide that there has been a long-run shift in the function or whenthere's a consensus that that has developed? I guess it's justsomething that ought to be brought before the FOMC, to acknowledgethere's a shift and then--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It sure is [unintelligible] when it hasalready been that for a while, that's--MR. JOHNSON. Sure it has.MR. STERNLIGHT. It seems to me that it is the nature of theBluebook discussion to bring that kind of shift to the Committee'sattention in a normal way before it's in the--7/7/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To some degree this question arises atevery meeting.MR. JOHNSON. Sometimes, though, we don't have enoughinformation to decide whether it's just noise or real--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, that's usually the case.MR. JOHNSON. That's usually the case, yes. The lastquestion that I had was about seasonal borrowing. It seems to me thatthere's always been a bit of a question about whether seasonalborrowing should be included and, if so, to what extent.MR. KOHN. Our findings are that seasonal borrowing isinterest sensitive--sensitive to the spread. It's not quite asinterest sensitive as adjustment borrowing but, as I think is pointedout in the footnote here, when we fit the whole equation--totalseasonal and adjustment borrowing--on the spread, we cannot find aseasonal influence that is separate from the influence of the spread.So, from that kind of finding, it would appear that including or notincluding seasonal borrowing wouldn't significantly affect--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What did you say? There's no seasonal inseasonal borrowing?MR. KOHN. Well, there is a seasonal in seasonal borrowing,but it's not large enough to come through in the overall--. When welook at seasonal borrowing by itself we find a significant seasonal;but when we lump it in with adjustment borrowing that seasonal getsswamped by all the other--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But isn't that because we're aiming at atotal borrowing figure including the seasonal? Otherwise, we offsetthe seasonal in the seasonal.MR. LINDSEY. Well, it's looking at borrowings as they relateto the spreads. So, what we're looking for is the seasonal in thatrelationship, not just in the quantity per se. As Don said, in thatrelationship for the total adjustment plus seasonal borrowing we'renot able to pick up statistically significant seasonal effects, thoughthey do appear in a seasonal borrowing relationship.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You say your relationship between theborrowing total and the funds rate doesn't change seasonally?MR. LINDSEY. In a systematic way, that's what we find.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Even though the seasonal total itself isseasonal?MR. KOHN. Yes. In effect, we're saying that the seasonalinfluence isn't strong enough to push the whole thing around. TheDesk actually has a different view of that. Frequently, they see ahigher seasonal [influence].MR. JOHNSON. But you're saying whether we include it or not,it's not really an important--7/7/87MR. KOHN. Clearly, it works in the direction that in thesummer--the seasonal peak is usually in July and August--we would haveless adjustment borrowing and potentially a slightly lower federalfunds rate than we would in the middle of the winter for a given levelof borrowing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I forget: How much does the seasonalborrowing swing in a normal year? Is that [unintelligible] orsomething?MR. KOHN. Yes, close to it. It would have a trough of $100million and a peak of $300 million, and in a tight year such as 1984,maybe $400 million.MR. JOHNSON. So you don't think that taking it out wouldhave any effect on the standard error?MR. KOHN. I guess, consistent with the findings, it wouldn'treduce it very much.MR. JOHNSON. But I think we did say--MR. ANGELL. But the problem is--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But if we got to a lower level ofborrowings that would probably aggravate the problem you were justtalking about before. In other words, there would be less cushion.MR. JOHNSON. Yes.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In terms of the overall mechanism.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I certainly don't think it makes muchdifference if the level of borrowings is $1 billion or something, butmaybe if it is so low--MR. ANGELL. The problem is that if you take seasonalborrowing out, it is no longer under control the same way that openmarket operations are. You have to ask yourself: Are seasonalborrowings more like adjustment borrowings or more like open marketsupply credit? And I think it's--MR. JOHNSON. Well, that's what I was--MR. ANGELL. The answer, it would seem to me, is that it'smore like adjustment borrowing than it is like open market operations.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. To an extent.MR. JOHNSON. Well, maybe we should apply some adjustmentfactor to it to deal with just the seasonal element. I don't know ifthat's possible; but if it is possible, we might be able to correctthe seasonal borrowing for seasonal.MR. ANGELL. In other words, you'd like to have the seasonalborrowing have a seasonal influence; thereby, if we had a $500 millionseasonal target, then it might be adjusted seasonally to be $540million or $470 million?-10-7/7/87MR. JOHNSON. Something like that. I don't know if it'sdoable; I'm just saying it's worth thinking about.MR. ANGELL. That would tend to give you--MR. HELLER. Otherwise, you are always counter steering withyour adjustment borrowing and that's the variable that gets squeezed.MR. JOHNSON. It's worth thinking about.MR. KOHN. Okay. One option would be to include the seasonalin with the extended credit. We could treat it as an exogenous factoraffecting "nonborrowed" reserves. That would be just targeting onadjustment credit. Our feeling is that the seasonal is sufficientlyresponsive to interest rates and, as I think you or the Chairman said,that its behavior is somewhere in between adjustment and extendedcredit, and we've included it with the adjustment credit. I think itdoes respond to interest rate spreads; it's not truly seasonal, that'sfor sure.MR. JOHNSON. Yes. I know.MR. ANGELL. I think it would be better to leave it in andput a seasonal factor on it than it would be to take it out and treatit like extended credit.MR. STERNLIGHT. Governor Angell put his finger on it insaying that you need to ask if it is more like the adjustment creditor more like something that we want to compensate for totally, likethe extended credit. I think it has some elements of both, andprobably is closer to the adjustment credit.MR. JOHNSON. I'm just saying that you might want to leave itin, but still make some adjustments to that number.MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, possibly.MR. HELLER. The question is whether you have enoughconfidence in your seasonal factors to do it with any degree ofprecision. If you don't, then you're better off--MR. JOHNSON. Yes. I don't want to send us off on somefrivolous exercise; I'm just saying it might be worth thinking aboutif there's a way that you feel comfortable dealing with it.MR. KOHN. Why don't we look a little more closely at therelationship with and without the seasonal and see whether we can comeup with a plan if, after looking at that relationship, it looks likeit's worth doing.MR. HELLER. Is that seasonal borrowing also concentrated incertain institutions?MR. KOHN. Well, it's in smaller institutions by policy--Regulation A. It's primarily in agricultural banks, but it's also inareas that have tourism and in some other areas subject to seasonal---11-7/7/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did you do any study as to how sensitive,let's say, the federal funds rate is--that is, what kind ofrelationship you get with net borrowed reserves or free reservesinstead of borrowings?MR. KOHN. Yes, we did free reserves, net borrowed reserves,and it did not improve the relationship; in fact, it was worse inrecent years. In the LRR period it was about the same; but in the CRRperiod the excess reserves have fluctuated and we've made moreadjustments, so the free reserves--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess if you're going to follow thisgeneral approach, it's better to target borrowings than free reserves.MR. KOHN. We do make adjustments in the excess reserveallowance as those demands change, over time; and that would beincorporated into a strict reserves--MS. SEGER. What do the relationships look like if you don'twash out the variations within a maintenance period? It seems to methat by averaging that you would knock off quite a bit of thevariation before you do your statistical study.MR. LINDSEY. Yes, that's right. The daily variation wouldbe much larger than what we've shown here. We have looked at this inthe past, and we've found that on settlement day over the last fewyears we have gotten more variation than we did previous to theintroduction of CRR in 1984. On the other hand, the quarter-ends(except for the year-ends) seem to be somewhat muted by the two-weekperiod.MR. PARRY. Don, your work indicates that the relationshipbetween the spread and borrowing is linear. Is it more reasonable tothink of that as a nonlinear relationship, since banks have a tendencyto become more reluctant to borrow as that spread widens?MR. LINDSEY. In some earlier work that we did here, inconnection with the evaluation of the new operating procedures in1980, Peter Tinsley and his colleagues did estimate a borrowingfunction that, instead of being linear as we've drawn it, showed thatas borrowings got to higher and higher levels the associated increasein the funds rate tended to rise faster.MR. PARRY. Right.MR. LINDSEY. On the other hand, there has been somesentiment among commenters on this memorandum, that perhaps in some ofthe more recent data the relationship bends the other way since, afterall, as borrowings increase more and more, each $100 million involvesa smaller percentage change. So, confronted with two alternativessuggesting the opposite, we took a hard look at these data and justfit a straight line through them.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I react to this along the followinglines. The whole thing, as a matter of perspective, represents aseries of technical relationships that are the first step in a long,7/7/87long, linkage between what we do and prices and all the things wereally care about. Looked at in that light, I walk away somewhatamazed that it works as well as it does. Indeed, when you look at thenet deviations as summarized either on chart 2 or chart 5, I'm hardpressed to conclude that any of them is likely to have any net effecton real economic variables or prices or anything else. Indeed, thedeviations are in that sense, I think, astonishingly small. So, it'sreassuring to me in that sense. But what is a little troubling aboutit to me is that it comes pretty darn close to saying that, despiteall our protestations to the contrary, we're really operating on thefederal funds rate.MR. PARRY. Right.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I find that troubling because we'vebeen down that path before; and to the extent we seduce ourselves backinto that I think it could come back to haunt us in the long run.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe I didn't read this carefully, but Icame out with the opposite conclusion: that the relationship is soloose that we're not doing that.MR. JOHNSON. I guess the point is that even if we are, westill think of the funds rate as a check against the borrowings. Iknow that from sitting in on the [daily] call. Many times the fundsrate is used as a check to gauge whether the reserve estimates arecorrect. If the funds rate starts to move off from where we wouldhave expected, given the reserve estimates, we seem to second guessour Treasury balance numbers and our excess reserve numbers andnaturally assume that our reserve estimates are off because the fundsrate is strange. Therefore, the Desk tends to do more or less in theopen market.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's one thing. In that case, thefunds rate is being used appropriately, in my judgment, as aninformation variable.MR. JOHNSON. Right.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It's telling you something. Indeed,some of those deviations--which, again, I regard as small in netterms--ultimately reflect a willingness to let the federal funds rateat times tell us something. But that's a little different.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I agree. And that's a short-term viewversus a longer-term policy issue. But I'm just saying that even ifwe were trying to target the funds rate, the question still remains:Are we targeting the funds rate to affect the aggregates or reservesor are we just trying to stabilize the funds rate? In other words, wecould target the funds rate at various levels over short periods thatwould affect the aggregates, and I think that's basically what we'redoing, as one means of sort of trying to--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's always what I thought we weredoing.MR. JOHNSON. Yes.-13-7/7/87VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But when I got through reading thisI got a little nervous on the other side of the ledger.MR. JOHNSON. If you let the funds rate drift off somewhere,over the long run it's eventually going to affect the aggregates. Soyou can't really look at one without the other.MR. BLACK. The most important argument for using theborrowed reserve target is that it gives us a certain amount ofpolitical insulation so that we can let the federal funds rate movemore than we otherwise would be able to do. That to me is theimportant decision.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there are all kinds of interestingquestions and implications toward operating techniques which I willdeclare after this discussion will not be acted on at this particularmeeting.MR. JOHNSON. I think you're right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I assume that the operating techniqueswill remain the same, for this meeting anyway. Let's turn to theeconomic situation. I gaze down at the other end of the table andnote that we have a few other changes. You are aware that Mr.Kichline will leave us in a couple of weeks. He has been at that endof the table during my whole Chairmanship; I don't know how I'm goingto get along without him but I see some able-bodied, capable peopledown there to lead me through this meeting anyway.MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As usual, we'vedistributed to you a set of charts; they are entitled "StaffPresentation". [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it was a comprehensive presentation,very complete in all senses. It can now be attacked. Are there anyattackers? Mr. Parry.MR. PARRY. I have two questions. With regard to theinflation assumptions for 1988 and what might be the interest rateimplications: We have a forecast of inflation that is really not verymuch different from what you have for 1988. But to achieve that, tokeep a lid on inflation, we had to generate some slack in the economyand that was done by having short-term rates--in this case thecommercial paper rate--rise a little more than 200 basis points to 9percent. In your principal assumptions you referred to an appreciablerise in interest rates over the projection period. I wonder if youcould be more specific. What is the extent of that increase in ratesand where would you have the commercial paper rate at the end of 1988?MR. PRELL. We've made assumptions about both short- andlong-term interest rates. As I indicated, we see Treasury bond ratesmoving back above the 9 percent level that we saw just recently. Onthe short end we are looking at federal funds trading above 8 percentby some time in 1988. That would be a shade less of an increase thanyou're talking about but in the same general ballpark.MR. PARRY. I see. The second question is [about inflation.]Your forecast for 1988 has a slight upward trend in the last three-14-7/7/87quarters in the fixed-weight deflator. And, if I remember correctly,you have import prices rising about 10 percent, the dollar decliningless than 10 percent, and little slack in the economy given that theunemployment rate remains relatively constant around 6.3 percent. Ifyou were to continue your projection beyond 1988, it sounds to me asthough your forecast implies that inflation rates continue to move upin 1989. Is that correct?MR. PRELL. I think the answer is that much would depend onsuch things as what happens to the dollar in the latter part of thecurrent projection period and into 1989. Another uncertainty is, ofcourse, what the implication of any unemployment rate level might befor inflationary pressures. But our forecast certainly hints ofongoing pressure on compensation coming from the price increases thatwe have forecast and the risk that if the dollar continued to declinesubstantially into 1989 there would probably be some furtheracceleration in general inflation.MR. PARRY. But even a decline in the dollar through 1988would probably have some inflationary impact in 1989.MR. PRELL. That's why I mentioned it for the latter part of1988.MR. PARRY. Yes. Thank you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Ted, I wonder if you could comment on how yousee the business outlook for some of our major trading partners,Germany, Japan, England, etc.?MR. TRUMAN. Well, I think the answer to your question is notterribly robust. As that chart that I referred to shows, for thosecountries the growth is in the 2 percent range, on average. Growth indomestic demand is somewhat faster. The current situation presents asomewhat mixed picture. Germany, after a very weak first quarter,which was partly a seasonal weakness that is not seasonally adjusted[in the statistics], seems to have moved quite rapidly in the firstcouple of months of the second quarter, according to the availabledata. Unfortunately, Germany has shown more strength in theirexternal accounts than one might want to see from our perspective.Japan, on the other hand, had a better first quarter and things seemto have become a little soggier in the second quarter. However, theyhave put in place the fiscal package that was announced just after thelast FOMC meeting, and that was somewhat more than we had expected.That has led us to boost our forecast of growth in Japan for this yearand next year. So, we have real growth in the 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 percentrange in that country and in the 1-1/4 to 1-1/2 percent range inGermany. The somewhat prolonged slowdown in growth in Germany doesseem to be having some effects on the rest of western Europe. I thinkthe projection for France also has been marked down in recent months.The only country in western Europe that seems to be doing quite wellis the United Kingdom. It all depends on how you read these things,but that in part seems to reflect a boost from the depreciation of thepound last year and the somewhat easier fiscal policy--they wouldn'tdescribe it that way--that they seem to have gone into this year. Wedo see some drop-off in growth in 1988, in part reflecting the fact7/7/87that the economy has recovered this year. And as far as Canada isconcerned, we see things largely dependent on [unintelligible]; so youfind growth in the 2 percent area next year. On balance, it's notmuch of a favorable picture and [there's] not much scope orwillingness to foster very much [further growth]. We have built intothe forecast some further downward adjustment in the interest rates inthese countries, though I would say it's quite modest, presumablytriggered by a discount [rate cut] or [unintelligible] some exchangemarket pressures to bring that about. Aside from the Japanese fiscalpackage, which we assume will pass before the [unintelligible] go intoeffect, and the German tax cut that comes in the first quarter of nextyear, we really have no other major policy that--MR. BOEHNE. Have you given any thought to what theimplications of the outlook in the United States plus the outlook thatyou just gave for Europe and Japan might have on the less developedcountries and their external accounts?MR. TRUMAN. Yes, and that has deteriorated noticeably butnot in demand for right now. Since April, for example, we have [beenprojecting] a deterioration in the current account next year ofroughly $4 billion for the [unintelligible] of the developingcountries. That reflects the influence of somewhat weaker growth inthe industrial world and somewhat higher interest rates and slightlybetter commodity prices, on average, at least relative to early Aprilwhere the [unintelligible] occur. But that effect has been negative--much of it coming from interest rate assumptions. Now, that's notenough to upset the apple cart, but it could rebalance the apples inthe cart.MR. BOEHNE. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. What surprised me about this forecast wasyour projection of real consumption, consumer spending. It's really aquite low level in 1988. It seems to me that on the one hand, you'reprojecting increased industrial production, which I would have thoughtwould have increased disposable income, and yet you're not showing anyincrease in the saving rate. I would have thought that you would havea higher level of consumer expenditures. What am I missing in thatequation?MR. PRELL. Well, we have some modest growth in manufacturingemployment going with the stronger industrial production but thosegains are not large by any means. We see overall employment growthslowing from the pace of the last couple of years. Layered on top ofwhat would be moderate growth in nominal personal income would be moresizable consumer price increases--not more sizable than we've seen inthe first half of this year but more sizable by far than we had overthe past year or two. And thus, that's eroding real income, laborincome, by a substantial amount. So, as I pointed out, we have gainsin income and expenditures of a similar magnitude. This is very lowgrowth in consumption expenditures, particularly in a nonrecessionperiod. But consumption expenditures have been very high relative toeconomic activity. And consumer durables have been growing verystrongly. There's probably much less pent-up demand for consumerdurables than there has been. We think the financial situation on the-16-7/7/87whole is one in which we probably will not see the kind ofaggressiveness of spending relative to income that we've seen over thepast few years. So, that is the story behind our admittedly very weakprojection of consumption expenditures.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a very optimistic projection from onepoint of view. That has to happen to release the resources for theimprovement in the external account and produce some savings; itdoesn't produce very much. Mr. Stern.MR. STERN. If the dollar were to level off relative toforeign currencies about where it is now, what do you think that woulddo to our real trade position over this forecast period and to theaggregate forecast that you have?MR. TRUMAN. It depends a bit on what else goes along withthat, in particular whether the dollar leveling off and presumably alittle less inflationary pressure would lead to the same kind ofinterest rate projection or trend or a somewhat easier one. But, anobviously easier one needs to result in more gain on income. In termsof where you would be in the fourth quarter of next year, it wouldmean roughly between $20 and $30 billion, depending on whichassumption you make on the real net export side. And it would bemaybe between $5 and $10 billion on the current account side by theend of the projection period to keep GNP unchanged. In the worstcase, using the higher number in terms of losses, if you keep GNPunchanged and you get the $10 billion and $30 billion (nominal andreal)--if you essentially let the tighter policy show through--giventhe passage of the exchange rate pressures, you would lose a halfpercentage point or so on the level of GNP. You'll get $5 to $10billion off--MR. STERN. I guess what bothers me about this forecast isthat you have the dollar going down somewhat further and interestrates higher than they were the last time we met, and you have takensomething off real growth. The directions are all right but it seemsto me that the adjustment is kind of small. If things work out thatway, I would think we would be looking at slower growth than you havehere and something that would be approaching a stagflationenvironment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ms. Seger.MS. SEGER. I have one question for Ted Truman and one forMike Prell. For Ted: How is the rundown you gave of the growthforecast for these various major economies consistent with ourexpectation of a substantial pickup in exports? I keep thinking ourexports have to go someplace and England isn't going to buy them all.MR. TRUMAN. First, I think the answer to that question, andthen you can ask Mike of course, is that domestic demand in thesecountries is growing faster--by 1/2 percentage point or more--thanproduction in these countries. And it is the difference betweendomestic demand and production that is absorbing the net imports. Itis generated not so much by relative income effects because of growthbut price effects. To put it more clearly, it's the other side of thegap we had in the early 1980s between domestic demand and production,against a background in which domestic demand will be growing more-17-7/7/87slowly. There is less help from income effects; [we're] relying to aconsiderable extent on the price effects that produce increases inexports. And as I noted, one particular problem in that area has todo with the role of protectionism, in a generalized sense, inweakening the link between relevant price changes and foreignexchange. Of course, part of the protectionism thrust comes from a"soggy" or not terribly dynamic world economy.MS. SEGER. Well, do you think that there is enough zip orthat it's not so soggy that it will sabotage our interests--MR. TRUMAN. First of all, the growth we are anticipatingover this forecast period is not much different than we've had overthe past four quarters, and we have only a slightly faster pace forgrowth of non-agricultural exports, as we are all aware. So we're notrelying a lot on that further pickup in the rate of increase of ournon-agricultural exports.MS. SEGER. But we were badgering Germany and Japan, Ithought, to stimulate their economies so that there would be--MR. TRUMAN. I believe that we're better off, in some sense,than if they had chosen for their own reasons not to accelerate thetax cut in Germany and not to adopt the fiscal stimulus in the case ofJapan. But that's not enough to boost the overall level of productionin those countries; in fact, as I've commented, looking out into 1988we now see domestic demand slowing a bit further.MS. SEGER. Okay, but it still makes me nervous.MR. TRUMAN. I share your nervousness.MS. SEGER. For Mike: In reading the Greenbook and othermaterials that were distributed prior to the meeting, there's sort ofan underlying tone of an economy that's about to go into orbit. It'snot stated that way, and maybe I just read it wrong, but the forecastsuggests that private demand suddenly is going to explode and thatthere's going to be this inflationary surge. I went through all theindividual numbers and thought it through in my own mind, looking atthe different sectors and so forth, and I must say that I can't findone that is about to go off in a bit of robustness.MR. PRELL. Governor Seger, if that was the impression weleft, that was not our intention. As I've noted, we have in fact verymodest growth of domestic spending in the forecast period. We thinkthings may pick up a bit in the near term on the consumer side, butonly because there are some autos that have to be cleared away beforetoo long--before we get well into the '88 model year. I suppose therecent indicators on business fixed investment have been a bitcheerier and, indeed, if one wanted to be optimistic one could seesome upside potential there relative to our forecast. Certainly, ourforecast is considerably weaker than any of the major surveys--Commerce, McGraw-Hill, and Merrill-Lynch--would suggest for theremainder of the year. If one became particularly bullish on thebasis of recent stories about the computer industry maybe we could beon the brink of another resurgence of high-tech spending. Butbasically, our thrust is not toward a boldness in the economy such asyou've referred to.-18-7/7/87MR. PARRY. What deflator does the Commerce Department use ontheir surveys? Don't they use last year's price experience?MR. PRELL. Well, I was thinking of the nominal [GNP], butyes, the Commerce Department takes the experience over the most recentfour quarters and applies that as the deflator for the currentcalendar year's spending. That gives us--MR. PARRY. So they're probably overstating?MR. PRELL. We're expecting a fairly low inflation in fixedinvestment prices this year. In fact, that computer factor that Imentioned for the second quarter would put equipment price inflationat essentially zero in that period. So it may be that they're notthat far off; but looking at nominal spending, the trajectory impliedto get their annual total is far steeper than we have in the forecast.MR. PARRY. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. I also have a question about the consumptionexpenditures, which I think look on the low side, particularly for1988. Cross-referencing a bit between [components of] the Greenbookforecast, specifically for autos, Mike, you are forecasting anincrease in auto sales next year yet durable expenditures seem awfullysoft. Maybe I missed it but what is your number for autos?MR. PRELL. Total auto sales next year are a shade over10-1/2 million units. We have about 10.3 million units for thecurrent year. The difference there is something of an artifact of thebulge that we had in the latter half of 1986 which borrowed some from1987. Looking at it in terms of the year from the fourth quarter wehave 10.7 million units in both years; auto sales provide essentiallyno contribution to growth for the period from the fourth quarter of1987 to the fourth quarter of 1988. I would note that cars are notthe only element of motor vehicle purchases by households at thistime. The sales of vans and trucks and light trucks are reallyrunning quite strong and may persist; that's not something that shouldbe ignored. There's little more I can add to what I said earlierabout our consumption forecast. It's not inconceivable that consumerswill not get over their increased bent for spending and that they willcontinue to spend. The short-run income developments, transitory forMay, [could lead consumers to be] very optimistic about the future andpush consumer spending up further. But we think that's not as likelyas what we have forecast; we feel that the strength we've seen hasbeen, in part, a reflection of those currents of trade movements oravailability of imported [goods] at attractive prices and that hasinfluenced a shift in the direction.MR. KEEHN. If you have a level of doubt about any part ofthe forecast is this one area where your doubt level is a littlehigher than in others?MR. PRELL. Oh, I don't know. I'm always very doubtful aboutthe part that Ted is most [unintelligible]. But consumer spending isa very big sector, so a small error in one's thinking about it couldhave a big effect on overall GNP.7/7/87MR. KEEHN. Thank you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. The number that I find rather depressing, and Iwant to make sure I understand it, is your projection that the Federaldeficit next year is going to be about the same as in fiscal 1987.After $25 billion of deficit reducing actions and after what I recallwas a fairly sizable increase in the Social Security surplus--which Iassume is in these numbers--we still end up with no change in theFederal deficit. And on top of that you're projecting a wiping out ofthe state and local government surplus, a low consumer saving rate,and some decline in the inflow of foreign capital associated with thereduction of our current account deficit. To me, all of this adds upto the possibility that we will see much higher interest rates, as aconsequence of all of these forces, than you have been suggesting.Now, perhaps you didn't want to scare us but--MR. PRELL. There is a complex of things involved here.Clearly, our overall nominal GNP growth is not very rapid relative tothe kind of money that we have built into this forecast. It doesn'timply a large amount of interest rate pressure, certainly not morethan we have built in. On the outlook for the Federal budget, thesituation does look less favorable to us now than it did previously.In part, that's a result of our ongoing attempts to interpret theeffects of tax reform; the pattern of movement from year-to-yeardoesn't look as favorable at this point as it did before. And, ofcourse, with the kind of nominal income growth we have, we're notgenerating a tremendous growth of Federal revenues. Our Federalspending projection is not terribly robust but when we put all thesethings together, we come out with 1988 much closer--in fact almostidentical--to what we have for 1987 now.MR. MORRIS. I suppose what could really cause us troublewould be if the improvement in our trade picture should lead to alarger increase in business investment expenditures than we'reprojecting here. That would put an awful lot of strain on the capitalmarkets with the government deficit not declining.MR. PRELL. Yes, I think that's a possibility. We have builtinto our thinking some stimulus to investment coming from thisimprovement in manufacturing, and that's associated with the tradeimprovement. As we said, we think equipment spending will be fairlystrong and we may see some increase in industrial construction, too,as time passes. I should note that one other factor that has changedin our thinking from earlier in the year with respect to the 1988fiscal year budget is the higher level of interest rates that we haveseen come about. We have that extended a bit into the fiscal 1988period, so that is adding to the deficit. But in a sense that's sortof an artifact; many people would want to look at the so-calledprimary deficit without interest to get a better guide as to what theunderlying movement is. But it's adding something significant tothese numbers.MR. MORRIS. The increase in the Social Security surplus isnot a very big factor for 1988. Maybe I was--7/7/87MR. PRELL. Well, I must confess: I don't think we havespecific numbers on the surplus. It's clear that the trend over thenext decade or more is going to be in that direction; and for the 21stcentury I assume it's moving in that direction. It would be helped bythe increase in Federal taxes that will occur the first of the year.MR. MORRIS. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Melzer.MR. MELZER. Mike, I wanted to pursue your assumptions withrespect to money growth and your statement earlier. You have veryslow rates of growth of M2 and M3 over the projection period. As youmentioned before, I guess that's associated in part with risinginterest rates and increasing velocity. First of all, what's impliedfor M1 growth if you looked at that? And secondly, apparently you'recomfortable that the liquidity that's being provided, if you will, issufficient to sustain the type of expansion you're projecting. But Iwondered what that implied overall in terms of velocity behavior.MR. PRELL. We think there's--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I could say something, but I thinkwe'll get into this later in some more sophistication presumably thanMr. Prell has indicated.MR. PRELL. Don Kohn has an exhibit that he'll be giving forthese--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I presume that Mr. Kohn's presentation isgoing to revolve around those issues.MR. MELZER. Okay.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. Ted, you said something about oil prices. Ithought you said something about rising oil demand so that we havepotential upside risk on the price level. But we have a verydepressed level of world demand it seems; I'm wondering where the risein oil demand would come from out of this whole picture.MR. TRUMAN. All I was trying to suggest was that that's areason why we don't have prices going up. There was some furthersecular decline in U.S. production and the leveling off of some of theproduction in other non-OPEC sources of supply like the North Seas.But there was at the same time [unintelligible] on the production sideof the equation ex OPEC. And given some growth in GNP and productionaround the world--it's not bulging but it adds to demand, with theelasticity of something between 3/4 and 1 percent. So the question iswhether that differential is going to be absorbed by the substantialexcess capacity in OPEC, in particular in the Middle East, abstractingfrom military installations [unintelligible]. If it's going to beabsorbed by Saudi Arabia increasing its revenues by increasingproduction--which it clearly has the scope to do if it wants to--thatis one scenario. What happens to [unintelligible] in that way tostabilize prices and to not cause the kind of run-up in prices thatwould bring a presumption of exploration around the world in non-OPEC-21-7/7/87sources of supply. That is another scenario--a small gradual increaseof 1 million barrels a day roughly in the demand for OPEC oil, whichcould easily be accommodated by OPEC itself.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How much is U.S. production down in thepast year or so?MR. TRUMAN. So far it's down something like 600,000 barrelsa day. The numbers are not great on this. And we have another coupleof hundred built into the forecast.MR. JOHNSON. I also have are a comment on the interest ratepicture and a word in terms of the deficit. It's true that by yourprojection the deficit is not improving in '88 over '87, but you haveabout $300 or $400 billion more nominal GNP. I think the deficit-to-GNP ratio declines by about .3 or .4. So you have a slackening ofpressure there even with a constant number. In addition to that,you're estimating the same degree of capital flows. If I rememberright, there is not a dramatic change in capital flows from abroad.So, under your forecast there is going to be a still significantamount of foreign capital inflow [in relation] to the decliningdeficit-to-GNP ratio. On the state and local front, Frank, your stateand local numbers don't count the pension surpluses, which are verylarge. So, I don't see in this scenario big interest rate pressurescoming from the government side. Now, if those capital inflows werereally changing sharply you'd have a different picture. But that'snot the forecast. And the deficit declines as a percent of GNP. So,there seems to be an improvement on that side rather than a change inthe other direction.MR. PRELL. But if you look at the numbers on a quarterlybasis you would see, for example, that our NIA deficit is moderatingover the forecast period to the end of 1988. We have about $158billion in the fourth quarter of 1988; and we have a projection of$187 billion for the current quarter. So there is a perceptibledownward movement. You are quite right about the surplus of thesocial insurance funds in the state and local sector which is runningabout $60 billion and edging up in our forecast. That sector as awhole, at least as measured in the national income accounts, is movingin the direction of additional net saving to offset some of theFederal deficit.MR. MORRIS. But you do have an absolute decline in theforeign capital inflows in 1988, right?MR. TRUMAN. Yes, of about $20 billion.MR. MORRIS. Not only as a percent of GNP but in absoluteterms so that--MR. JOHNSON. Yes. It's not dramatic but it's there. Itdoesn't change at all in 1987 I don't think. There is something inthere--MR. MORRIS. No, I'm talking about 1988.MR. JOHNSON. Yes.-22-7/7/87VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. What happens, Mike, to the netdomestic savings gap in 1988? In other words, what happens to thefinancing requirements of the government plus the private sectorrelative to net domestic savings?MR. PRELL. I have to do the arithmetic to get to the net.Looking at the government sectors combined, as a percent of GNP wehave a 3.3 percent deficit last year moving down to 2.6 percent thisyear and then to 2.3 percent next year. So there's a significantmovement this year and then some modest further movement next yearwhile net foreign investment declines by 0.7 percent over that period.That is almost, I'll say, 3/4 of the movement in the governmentsector. In gross terms private saving is about unchanged for 1987 and1988 in our forecast.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. As a percent of GNP or in absoluteterms?MR. PRELL. As a percent of GNP.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So the net is slightly worse off in1988 than in 1987.MR. PRELL. Net, right.MR. TRUMAN. One of the problems is that these statements arein nominal terms. If you look at the real terms you get a somewhatdifferent picture because the real adjustment on the external sideis--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But for financing purposes thereal--MR. TRUMAN. Right, but the resource allocation implicationsof the reallocation exercise are more difficult, in some sense, on thefinancial side. They do get more reshuffling [unintelligible] side.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody else have a question?MR. MELZER. I just want to ask: I assume the way you'vestated interest rates as an assumption means they are more or less anendogenous variable here. Where would this come apart had you notprojected the kind of increase in rates that you have?MR. PRELL. Well, I think we would have tendencies towardgreater inflation and a weaker dollar. And the kind of accelerationwe would see in the inflation rate next year would be a significantchange from what we had. I think you would notice it; that up-tiltwould be considerably greater. These are matters of degree. Wehaven't changed our interest rate forecast from last time to thistime. The change is not drastic, really, by comparison to what wewere looking at earlier in the year [but] we have a substantiallygreater increase in rates than we anticipated at that time.MS. SEGER. Could you just run the numbers by us instead ofjust saying appreciable? I don't know what that means.-23-7/7/87MR. PRELL. Yes. Maybe you were out of the room when I gavethe numbers earlier. We have federal funds, for example, rising above8 percent by some time in the latter part of 1988. We have long-termTreasury bonds moving noticeably above 9 percent.MS. SEGER. How about home mortgages?MR. PRELL. We have them moving back to the highs--maybetoward the 11 percent area.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Just to follow up on Tom Melzer's question: Ifyou look at the quarterly pattern of prices measured by the CPI, theimplicit deflator, or otherwise, you really end up 1988 at about thesame level as the second quarter of 1987. But I think you may havejust answered my question when you said to Tom that the rise ininterest rates is what pulls that to about that level. Is it?MR. PRELL. Well, it's clearly an ingredient in the dampingof GNP growth in our forecast. The fiscal side is one factor; but thefinancial environment we think will tend to damp domestic demand, andoverall pressures on the labor markets will not increase. And so--MR. GUFFEY. Given the capacity utilization you're projectingof roughly 80-81 percent and the unemployment rate of about 6-1/2percent, it could turn out not to show through in prices if indeed thedollar does not fall. We may not need the various interest rates thatyou have built into the projection.MR. PRELL. I can't quarrel with that. I would justreiterate my statement that there has to be a considerable uncertaintyassigned to one's reading of the implications of a given level of theunemployment rate. We think it has gotten in the territory where itwill [unintelligible]. There are areas of greater tightness; innondurable manufacturing, for example, there are industries right nowthat have very high levels of capacity utilization and price pressuresare evident there. But there's clearly a significant range ofuncertainty around it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody else have any particularquestions that are contrary on this presentation? If not, I would askyou to present your alternative scenarios, if any, that you think areimportant. I don't want to interpret the group as all being in fullagreement with the staff. Mr. Parry.MR. PARRY. Our forecast really is in agreement with thebroad outlines of the Greenbook forecast. We're expecting growth ofjust under 3 percent this year and a slowdown next year, althoughperhaps more of a slowdown than is included in the Greenbook. Thisgreater weakness that we have is in spite of a little faster growth ofconsumption. It's a result of a smaller improvement in net exportsthan is in the Greenbook forecast and a somewhat weaker housingsector. Our inflation forecast for this year and next, as measured bythe fixed-weight deflator is 4-1/2 percent for this year and 4 percentfor next year. And higher import prices are certainly a significantcontributor to these inflation rates. But I just want to repeat thatthe only way we were able to keep inflation to these levels was to-24-7/7/87produce slack in the economy by means of a fairly substantial increasein short-term interest rates on the order of 200 basis points. Andfrankly, I'd be very interested in what types of trade-offs othermembers of the Committee ran into as they addressed this issue of therelationship between their forecast of inflation and its implicationsfor interest rates in 1988.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think Governor Heller will tell us theanswer to that question.MR. HELLER. I'm not sure. You asked where we were woulddiffer with the forecast; let me focus on that. I think the Federalgovernment deficit number of $168 billion is probably on thepessimistic side. I would expect that the tax reform which has takenplace, and which is clearly difficult to model as far as econometricmodels are concerned, would result in a considerable broadening of thetax base and, therefore, that the tax revenues would be running higherthan the projections indicate. That would be the one factor that Iwould argue would relieve some of the pressure in the financialmarkets and thus would yield lower interest rates in an overalleconomic environment where there is relatively slow consumptiongrowth--with which I agree--and a lot of underutilized capacity and,therefore, lower investment. But the commodity markets still havequite a bit of excess capacity, on a global basis at least. I thinkthat is the framework in which we could see interest rates stayingroughly where they are, or maybe even drifting lower, and not havingthat inflation rate surge that would accompany the projections thatthe staff has here. Overall, as far as the level of economic activityis concerned, I'm roughly in agreement with the Greenbook. But as faras the financial implications are concerned, I'm not as pessimistic;and therefore, unless we do something to drive interest rates up, Ithink we can see probably the same level that prevails now, if notlower.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, our forecast for thisyear is basically in agreement with the Greenbook but we departsomewhat [for 1988] on both the real growth and the inflation side.We think that real GNP is going to be more in the neighborhood of 2.8percent, which is the number we used in our wire to the Board's staff.That's basically because of our belief that personal consumption isgoing to be stronger than the Greenbook indicates. We also think theinvestment forecast for 1988 is a little on the sluggish side in theBoard staff's forecast; we think it's going to be a little better thanthat. Also, we don't see quite the improvement in the trade situationthat the Greenbook implies and that translates into our forecast forinflation which we have rising somewhat faster than the Greenbook. Infact, we put the GNP deflator at 4.3 percent, which is about a halfpoint higher than the staff expectations. Unlike Governor Heller, ifI understood him correctly, I think the Federal budget deficitprojection is a little on the optimistic side; I think it's perhapsgoing to be higher than the $167 billion that the staff isforecasting. And that might give a little stimulus to the economy aswell. The one place where I think we are in agreement, if Iunderstood the staff forecast correctly, is that we're likely to getwage pressures toward the end of this year and out into 1988 simplybecause we're operating probably at our potential in the economy at-25-7/7/87the moment. And if the inflation number that I have is right, thatwill in turn put some pressures on the wage front.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The New York Bank's ResearchDepartment forecast has basically the same bottom line as the Boardstaff's forecast but there are a couple of very important differencesin the assumptions. In the forecast of the New York ResearchDepartment--I distinguish that from my own forecast, because sometimesthey're not the same--they basically have no further change in theexchange rate over the forecast period from about the levels of thepast month or so. Vis-a-vis the Board staff's forecast that reallyconstitutes a very large difference because it reflects not just the 9or 10 percent [decline that is forecast] for next year but also whathappens over the balance of this year. So, the net difference is morelike 13 or 14 percent from where we are right now. Now, because wedon't have that further decline in the dollar we get some spuriousfeedbacks from that. For example, in nominal terms, our currentaccount number for next year is actually better than the staff'snumber even though in real terms the opposite might be the case; it'shard to tell there precisely. But by not getting that further 13 or14 percent of J-curve effects we actually end up with the spuriousresult, at least in the near term, of a better current accountsituation in 1988.The other thing that is true by assumption is that while wehave some build up in interest rates I don't think it is quite assharp, by implication, as maybe what you're talking about, Mike. Butwe get a different mix: we pick up a little more in terms of domesticspending and a little less perhaps in real terms on the net exportside. It washes out in terms of GNP to about the same although, as Isaid, the current account--which for financial purposes is important--is actually better in 1988. The other thing that is troublesome isthat, notwithstanding the fact that we have by assumption no change inthe dollar, our price numbers are higher, if anything, than the staffnumbers--not by a whole heck of a lot, but they are higher. Indeed,it seems to me that when you look at all the price forecasts that arearound, certainly the overwhelming consensus of the forecasts, thoughnot all of them, is for a situation for 1988 in which the deflatoreither bumps or passes through 4 percent and the consumer price indexeither bumps or passes through 5 percent. And in some cases theconsumer price index gets up into the 5-1/2 percent range. Withoutbeing too precise, I am just thinking of those thresholds of 4 percentand 5 percent. I'm hard pressed at this point to see what, short of arecession or some major slowdown in economic growth, will prevent thatfrom happening. In other words, given labor market conditions, importprices, and all the rest, that kind of result seems to me to be almostbaked in already. To the extent that developments either in oilprices or other things work the wrong way, so much the worse. So, Ifind it troubling that--and I'm referring to my personal forecast onthis--I end up with such a price outlook, again just focusing on those4 and 5 percent thresholds, despite a different assumption about thedollar exchange rate. When looked at it in terms of a growth patternof say, 2-3/4 percent, just to pick a number out of the air, that'stelling us that we're at the point where we've got to pay for some ofour past sins. If we have faster growth we're going to have moreinflation and we're going to have less external adjustment. And when-26-7/7/87I look at that growth pattern for next year of, say, 2-3/4 percent, Ithink it's about the best we can possibly hope for.MR. PARRY. What kind of interest rate increase do you havein that forecast?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It's really quite modest, Bob. Idon't have the numbers.MR. PARRY. Modest?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes. That's partly because byassumption the exchange rate is unchanged.MR. PARRY. But the higher inflationary rate doesn't feedthrough.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. This is kind of a mechanicalexercise; not in any material way, no.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Yes. My comments can be brief, Mr. Chairman,primarily because for all practical purposes we're right where thestaff forecast is--for 1988 at least. We're slightly less optimisticfor the remainder of this year; rather than the 3 percent, we seesomething more like 2-1/2 percent. We question whether there's quitethat much strength there. We do see a little price pressure for nextyear--not anything particularly great, but slightly higher prices. Onbalance, we pretty much agree with the staff forecast that was justgiven.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Melzer.MR. MELZER. I want to pick up on Bob Parry's theme, using amoney-driven model and extending the debate about what money isgrowing at right now. Just extending the present growth rate--whichfor this purpose we assumed to be 8 to 10 percent in M1--into 1988produced what I would consider unsatisfactory results, with thedeflator getting up to 5-1/2 percent by the fourth quarter of 1988.So, in coming up with our projections, we assumed a further degree ofrestraint in 1988 vis-a-vis 1987, which I guess, Bob, would reallytranslate into another way of looking at your interest rateassumption. The net result was that, basically, in 1987 we tend to beat the high end of the [Committee member's ranges] with a 7-1/4percent nominal growth rate--3 percent real and 4-1/4 percentdeflator. But then in 1988 we're more in the median area with 7percent nominal, 2-1/2 percent real and 4-1/2 percent on the deflator.But we found, really, the same thing using another type of model.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Our outlook is quite similar to the forecast thatBob Forrestal gave just a moment ago; namely, we're really very muchin sync with the staff with regard to 1987 but our 1988 number is 3percent. The difference, as I alluded to earlier, is in theconsumption area; in each of the three categories of consumption wehave a higher level of growth than the staff has in its forecast. The-27-7/7/87services number seems awfully low, certainly by comparative standardswith what we've had over the last few years. And we really wonder ifthat's realistic. So that's an area of difference. Our inflationnumbers are somewhat higher but not much higher than the staffforecast, based principally on the export or the trade side. We feelthat higher import prices are going to work their way through to agreater extent than in the forecast that the staff gave.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.MR. STERN. As far as the real economy and real growth areconcerned, my own view is very similar to the Greenbook numbers; Ithink that may be the most likely outlook. But as I suggestedearlier, if I were to use something like Mike's interest rateassumptions, I think I would get something that would be considerablyweaker. Indeed, some of our more formal models suggested that thatwould be the case as well. On the other side of the coin, and reallysort of putting the dilemma before us, I think the staff hasappropriately raised concerns about the price outlook and inflationarypressures as the months and quarters pass here. Again, our moreformal models suggested that, if anything, those pressures must cometo fruition more quickly and somewhat more severely than the Greenbookforecast and my own judgmental view of how things are likely tounfold. So, I think we are facing some unpleasant choices.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody else feel compelled to saysomething? If not--you feel compelled to say something?MR. ANGELL. No, I don't feel compelled.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't want to--MR. ANGELL. No, I thought you were stopping the process.Right now I understand you want to eat lunch.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'd rather eat lunch with everybodyhaving talked on this subject before lunch so we don't return to itafter lunch.MR. JOHNSON. Issue complete.MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that there's more assuredness, asI read it, in the 1988 numbers than I quite feel. I'm somewhat moreoptimistic in regard to the rate of wage pattern change than the staffforecast. But I hasten to add that I believe that if you wait untilyou do get the wage inflation change that accompanies the staffforecast then it's too late not to have a price impact from that. SoI have a very strong resistance to creating an environment in whichthose wage patterns might develop as the staff and some of the rest ofyou seem to be indicating. It seems to me, if you look at the wagepatterns over the entire decade of the 1980s, that you do see a ratherslow, gradual, moderation of wage patterns. And when you look at thekinds of interest rates and unemployment rates that have existed, itseems to me that it takes more of a movement of the actualunemployment rate compared to the assumed natural rate to jar wagepatterns out of the existing mold. So I would expect there to besomewhat more delay; consequently, it seems to me that there is somewindow of opportunity to bring price pressures more in line before a-28-7/7/87wage adjustment takes place. But I am grateful to the staff forcontinuing to indicate to me the danger of this because I don't wantit to happen.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I don't have too much to add. The numbers Ihad in mind for 1987 and 1988, at least in terms of real and nominalGNP, and maybe even the deflator, probably are a little moreoptimistic. Overall, the [Greenbook] GNP and deflator numbers arevery close to what I had in mind. Like Governor Heller, I had aslightly different view of the financial implications of that. Butthere are so many "ifs" I really don't know the answer at all.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You had a much lower deflator number fornext year if this report is correct. In fact, you have the lowest.MR. JOHNSON. Deflator number? I had 2.7 or 2.8 percent,something like that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, 2.6 percent it says here, but--MR. JOHNSON. Okay. Well, maybe it is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And you're way down at the bottom on therate--MR. JOHNSON. All right. Maybe I was thinking more on--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Along with Governor Angell.MR. JOHNSON. Yes. Well, what does the staff have for thedeflator?MESSRS. TRUMAN AND PRELL. 3-3/4 percent.MR. JOHNSON. 3-3/4 percent? I guess it is different. Butthe main issue is that there are so many "ifs" I don't know where tostart. One story that's being told here that I think would alleviatesome of the financial implications is that we're shifting resourcesinto an area where there's a lot slack in the economy. The wholetrade area that we have growing here is one that has a large degree ofslack. We are shifting from a service base into trade-sensitivemanufacturing areas where capacity utilization rates are extremelylow. I agree that there are some sectors that are doing quite well,like paper or others like that. But basically, we're shiftingresources out of the service area toward the trade-sensitive areas;and productivity has been high in those areas. Employment growth hasbeen very small, and whether employment demands will pick up in thearea, I don't know. But, given the utilization rates and theproductivity rates consistent with those sectors, there's a goodchance that they won't increase labor demand dramatically and thatoutput will be satisfied otherwise. If that's the case, we're [not]going to be seeing the kind of wage pressures that one might expectand we may not see a big reduction in the unemployment rate associatedwith the output growth that we're forecasting. So, that's sort of myexpectation; the direction things are shifting would tend to indicate-29-7/7/87that the kind of pressures we might expect would not be as great.That's just a notion; I don't really know.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know; I would like to believethat. And if you look at just goods versus services it sounds right.But if you look at goods, I wonder whether that is a likely result.It cannot be resolved today, but if you look at it industry byindustry where is the trade improvement likely to take place? Wouldyou, in fact, find substantial amounts of slack? In some cases yesand in some cases no, I suspect. But where does the balance lie?MR. JOHNSON. Well, I think just as--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're not going to tell me right away.MR. JOHNSON. I don't know the answer. But if you justaccept the principle--which I think we've all accepted up to thispoint--that the trade-sensitive sectors have been severely damaged bythe changes in the trade imbalances, it seems to me that you have toaccept that there's slack there in reversing it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, there is in some industries; paper,for instance, is a leading example. In lumber I don't know--maybethere is and maybe there isn't.MR. JOHNSON. Well, maybe it's not true that trade has beendamaged.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It has been damaged because someindustries have contracted; and in some cases where it has beendamaged it isn't going to recover. The recovery is going to be indifferent industries than where some of the damage took place, Ithink. But if we compromise--MR. HELLER. Yes, but capital goods, autos, that whole area--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, look at it. How much capacity haveyou got on autos? I don't know.MR. ANGELL. Right.MR. JOHNSON. I'm just saying the total rate is around 79percent and that's very low. It seems to me that's got to be weightedtoward the trade-sensitive sectors.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would like to see an analysis afterlunch. Does anybody else have anything to say before lunch? If not,we'll go to lunch.[Lunch recess]MR. KOHN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just a technical question: In 1987 whatgrowth would be needed in M2 to hit the bottom of the current rangefor the year? Arithmetically, what does it take?MR. KOHN. About 7-1/2 percent.-30-7/7/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. From June to December.MR. KOHN. Yes. It would be about 6-1/2 percent on a QII-to-QIV basis. But given where we are in terms--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 7-1/2 percent brings it into a[unintelligible] 5-1/4 percent.MR. KOHN. That will bring it to 5-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 5-1/4 percent. Not just for December--MR. KOHN. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One historic question is bound to arise.What is the record in changing these targets at midyear?MR. KOHN. We have never changed an M2 or M3 target atmidyear; we have changed M1.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have changed M1.MR. KOHN. We have rebased it, we have widened the range, andwe have abandoned the range. We have done all sorts of things. Wehave never changed the M2 and M3 targets at midyear.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Stated another way, we've changed thetarget that was the most operative.MR. JOHNSON. One down, two to go.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we concentrate mostly on 1987now? Somebody commenting on 1987 might want to say something about1988 but primarily concentrate on 1987 where the choices are morelimited. We are running within the debt range, so I presume thatnobody is going to want to change the debt target. There's some biasagainst changing these things. Does anybody want to raise a bigquestion about M3? I just want to see if I can narrow this[discussion] at all. Now we might want to say something or leave openthe issue of our willingness to fall short or overshoot, or where we'dlike to be in the range, or whatever. But so far as any formal changein the ranges, we are talking about M2. Who would like to saysomething? Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, in reading this discussion of thealternatives in the Bluebook, I was struck by the difference betweenthe way some of us used to view these ranges several years ago and theway in which we are approaching them now, which seems to me to be verydifferent. In the past, some of us thought of these aggregates asintermediate targets and we selected ranges that we felt would beconsistent with progress against inflation in the context ofreasonable economic growth. And, of course, one of the advantages ofthis fairly direct relationship was that we made an announcement onthe ranges and it was reasonably clear as a signal to both the publicand Congress of what our intentions were. This present approach is, Ithink, very different from that. What we are doing now, as I thinkthe Bluebook makes very clear, is projecting a broad path of interestrates that we think will be consistent with a desirable economic-31-7/7/87outcome and then we project the ranges for the aggregates that wethink will be consistent with that interest rate path. Now, I realizethat the increased sensitivity of the aggregates to interest ratesmakes this a logical move but I worry that this approach, if we followit too slavishly, is going to lead us to deemphasize the aggregates tosuch a point that these ranges will cease to be reasonable signals tothe market as any kind of confirmation of our longer-term objectives.Thus, I would have some reservations about reducing this 1987 rangefor M2 even though I recognize that a good case can be made for doingthat on the basis of the prospective behavior of interest rates overthe next 18 months or so. I think some professionals in the marketwould clearly understand what we are trying to do; but I think therewould be a lot of other people who would not understand it. Theywould likely interpret it as a considerable move toward ease in theshort run, which seems to me to be pretty unwise, given theuncertainties regarding the overall economy and inflation. So I thinka better approach would be to leave that range unchanged and stateexplicitly that there is a possibility that it may be appropriate tocome in under the range if the recent trends in velocity continue.If you want me to go on to 1988 I would say that I would takealternative II, which would reduce all the ranges. If we do that,though, I think we ought to have a sentence, which I would be glad tosuggest if anybody has any sympathy with this, to explain therationale behind why we are reducing these ranges--that the furtherreductions are going to be required over time if we are going toextend the recent progress we have made against inflation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can get back to M2 in 1988 in time.Mr. Parry.MR. PARRY. Well, I will confine my remarks to 1987 and M2.I think that there is a compelling reason to reduce that range.Projections that I have seen, including the Board staff's, wouldindicate that the growth is going to be about 4-1/2 to 5 percent. Ifindeed that is what the growth is likely to be, why don't we changethe range? And 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent makes a lot of sense to me.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think we ought to staywith the historical precedent that we have established and not move M2at midyear. First of all, I am not really concerned very much aboutthe shortfall in M2 that we have had. The indicators suggest that theexpansion is not really in any kind of jeopardy and our discussionthis morning, I think, confirms that. Also, it seems to me that tochange the range now would suggest a degree of precision that I don'tthink we really have. So I would not be in favor tinkering with M2 atthis point. I would rather explain it; and I think it can beexplained in terms of a period of slower growth after a period of morerapid growth. And perhaps even more importantly, it could also besaid that the growth was too rapid in the past. So again, I wouldleave M2 exactly where it is for 1987.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I would favor leaving the target for 1987 theway it is. It seems to me that it's better to perceive the targets as7/7/87being what you are trying for and subsequently, if reasons cause youto miss, to miss. I would rather explain the miss than have newtargets. Having a new target almost gives you the notion that it ismore important. And if you choose that new target of 4-1/2 to 7-1/2percent, it is entirely possible that conditions would be such that7-1/2 percent would be too fast a growth path. So I think it would beconfusing, non-helpful, and unnecessary.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You confused me a bit. Let me ask you aquestion. I don't remember your exact words, but [the thrust wasthat] they are real targets and we don't change them but explain if weare going to miss them. Are you really going to try to make it [intothe range] by not changing them?MR. ANGELL. No, I would not at this point, unlessdevelopments in the economy gave us a clearer signal than we now have.I would not try for the 7-1/2 percent [second-half] growth path itwould take to get there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not try for the 7-1/2 percent?MR. ANGELL. I would not try.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You don't really consider it a target inthat sense. I am just trying to clarify your view.MR. ANGELL. I would consider it the best target we knew howto come up with in February of 1987. To try to adjust the target[unintelligible] the targets in my view. It was the best indicationat that time of what we should have. And I think we've learned withM1 that there are conditions under which one better not try to alter--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are not arguing to make 5-1/2 percenta minimum at this point.MR. ANGELL. That is correct.MR. PARRY. Do you think that is the best target today?MR. ANGELL. Well, I would prefer that we would havesomething in our language. As you may remember, in March we chose thewords 6 percent or less [for the March through June period]. We canhave a short-run range as an appropriate signal in the market thatdoes not necessarily have to move growth back within the long-runtarget range.MR. PARRY. But if you thought that the best target was 5-1/2to 8-1/2 percent before, and now six months later you think that it issomething lower--which I think most people do even though they saydon't change the target--why wouldn't you want to communicate that?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The whole issue is--and Mr. Kohn, this isa question that you can answer--have we ever before said explicitlythat we have this target but we expect to come in below it or aboveit?MR. PRELL. We did in the early 1980s, I believe. We wereunder the M1 range, and probably ended up---33-7/7/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have often said the low end or the highend, or whatever. I am asking have we ever said we expect to end upabove or below the range.MR. KOHN. That, specifically, I don't know. However, M1last year is an exception.MR. JOHNSON. Let me ask: One would have to look back at theFebruary record, but I thought we had qualified our target by sayingit was interest sensitive; we said something about the fact that ifcertain conditions developed, we might expect a more appropriate rangeto be--. Maybe I am wrong about that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We simply said it was interest sensitive.I don't remember the exact words, but we said something aboutparticularly at the beginning of this year, which I just have norecollection of. It bears upon this question of whether we would morereadily or not change the target. I ought to know; I don't recall.MR. ANGELL. Finally, I would say if we choose to change thetarget, why 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent? It would seem to me at this pointthat that might be a higher path than we would want to use. I am notpositive but perhaps a 3-1/2 percent growth path in M2 should betolerated under certain conditions. So, I don't want to change it.If we changed it now to 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent then I would feelmore--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then you would feel more compelled to tryto meet the 4-1/2 which you may not want to meet.MR. ANGELL. That is right.MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, I am looking back over the M2 and M3targets, relative to where we were in June when we considered them.There is only one other year in which we were substantially away. Inother cases we've been less than a point or so away and very wellcould have said something, as Mr. Prell indicated, around--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have often said we expected it to behigher or lower within the target. But I don't recall offhand oursaying, though we might have--MR. BOEHNE. I think we have at times used the word "near"--indicating that we expected to be near the upper end or near thebottom end, with "near" meaning we could be a little out of the rangeor a little within.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who else wants to talk about thesubstance? Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I would opt to retain the rangesfor 1987. In listening to Don Kohn, and if I read the Bluebookcorrectly, the reason that we would be at or below the range is theanticipation that interest rates will rise. If interest rates remainat current levels or somewhat lower, then I believe the projection isthat we would come within the ranges established in February. Idon't---34-7/7/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that correct?MR. KOHN. I think we would just about make it. It makesabout a 2 percentage point difference in our second-half growth.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With the current levels of interest rates?MR. KOHN. At the current levels of interest rates. It wouldbe a close call but, at least if we believe the differences in themodels, the interest elasticity in the models say it will be--MR. PARRY. You say it will be at 5-1/2 percent or close to5-1/2 percent?MR. KOHN. Just around 5-1/2 percent.MR. GUFFEY. My point is that if we change the ranges now tolower them, it does imply that we believe interest rates will riseover the next six months. I am not prepared to make that kind ofassumption.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I would not change the ranges hereat midyear; most of the reasons have been given. One other thing doesoccur to me: it seems that if we did, say, want to go to alternativeII, it would limit us somewhat as to what we were going to do for1988. If we do the midyear correction, the change would imply someprecision; I would rather wait and make that judgment. In the finalanalysis, looking out to 1988 and given my view of the economy for thesecond half of this year, I would not want to do anything that wouldgive a signal that would imply possibly higher interest rates. So Iwould leave it alone.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I would leave it alone. I don't think it's abig issue. Frankly, I am pretty close and could go either way.Whether we lower it or keep it the same, I doubt very much that it isgoing to have much impact on our policy decisions, because I suspectthat our policy is going to be much more dependent upon foreignexchange markets and the domestic economy and considerations like thatrather than the range. I would keep it the same and just indicatethat it will be near the bottom and be a little vague as to whether itcould go outside the range or stay in by a margin.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.MR. STERN. I have a mild preference for just leaving it atthe 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent range. At this point I am not troubled bythe shortfall. The only other thought I would add is that if, as atechnical matter, we are troubled by the prospective slowing, we mightsimply broaden the range to something like 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent onthe grounds that that is all we are doing, broadening it. It reallyhas no other significance. It would raise the probability that M2will come out within it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Johnson.-35-7/7/87MR. JOHNSON. I don't think I would change the range either.I would leave it, mainly because I think it does imply some interestrate forecast. If interest rates stay where they are then this targetis probably appropriate. And not knowing exactly what the course [ofinterest rates] is going to be at this point--that is more of a seriesof short-term policy decisions--I don't see any point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Melzer.MR. MELZER. I would leave it the same as well. I agree withEd Boehne, [unintelligible] I don't think it is a particularly goodintermediate policy guide. We know it is not how we are going to runpolicy. And looking at it on a long-term basis, it looks to me likevelocity growth has been essentially zero over a long period of time.That would be consistent with our GNP forecast for the year; it wouldfall right about in the middle of a 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent range. Andfinally, I think this signal effect point that Roger Guffey and ManleyJohnson raised is also an important one. I don't think that this isnecessarily a time when we want to send a signal that we're somehowtightening up policy further. The recent actions have gained a lot ofcredibility in terms of the willingness of this group to respond topressures. Those pressures don't seem to be on the table right now,so why send that signal and potentially destabilize things?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. For once, I agree with everything that has beensaid so far, more or less.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. I don't think this is a world-shaking issue, butI have a slight preference for a change to a lower range. We have anumber of times gone before the [Congressional] Committee when we havebeen in a little embarrassing position of having the targets,particularly M1, running over the top. It seems to me we might pickup a couple of minor credibility points by revising the M2 guidelinesdown. I don't see any harm that could come from it. So I say, whynot?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Well, for all the reasons stated, I am in favorof maintaining the current range. The only thing I might say that isslightly different is that I think there is a message effect in allthis. I think the economic results have been and look to be prettygood. A change in the range might imply some kind of policy changeand I don't favor that. On top of it all, it is an awkward time to beconsidering change.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I'll be brief. I favor maintaining the ranges ofalternative I.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.-36-7/7/87VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'd keep the range, too. What Iwould be prepared to say is that, in a context in which velocity wascontinuing to [rise], I would be willing to tolerate a shortfall.MR. HENDRICKS. I would leave it the same for all the reasonsthat have been stated and perhaps one that has not quite been stated.And that is that [given the precedent] of not doing it at midyear inthe past, as I understand it, I think we might confuse the marketunduly and unnecessarily and perhaps send mixed signals that could becounterproductive.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not sure I understand the signalargument. I think it depends on what we say, not whether we change.If we said nothing and didn't change the target the presumption in themarket would have to be that we were going to ease.MR. JOHNSON. It seems to me that seeing the same targetwould leave the understanding that at the current level of interestrates we would get back to the target by the end of the year.MR. KOHN. There are some odds on that.MR. JOHNSON. That's the best guess.MR. KOHN. Less than a 100 percent.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, but that is your best guess.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. His best guess is that it's going to be insome range of outcome that is barely at the bottom of the target andthat to be safe we would reduce the target.MR. JOHNSON. Well, it all depends. If the implication isthat we are just reducing the target to respond to interest ratelevels in the past, that is one explanation. If that is theexplanation then I feel less uncomfortable about it. But anotherplausible explanation is that you expect interest rates to rise in thefuture. It would depend on which one of those we would use--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to decide what to say. I wouldnot say we are reducing the range because we expect interest rates togo up. That would not be suitable. In fact--MR. JOHNSON. We expect an increase in velocity.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Over the year as a whole, given what hashappened, given where we are, and so forth--MR. JOHNSON. I think some people would read through that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, why don't we return to this issue ofwhat we say. Let's look at the next issue, with a bigger range [ofoptions] being displayed before us.MR. JOHNSON. For 1988 I'd select alternative II. I think itis important to continue to give the signal that we are adjusting theranges to move toward price stability and I think that all of those-37-7/7/87ranges are appropriate for what we expect for nominal GNP next yearwith some continued resistance against inflation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You would be explicit. You are sayingalternative II is lower than--. No, we haven't set any tentativerange.MR. JOHNSON. The only thing I would say is that I mightfavor just a 5 to 8 percent range on M2 instead of a full one pointreduction to 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent. I might be a little morecomfortable with 5 to 8 percent rather than 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. 5 to 8 percent is alternative II,isn't it?MR. ANGELL. No, alternative II is 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. That's exactly where I would come out, Mr.Chairman. I think it is very important that we send a message to thepublic that we are still committed to the fight against inflation. Wehave had that inflation this year and I think the markets need to knowthat we are not going to validate that. But having said that, I wouldbe a little reluctant to send too strong a signal--which alternativeII implies to me--that we would foresee a need to tightenaggressively. I think the middle ground of reducing it about one halfpercentage point, which is typical of what we have done in otheryears, would be appropriate. So, I would like to go with 5 to 8percent.MR. KEEHN. Could I ask: What is our record of reducing theranges over the last few years? Have we tended to move about 1/2point?MR. KOHN. Yes. The Committee has reduced them nearly everyyear, and more often than not by a half point. In 1984, M1 and M2ranges were reduced by one full percentage point, but usually it hasbeen one half point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I like alternative II as it stands. It is truethat for most recent years we have reduced it by a half point. But Ithink this time we have a good technical reason for going to a fullpoint reduction and I would take advantage of it because some years wemay not be able to reduce it at all.MR. ANGELL. I'd vote with Governor Johnson and PresidentForrestal for the 5 to 8 percent because it does send a signal. Andit does give us a chance in January or February, when we reconsiderthis, to come back to the lower number. I would be very happy ifconditions were such next winter that we would want to go ahead andtake the range down another half point. But I would hate to take itdown a full point now and have to bring it back a half point nextwinter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.-38-7/7/87MR. BOYKIN. Alternative II is where I would be. I have apreference for going down the half point, although I am not totallyhung up on it. I could go with a point, but my preference would bethe half point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Parry.MR. PARRY. I would favor alternative II as it is, mainlybecause the kind of growth rates of the aggregates that we see fornext year are consistent with that. As a matter of fact, if one wereto look at the projections more precisely, growth of M2 is at thatlower end of 4-1/2 percent and one could even argue for a slowergrowth. I don't know, but perhaps the projections of those who aresupporting 5 to 8 percent do have 6-1/2 percent growth of M2 in theirforecasts. I just find that difficult to see.MR. JOHNSON. It all depends. If you have stable interestrates next year, you've got--MR. PARRY. But if you have stable interest rates whatinflation rates do you have?MR. JOHNSON. Well, I don't know.MR. PARRY. That's sort of the critical question though,isn't it?MR. JOHNSON. Well, no. I think the point, once again, isthat we can't control precisely the mix of nominal GNP. You have tohave some idea of what kind of nominal it would allow for and hopethat most of that growth shows up in real. Most of the determinationof the mix is structural.MR. PARRY. I think that interest rates have an effect on thereal side as well.MR. JOHNSON. Good. That's it, stable interest rates; itdepends on what you say about it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On our staff forecast, from February youwould end up with alternative III if you take [unintelligible] ascertain.MR. KOHN. If you were to center on the staff's best guess,alternative III would be more like it. Our estimates are similar toPresident Parry's estimates. We have essentially the same underlyingeconomic forces at work: a lower dollar, a little more inflation, anda little higher interest rates.MR. PARRY. What concerns me is that if one goes to thesehigher rates, one is implicitly saying "I am comfortable with thepotential for higher rates of inflation."MR. JOHNSON. No, that's not true. No.MR. PARRY. Show me the analytic work that leads you to adifferent direction.-39-7/7/87MR. JOHNSON. It depends on your interest rate scenario.MR. PARRY. But that is not independent of what happens toinflation. For example, work that the Board staff has done and workthat we have done would suggest that if you don't get those kinds ofincreases in interest rates, it has an impact on inflation. Wouldyour work show that? What if M2 rose 6-1/2 percent or to the midpointof the 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent range? What would happen to inflation?MR. KOHN. I think you essentially asked Mike that questionbefore about--MR. JOHNSON. There are too many unknowns in this equation.MR. PARRY. If there are too many unknowns, what do you do?How do you proceed?MR. JOHNSON. You've got to make some assumptions. We aremaking different assumptions.MR. HELLER. A lot depends on what happens to your Federalgovernment deficit, and obviously, the difference between what thestaff has said and what other people say.MR. PARRY. I think it is dangerous.MR. ANGELL. Bob, you see, I just want to leave room forselecting the range next January. I don't want to do it now. Why notmake the gesture that we have always made, which is a half percentagain? And then we have room to go further in January. The lastthing I want to do is to go [down] too far and then end up having toback up. I might be ready to take the 4 to 7 percent, closer toalternative III, next January.MR. JOHNSON. If interest rates rise as in the staffprojection in the end, in January we'll build that into our M2forecast for 1988. I don't think there is any doubt. We are notsaying that we wouldn't support the interest rate rise; it is just amatter of opinion about how the scenario is going to go.MR. ANGELL. I don't want to build in a possibility of aneasing signal that is inappropriate because we got the number too lownow.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. I'd also favor alternative II. I don't feelstrongly between 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent and 5 to 8 percent but I wouldhave a slight bias for the 5 to 8 percent. In July, February alwaysseems like a long time away. But this year it seems like aparticularly long time away. I would be very tentative in thelanguage for the reasons that Governor Angell has pointed out. Iwould prefer to go to the 5 to 8 percent now, and if there is room togo to 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent when we get to February, I think thatwould be the appropriate direction, as opposed to the alternativedirection.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.-40-7/7/87MR. STERN. I, too, would favor alternative II with themodification of 5 to 8 percent on M2. It seems to me that, in termsof the signal effect and working toward progress on price stability,at least at this point in time, alternative II would demonstrate thatconcern. The uncertainties in the outlook remain sufficiently largethat I would be a little reluctant to want to overdo it at this point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Hendricks.MR. HENDRICKS. Our projections follow very closely those ofthe Greenbook and as we try to lay that against our forecast, we comeup with the suggestion that interest rates can't stay where they are.And the alternative that best seems to fit our projection is reallyalternative III. So we would suggest that we make that move, whetherwe stick with it exactly the way it is put here, 7-1/2 percent orsomething in between there. Alternative II would be all right withus. But alternative III is the one that we would favor over the othertwo alternatives.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. Well, just to take advantage of the full range ofalternatives, I will vote for alternative I, primarily because thestaff's beautiful forecast failed to convince me that the economy isas strong as we would like to see it and as they suggested it is. Iam also less confident about the outlook for the economy. I wouldlike, of course, to see the strong trade turnaround, and I hope ittakes place; but I am not really convinced that it will to the extentthat they are assuming. So I would prefer to go with 5-1/2 to 8-1/2percent again, with the understanding that we have another crack atthis early next year. If I am wrong and the economy is roaring along,then certainly it can be adjusted and I don't think anything will havebeen lost. We'll have plenty of time to send signals to the markets,in my judgment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. My preference is alternative II asis. But if there was something of a consensus to go 5 to 8 percent onM2, then I would make a formal suggestion that we make the ranges forboth M2 and M3 4 to 8 percent.MR. ANGELL. Make it 4 to 8 percent, Jerry, did you say?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. My preference is alternative II asis. What I said is, if there was a consensus to make the M2 range 5to 8 percent, I would then suggest that we make both M2 and M3 4 to 8percent.MR. MELZER. Don, what would you say is the trend velocity inM2 right now? I threw out zero before as the trend velocity growth.Is that fair?MR. KOHN. I think that is as close as we can estimate.MR. MELZER. One of the things that concerns me a little isthat we get down to ranges that embrace trend velocity growth andfactor in what we expect in nominal GNP and the ranges roughly bracket-41-7/7/87that. If we start to take into account short-term velocity behaviorto drop the ranges down even further, that's almost building in thefact that at some point down the road we are going to have to jackthem back up and move them around. Maybe this is a historicalquestion in terms of what the tradition is. But I would tend to viewthese, particularly for M2 and M3, as much longer-term. I would becomfortable, therefore, embracing a trend velocity concept togetherwith a nominal GNP forecast; and that would lead me roughly to the 5to 8 percent range for M2, which is what I would favor. I think thereis a danger if we get these ranges down so far that, first of all, weare almost making it necessary to project interest rates to set thetargets because of the sensitivity of velocity to interest rates.Also, later we might get into the situation Wayne described where justbecause we change our outlook and interest rate forecast, we'rejacking them up and sending a false signal.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Kelley.MR. KELLEY. I would just like to go on record as saying thatI prefer alternative II with the 5 to 8 percent range on M2 forbasically many of the reasons that I've heard already expressed here;no others occur to me.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. I would be hard pressed between alternatives Iand II, but with the 5 to 8 percent modification I would go foralternative II.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there anyone we haven't heard fromhere? Mr. Morris, then Mr. Guffey.MR. MORRIS. I would go for alternative II as written, Mr.Chairman. I don't have the concern that Tom Melzer expressed that weare going to lock ourselves into a range for M2 that is going to betoo low. I can't foresee in the years ahead when we would wantnominal GNP growing faster than 7-1/2 percent. So that doesn'ttrouble me.MR. GUFFEY. I would opt for alternative II with the 5 to 8percent, simply because I've been persuaded to keep a little of thepowder dry. If indeed in February alternative II of 4-1/2 to 7-1/2percent looks appropriate, we would have an opportunity to adjust itat that time. I wouldn't use up all my ammunition in midyear when itdoesn't mean a whole lot for the next year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I indicated earlier at the time Iwas talking about 1987 that I would be in favor of alternative II. Istill feel that way.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is one peculiarity about ending upwith 5 to 8 percent [for 1988] if we say we are sticking with thispresent [1987] target which we expect, with a high degree ofprobability, to come in below. Are we saying we expect 1988 to behigher than 1987? What is the implication of that?-42-7/7/87MR. HELLER. We have had that situation many times before inreverse--where we have overshot and then we still adopted a lowergrowth range and there wasn't necessarily any change in policy impliedby that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm going to make a little case. Ithink these are too high. What do we want to do? We have an outlookhere which is always uncertain in real terms. It is quitesatisfactory; it's about the best you could hope for if you believethe staff analysis of a slow growth domestically and a pickupexternally. Nobody has discussed the point that Mr. Prell madeinitially that we had quite slow--people like to call it sluggish--growth and a decline of one half percentage point or more in theunemployment rate in the past year. I am not sure we could standvigorous growth and a decline of 2 percentage points in theunemployment rate in the next year. I don't know how you resolve thatlittle dilemma.It seems to me that it is perfectly evident that the forecastthe staff has for prices--though I am not sure that it is right--leaves us in a totally unsatisfactory position a year from now, withthe inevitability of a sizable recession if we are going to have anychance of restoring price stability. Once that gets built into thewage outlook, it is just a question of when; it is going to be messy.I am not sure that is the outlook. I find it a little difficult tothink that the prices are going to be that high with the wages at themoment being as good as they are. But certainly, the recent evidenceis not very good in terms of what is happening in prices despite theperformance on wages. I would agree with what you said, Mike, thatonce it has broken the wages, you're dead. And a lot of hard workwill come unwound. What can we do about it? We only have one tool.For one thing, I would play for stability of the dollar, unlike thestaff forecast. And I would not take a further aggravation on theinflation rate or risk there and hope that a further decline in thedollar is not needed to produce the uncertain trade effect. I wouldcertainly work on the budget deficit. There's not much we can doabout it, but at least we get some protection on the growth ofdomestic consumption as well as on the financial side and interestrates. I worry about minimum wages and all that stuff. Now, when itcomes to monetary policy, I would be cautious. I think it would be abig mistake not to be cautious. We have talked about a half percenthere; it's imagery, but that is where I would come out. I think it isvery hard to present a suitably cautious outlook without changing therange this year. I suppose we can decide that we will probably comein low and we are willing to. But we are going to have a higher ratenext year that encompasses a more or less satisfactory nominal GNPgrowth but assumes a totally unsatisfactory price level. That is myspeech for the afternoon.MR. ANGELL. If you took one of these--the 1987 or 1988ranges--and you changed one, which one would you prefer to have lower?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For 1987 it is so much a matter of the waywe present it; I think it makes very little difference. If we say weare not in the practice of changing the range--which isn't quite truewhen we are looking at M1--and we are going to keep the range but wereally expect to come in low, Mr. Proxmire will say: "Why the heckdidn't you change the range?" If I were testifying, I would be hard7/7/87pressed to answer that question. I would mumble that the Committeedidn't want to but nonetheless we think it is going to come in low andeventually we would go on to the next question. I can survive that.I think the way we're sending the message is more in the 1988 rangesthan [unintelligible], providing that we say we are willing to come inlow in 1987. If we are not going to come in low in 1987 then we areactually saying--these are going to get quite exaggerated--come hellor high water, we are going to get it up in the second half of theyear with the implication that that takes a more aggressive easingstance for which we're going to vote.MR. ANGELL. But let's suppose there is one chance in fivethat the economy in the third quarter and the fourth quarter will belower than our estimate. Now, I don't think that's what is going tohappen. But I don't feel certain enough that I am willing to make abig stand over a 1988 target range at this point, have the economycome in weak, and then have to reverse. That is, with 6-1/2 percentnominal, one can have very modest inflation--less than 4 percent;that's very plausible.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Barely less than 4 percent. In GNP, Imake an assumption, and maybe its wrong, that you cannot have theeconomy grow 3 percent from here on out through the next 18 months,just based upon recent experience. The unemployment rate is going tobe 4-1/2 to 5 percent, which I think is going [down] too fast on theunemployment rate in terms of the future stability of the economy.Therefore, if it can't be 3 percent real and it is 6-1/2 percentnominal, we are going to see 3-1/2 percent on the GNP deflator and4-1/2 percent on the consumer price index.MR. JOHNSON. Once again, it depends upon your view of howthis whole scenario develops. If the growth is in the trade sensitiveareas where there has been a lot of slack and the employment gains arenot expected to be strong, then there might not be a reduction in theunemployment range consistent with 2-1/2 to 3 percent growth [in realGNP]. I think that is a perfectly plausible scenario. To remaincompetitive you want to maintain those productivity gains.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I grant you that; I hope that is whathappens. We can get reasonable growth consistent with sufficientlyless inflation than is in this forecast. If we can't we're introuble.MR. ANGELL. Paul, I very strongly share your view on what,in my view, is the most important issue and that is whether or not weare ready to have the dollar sustained.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's one of the issues.MR. ANGELL. Because it seems to me that we will quite likelyhave another period in which the testing of that will occur. But Iwould prefer not to have to test the dollar declining in an economythat is particularly weak. It seems to me that if we have an economythat is particularly weak and then we have a declining dollar, that isindeed the worst of all worlds. And so, I feel strongly andsympathize with you in regards to the dollar. But I want to be readywith ammunition to do the job when that needs to be done. I am notsure whether this is that significant an issue---44-7/7/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For the next few months, I don't thinkthis is an issue at all. That we will get to in a minute.SPEAKER(?). Mr. Chairman, one of the reasons I suggestedalternative I was that I thought it would be easier for you to explainto the public. You are saying to me that for 1987 alternative II, inyour judgment, would be much easier to explain, I think.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that is incidental. It is easierto explain at first blush, but we can do either one for 1987. I thinkif we've got a real [unintelligible] what we say for 1987. It's onething to say we are staying with the range, but we are perfectlyprepared to come in below it if that is the way things work out. Orwe say we are sticking to the range and mean it.MR. BLACK. If we don't go with alternative II, I think weneed to go with alternative III for 1988.MR. ANGELL. I don't want us to lower the ranges for thisyear and then say we mean it. Because then we get into a situationthat requires another move.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're saying lower the range for thisyear? Or do you mean lower the range now for next year?MR. ANGELL. No, I said this year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what the arithmetic is. I amnot arguing about it. I don't much care whether it is lowered thisyear; it's a little awkward to explain. If we didn't lower it thisyear, from now to the end of the year at what rate of speed would M2have to grow to exceed the 7-1/2 percent?MR. KOHN. To exceed 7-1/2 percent would probably take 11-1/2percent. It takes 7-1/2 percent [from now until year end] to get5-1/2 percent. I assume it would take about 11-1/2 percent to get7-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 11-1/2. I don't think it will exceed theupper end of the range, whatever we do.MR. ANGELL. Of course.MR. HELLER. There is really no expectation that we shouldchange the range. The world isn't waiting for us to make a decisionon changing or not changing. We have never changed an M2 or an M3target. So, if we let the target--MR. MORRIS. Yes, but we have never had an M2 or M3 targetcome in this much below, or even above, the range.MR. PARRY. One thing I don't understand is what you thinkthe interpretation of not changing it would be. Wouldn't not changingit indicate--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Most people said don't change this year;that is what everybody [who has a vote] said. Now, what I don't-45-7/7/87know--we have to return to what we mean by that. What do we want theexplanation to be? We are not changing it this year. We think it isinappropriate to change in the middle of the year unless there is avery strong reason. But, given what has happened in the first half ofthe year, we anticipate that it is quite likely that we could come inbelow the bottom of the range. I think that is what I heard mostpeople say.MR. KEEHN. There is a high level of uncertainty. Ourresults so far have been quite different than one might expect; thatlevel of uncertainty continues and that's how the rest of the yearmight play out.MR. ANGELL. I would say that the price level pressuresbecame such that it was appropriate for us to undertake policies thatresulted in coming in under the range because of our high priority onprice level stability.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When you put it that way, the nextquestion would be: What is that level of prices that gives you that?I would be a little more vague.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I suggest "be prepared to tolerate."I think that is a little different from saying we expect. We would beprepared to tolerate it coming in somewhat below.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible.]VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I would start with velocity: Ifvelocity of M2 continues to [rise], as in the first half of the year--MR. JOHNSON. It seems to me that what you want to say is:given our modest tightening actions to deal with the inflationarypressures that have built up, interest rates have strengthened some;that has put some upward pressure on M2 velocity and M2 has weakenedsomewhat relative to the targets. Assuming no further changes, Idon't know what you say about future policy, but [unintelligible] it'sstill plausible. I would want to say it is still plausible that wewill reach the current target. It is doable.MR. ANGELL. "Tolerate" is a good word.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. "Tolerate" leaves you open to hitthe target.MR. BLACK. I am not sure that the best choice for 1987 isn'tin part determined by what we do in the short run, because if we arenot going to send a signal of any action there, then it makes it alittle easier to explain no change for 1987. If we decide to takesome action, I think it becomes a little more difficult to maintainthe status quo for 1987.MR. ANGELL. It just seems to me that commodity prices andthe dollar this year might once again be a problem. And in thatcircumstance, that 3 percent might be a better growth path for M2 thanany number that we are willing to put out there. I would prefer tosend a signal that we have decided to come down in a systematicmanner--we want to come down a half a point per year. I would fit-46-7/7/87that in with what Tom Melzer had to say: that that is gradualismregarding the long run. In the short run, the short-run variations invelocity may cause us to tolerate growth occasionally below the ratesin the ranges.MR. HELLER. Lowering the targets this year, I think, wouldbe interpreted as a signal that we want to be tighter than we werebefore. And with the dollar rising at the present time, I see verylittle reason to tighten right now. Why do it at the presentjuncture?MR. PARRY. By lowering it you wouldn't be tightening. Whywould you be tightening?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are we talking about--1987?MR. HELLER. 1987.MR. PARRY. Why would you be tightening?MR. HELLER. Because now you are saying that I am going tochange my ranges; I am going to be tighter than I intended to bebefore.MR. PARRY. You mean you would adopt a different borrowingstarget as a result of that?MR. FORRESTAL. It would signal that.MR. HELLER. If we suddenly announced lower targets--MR. KELLEY. Which we have no history of doing.MR. HELLER. Which we have never done before, right? Then wesuddenly give a signal that we want to be tighter than we were before.MR. KELLEY. It would seem to me that if we do announce areduction to 4-1/2 percent, that would be immediately perceived asbeing the target that we are after.MR. ANGELL. We found with M1, with the interest ratesensitivity of its velocity, that under non-normal conditions we werenot able to forecast what its target path would be and we had to endup abandoning it. It seems to me that we don't want to forceourselves into this preciseness for M2 that might later cause us tosay: Well, we just can't hit it at all.MR. BLACK. I am repeating myself, but I really do think thiswould come to a head if we would address the short-run target. Ithink it makes the long-run a bit easier because we either send asignal or we don't and that strengthens or weakens the case for themost favored alternative.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we need to reopen [unintelligible]1987. I need to reopen what we say about it. There was aconsiderable feeling ranging from extremely mild to strong that weshouldn't change the 1987 range. That leaves open what we say aboutit. Have people who didn't want to change it before changed their-47-7/7/87mind or do I assume that we are going to keep the same 1987 range?I'm leaving open for right now what we are going to say about it.SEVERAL. Keep the range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't hear anybody recanting. Now whatare we going to say about it? We are not going to say at the oneextreme that we are really going to make it period. Nobody is sayingthat.MR. GUFFEY. Do we have to say anything at all about the nextsix months and the fact that we are coming in at or near the bottom oreven maybe below the bottom? I don't think the market perceives thatwe are going to take any action at this table to try to come withinthe M2 range within the next six months.MR. JOHNSON. I think that we can make that clear.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we've got to say something there.It will be rather obvious if we say nothing and we are at whateverlevel we're at.MR. JOHNSON. It seems to me that we can say, assuming nochange in current policy, that it is plausible that we could stillcome within the M2 target. That is what the staff says.MR. BOEHNE. Why not say that some of the same velocityproblems that have affected M1 in recent years have spilled over to M2and that the level of uncertainty is such that we can't be all thatprecise and would tolerate being near the bottom of the range?MR. JOHNSON. Okay, tolerate.MR. PARRY. Could I ask a question? Don, what was theforecast of M2 in February?MR. KOHN. About 7 percent, near the midpoint of the range,assuming no change in interest rates from the levels that prevailed atthat time.MS. SEGER. It was 7 percent for the year? Is that what yousaid?MR. KOHN. Yes. Assuming no changes in interest rates.MR. MORRIS. The big capital gains tax payments--was that afactor in the slow growth of M2 and M3?MR. KOHN. If it was, I think it was very, very small. Itwould have had to have been a factor boosting the fourth quarterlevel. That is, people realized the capital gains; they put it in thefourth quarter. By the time you get to June--MR. BOEHNE. We were high last year; we are low this year.We have to have a lot of tolerance.MR. ANGELL. Well, Mr. Chairman, it seems to me thatexplaining this is an opportunity for us to say something about the7/7/87recent actions that we took in order to provide for more price levelstability. The dollar was under pressure and that resulted in marketforces taking interest rates higher than they otherwise would havebeen. And that increased the probability that we might undershoot thelower boundary somewhat.MR. JOHNSON. What did we say at mid-term 1981 on M1? Wewere below targets then and we didn't hit the range by the end of theyear.MR. KOHN. The Committee indicated its expectation thatgrowth in M1, adjusted for shifts in NOW accounts, over the year as awhole would be near the lower end of its annual range. Both of thebroader aggregates on the other hand--and this was the instance whenM3 was above the range--had been running at the top or somewhat abovethe upper ends of the ranges. Given their behavior the Committee saidtheir growth might be toward the upper part of their ranges for theyear as a whole.MR. JOHNSON. At least M3 is in the range.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We had shift-adjusted M1; that wasthe NOW account year with all the controversy. The measured M1 wasactually below the range, but the measure we were using adjusted forNOW accounts and was within the range as I recall.MR. JOHNSON. We could use similar language. Is that why wedidn't change the range on Ml?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What language did you use? I am not quiteclear on what language we are supposed to use at this point. Are wesupposed to say passively that we "may be near" or "tolerate"? And ifwe say tolerate, under what conditions?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Again, what's wrong with linking itto velocity?MR. BOEHNE. We're in a situation in which velocity continuesto be high.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The velocity figure that we don't knowuntil the quarter is over.MR. BLACK. I think this is a dispute about how we explainsomething that we almost all agree on.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not even sure it is a dispute. Ihaven't got it clear in my mind as to what should be said at thispoint.MR. ANGELL. That is what I was seeking: the way we canexplain it the best.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am going to ask the staff. Do they knowwhat to say at this point?MR. PRELL. We are going to try to reflect the discussion.-49-7/7/87MR. BLACK. They would eliminate the System!VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We could say: "The Committee expectsthat M2 will come in at or slightly below the bottom of the range.However, if velocity were to continue to [rise], the Committee alsorecognizes that it might tolerate somewhat slower growth."MR. MORRIS. [Unintelligible] I think there is some languageon page 16 of the Bluebook that says "The depressing influence of theprevious increase in market rates should begin to wear off reasonablypromptly since offering rates on many components of M2 seem already tohave adjusted to the current structure of market rates." Theimpression is it's a temporary phenomenon or at least is thought tobe.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't believe this.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Previously someone said that it is prettyclear, or we expected to come in around, about, below or whatever. Ifthat is what you want to say, that is fine.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, that's what I--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Put in some other qualifying words aboutwhat is happening in the real world. I just want to be sure that iswhat you want to say.MR. ANGELL. That's not too bad. It doesn't make themonetarists angry. It doesn't make anybody angry.MR. JOHNSON. I think that is fine. We just need theexplanation for why it dipped below, which is what happened in thepast.MR. ANGELL. I don't know. I would rather have a wordslightly less emphatic than "substantially"; I'd rather leave"substantially" out. Is that page 16?MR. STERN. Why not be prepared to tolerate M2 growth at ornear, or whatever, the bottom of the range, depending on some of thethings we usually use--like performance of the dollar, the inflationoutlook, the real economy. It seems to me that that's really where weare. Assuming those variables more or less behave themselves, we justare not going to get all that worked up about M2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What you're really saying is--I just wantto get this right--if it is going to come in around 5-1/2 percent,that means above or below 5-1/2 percent depending upon all these otherthings.MR. JOHNSON. Say "at or near the bottom of the range."MR. ANGELL. "Around" is a good word.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. Tentatively I think we[unintelligible]. Where are we now on the big issue of next year? Wehave lots of people who want 5 to 8 percent for both M2 and M3. Wehave some who want 6 to 9 percent. Are there any different thoughts-50-7/7/87on these ranges? Anybody on one side or the other who wants to changetheir minds? Mine is closed. Does anybody like Mr. Corrigan's 4 to 8percent?MR. KELLEY. I thought Jerry's suggestion of 4 to 8 percentwas an interesting alternative.MR. STERN. One virtue of that is it does reflect a somewhatgreater level of uncertainty, which I think is probably appropriate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody like this 4 to 8 percent?SPEAKER(?). I think it is pretty good. Yes.MR. KEEHN. Unless broadening the range to 4 percentagepoints has some meaning that would make it difficult, I think it is agood suggestion.MR. ANGELL. I would prefer 4 to 8 percent over 4-1/2 to7-1/2 percent. It seems to me it gives you more flexibility which[unintelligible]. And then if we wanted to become more precise inJanuary, as long as we didn't change the top of it, and I don't thinkwe will--that is, we may want to increase that bottom range some--Idon't think it would be that damaging.MR. HELLER. I think the 4 to 8 percent is really going toofar. First of all, it's a very, very broad range. Because then we[unintelligible] just fuzzy things over. We are not giving a realmessage there. Talking about the bottom end of the range, I disagreewith the implications of the 4 percent growth for M2, certainly fornext year. Actually, if we use the 4 percent growth as a matter ofpolicy and get an unintended velocity change, where would we be? Ifwe have anywhere near the inflation that is projected, we'd haveeither zero or 0.5 percent growth. That is all that's left for thereal economy. So 4 percent growth, I think, would be too tight; 5percent leaves some room to grow.MR. ANGELL. But we might have a condition next year, likethis year, in which we might need fuller--MR. JOHNSON. You would have to have 2-1/2 percent velocitygrowth in M2, which would be the implication of rising interest rates.That's what you would have to have to get the kind of splits you'retalking about.MR. HELLER. Yes; that's really speculative. You're lookingat the M2 velocity as it is projected on those handouts. It is almosthorizontal--just a tiny bit higher for M3, a tiny fall for [M2]. Ihave never seen anybody who can project velocity with any great degreeof confidence.MR. PARRY. I would like to ask a question about thisuncertainty issue and the 4 percentage point band. Are we suggestingthat there is a greater uncertainty because the analysis that has beenpresented by staff and others suggests there is greater uncertainty?Or are we just trying to widen the band because there is a greaterdifference of opinion and we can't fit people within a 3 percentagepoint range? I think there is a big difference.-51-7/7/87VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In making the suggestion earlier, Iwas thinking of the analysis.MR. PARRY. Nothing has been said about that.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, if I take the arguments thatMr. Kohn and his colleagues are making about the interest elasticityof M2 seriously--and I am not sure that I do--but if I did, and if Ihad an economic outlook that very much parallels Mr. Prell's economicoutlook, it is not at all difficult for me to envision circumstancesin 1988 in which M2 could be growing at quite a low rate and I wouldbe very happy. The real economy could be doing just what they aretalking about--growing at 2-3/4 percent.MR. JOHNSON. Once again, to do that you have--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Now, I don't think that that is thelikely outcome; but certainly it is quite plausible.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Much lower [unintelligible].MR. HELLER. We can ask ourselves whether 5 percent or 4percent is more appropriate in conjunction with the economic outlookthat we have presented. And push it to a [unintelligible]. You arereally talking about an outlier of an outlier there.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't think so, Bob. Again, Ithink part of the question to consider is how you judge the outlook inthe first place.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Next year, you're projecting what for M2?MR. KOHN. Around 5 percent or maybe a little under that--4-1/2 to 5 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know whether I can get a[consensus for] 4 to 8 percent. Let's just have a show of hands ofpeople who like this idea of 4 to 8 percent.MR. ANGELL. Let's ask the question to you. How do you feelabout it? Do you feel that 4 to 8 percent helps you much?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a relatively small problem. Why isthe range so large? I am not so sure about velocity.MR. STERN. That seems to me to be one of the things we havebeen confronting for the last several years now. It doesn't seem tome that that would be difficult to explain.MR. JOHNSON. The only thing I can think of is that SenatorProxmire might react to that [by saying]: Well you never reallywidened the range on M2 and M3 before; it was just M1. Now you arefocusing on M2 and you are broadening the range on M2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Historically, the range has been 2 to2-1/2 points; we got that up to 3 points. It's a little embarrassing;if you believe in these targets, it is a pretty wide range. I am not-52-7/7/87sure it is wider than, in fact, the outlook has suggested it shouldbe.MR. STERN. It is probably not as wide as the analyticshere--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We had a decline in velocity last year ofwhat?MR. KOHN. It's about 4 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 4 percent.MR. JOHNSON. If I were a Senator sitting on the BankingCommittee, it would look to me like a gradual undermining of theHumphrey-Hawkins Act.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Senator Proxmire would take that view. Idon't think the rest care.MR. ANGELL. No, I agree with that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could say we are making it 4 to 8percent now, in July, but the Committee intends to try to narrow therange next February. That is what we could say to respond to hisquestion.MR. ANGELL. Or we could say 5 to 8 percent and the Committeeis going to look at it again in February in terms of possibly loweringit again. We want to send signals.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we have three choices: 4 to 8percent is being proposed, if that appeals to anybody or most of you;we have alternative II as written, which has gotten quite a few votes;and we have alternative II as modified to 5 to 8 for both M2 and M3.Then there are further subdivisions. We could adopt that last one andsay we were going to look at it hard with the thought or reducing it,or that we would have some inclination to look at that possibilitynext February, to take Mr. Angell's variant of that. Let me just testthe three pure ones and forget about defining the third. How manyprefer 4 to 8?MR. BLACK. Which ones?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How many members? We haven't got a hugefollowing for 4 to 8 percent: five. Alternative II as written?Alternative II with the 5 to 8 percent? Well, that seems to be wherethe Committee is; so let's assume that's where we are for the moment.Let us turn to the short-term.MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, do you want to consider thedirective language that would go with that?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's return to that after we consider allthe rest. I hear that you got all this new [unintelligible]. For theshort run, the critical variable will be [unintelligible].-53-7/7/87MR. BOEHNE. Mr. Chairman, I think that we ought to stayexactly where we are. We have two-way risk again in the foreignexchange market; we have a diminution in inflationary expectations;and the real economy is going along reasonably well. And I think weought to just take things as they are and not rock the boat. I wouldbe speaking of borrowing at $500 million and language saying that weseek to maintain the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Can I carry you one step further: is [yourpreference] symmetrical on the language?MR. BOEHNE. Symmetrical.MR. BLACK. With "woulds" or "mights"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm precisely with Mr. Boehne: "B"and symmetrical.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. I agree.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I agree.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. I agree.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. I agree.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is very subtle analysis in terms ofyour--contrarySPEAKER(?). You've got them all worn out!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I agree. I don't know what to fight about now.MR. MELZER. I'll agree.MR. PARRY. So will I.MR. FORRESTAL. I will not break the pattern; I agree.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, does anybody want to express aview?MS. SEGER. Can we have a different tilt?-54-7/7/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let us resolve the language. Where isthis language? Do you give any alternative here in the directiveparagraph?MR. KOHN. No.SPEAKER(?). That's good.MR. KOHN. Not for the short run.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're going to say "seeks tomaintain the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions." Canwe make it symmetric? "Somewhat greater reserve restraint would orsomewhat lesser reserve restraint would..." Do you want it in thatorder or reverse order?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No, reverse it.MR. ANGELL. Let's not reverse it. I don't want to send anyother subtle signals.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does the sentence otherwise look allright--to people who want it symmetrical anyway? I suppose we simplyput in these numbers; we have faith in the staff. Are we[unintelligible] now? What they say is 5 and 7-1/2--we sometimes tryto avoid using those fractions. If you believe the staff we've got touse different numbers this time; I don't know whether to believe them.MR. KOHN. Sorry. You can say 5 to 7; that would encompassboth.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Have we ever used a fraction here before?I guess we have.MR. BERNARD. Yes.MR. KOHN. I guess so, but not recently.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. 7-1/2 is a nice fraction, though;it's not like--MR. BLACK. That really [balances] off very nicely between 5and 10.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Shall we say 5 and 7-1/2?MR. ANGELL. That seems to me to be somewhat expansive butthat's--. I can imagine circumstances in which 5 to 7-1/2 might be--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, this is a resource--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This follows a very low [growth] period,let me say. That's not very expansive.MR. JOHNSON. That's what's inconsistent with alternative II.-55-7/7/87MR. HELLER. I know--which is [unintelligible] the bottom ofthe range, again. Otherwise, you have a hard time explaining why wewould be able to achieve the lower end of the target cone.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, 5 percent on M2 isn't going to be inthe lower end of the target.MR. HELLER. No, you need 7-1/2 percent arithmetically inorder to be able to reach it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 7-1/2 percent for 6 months. If it grew 5percent for the next 3 months, what would you need for the final 3months--11 percent or something--to reach the bottom end of thetarget?MR. KOHN. Yes. Presumably, it would be 10 percent, withouttaking account of the compounding.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, it would be 10.MR. KOHN. Yes, but without knowing the compounding. The 5percent gets you to 4-1/2 percent--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if the 7-1/2 percent is rightforgetting about the compounding, which is limited, it is going to be10 percent.MR. JOHNSON. Well, that's 7-1/2; that's what it says.MR. KOHN. Q4 to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, but I think with the 7-1/2 percent forM2 that we get [unintelligible].MR. JOHNSON. Yes.MR. KOHN. 5 percent gets you to 4-1/2 percent in September.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It would be a little more than 10 percentbecause that's a quarterly figure.MR. KOHN. It might be less given the higher base. We'll betaking it from September, which is a higher base.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're going to find out it's going to beeven 12 percent that this implies for the last quarter; I'm not sure.MR. KOHN. It's a lot.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And for growth in M1, that's a vagueenough statement. Are we going to leave that the way it is? "Growthin M1, while picking up from recent levels" or something--. Do wewant to put something like that in there?MR. JOHNSON. Still running--MR. KOHN. March to June was 4 percent; and 4 percent isabout what we're projecting for June to September.-56-7/7/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. March to June was low.MR. KOHN. It certainly picked up from May in June but notfrom March to June.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think it makes muchdifference. If we want to be reassuring to some of our monetarists,then we could say "growth in M1, while picking up from recent levels"--which would be May and June. And that was negative?MR. ANGELL. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "M1 is expected to remain well below its[pace]"--MR. JOHNSON. "Of 1986."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Growth during 1986," I think. Do youwant to put that phrase in there?MR. ANGELL. That's fine.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The word "pace" is kind of a funny wordwhen I see it, but I know what it means. It was 6 percent last time;I guess we'll leave it then and use growth rate. We continue on with4 to 8 percent. Does anybody have any further comments? That'sstating it symmetrically with no change, the numbers or the projection[provided by the staff], and "while picking up from recent levels"inserted. Does anybody have any questions about that? Then we'll beturning to the other operational paragraphs. We'll go back to page20. What's the difference between these variants? All right. Youhave nice language for us here; I might have read that before.Variant II just has the reduction in the range. Do people like Mr.Kohn's language? It's going to save us some trouble.SPEAKER(?). Yes.SPEAKER(?). Yes. It seems pretty good.MR. BOEHNE. Good.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Where are you reading from?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The top of page 21.MR. FORRESTAL. Do we just want to say "the lower ends of therange" or do we want to indicate that growth might be somewhat below?MR. BOEHNE. It sounds like "around".CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, "around the lower end of the range"I guess means that it could be below.MR. FORRESTAL. Does it mean that?MR. KOHN. Yes."Around" means both sides.-57-MR. MORRIS(?). Sure.7/7/87MR. BLACK. Trust him, Bob. That's Boston--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you want to say aggregates or growth inM2--pin it down to one that's around the lower end of the range?MR. JOHNSON. They're both going to be "around"--MR. FORRESTAL. Being around [unintelligible], which takescare of that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They "will be in the lower halves of theirranges, particularly M2" or something.MR. JOHNSON. That's fine.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I kind of like it the way it is.SPEAKER(?). Yes.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. When it comes in, if one falls out[of the range] we did exactly what we said we were going to do.MR. HELLER. Yes. Right; one may be above and one below it.MR. ANGELL. How about that [wording within the] brackets?MR. HELLER. That's right; put it in there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's all right.MR. ANGELL. I'd rather put a period after "appropriate."MR. JOHNSON. The rest of that explanation sounds all right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think whether or not you put a periodafter "appropriate" the explanation you'd have to go on isincorporated in the bottom line of what's there.SPEAKER(?). Yes, I'd leave it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that satisfactory?SPEAKER(?) Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, where are we? On page 22. Is this abit of boiler plate at this point? Have we said this before?MR. KOHN. Well, we condensed what's in the directive rightnow. This is adapted from what the Committee put in at the lastmeeting and at the February meeting.MR. JOHNSON. What do you say to monetarists who have focusedon M1A and tried to take out the highly sensitive interest componentand still find a similar pattern--maybe even a more pronouncedpattern--in M1 growth? I think you can still use the interestsensitivity argument, but it seems to me that it may come up in thehearing; there may be some focus on M1A. Do you say take out theinterest earning accounts and you've still got a pattern like---58-7/7/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the question is likely to come upregardless, since the issue has been raised. We should have had alittle discussion of what's the matter with M1A.MR. KOHN. I tried to include something in my presentationabout velocity; that's why I had the velocity chart in there. Ourview is that, while less is wrong with M1A than is wrong with M1, it'sstill not that good an aggregate. It's still interest sensitive; muchof the trend in its velocity that's extended beyond the trend in M1velocity is a combination of offsetting propitious events, includingderegulation and interest rate declines. And in fact, its velocitytrend did break in early '85. So, I think it's useful as a monitorand probably more useful than M1; but all our work suggests it'sprobably not as useful as M2.MR. JOHNSON. Would you concentrate even further oncompensating balances of corporations and their growing proportion ofdemand deposits?MR. KOHN. In my view, that's actually what's making thisaggregate increasingly interest sensitive over time.MR. JOHNSON. I think it might be useful to say that becausethat would really take a lot of the wind out of that.MR. PRELL. We had really good evidence, hard evidence, onthe proportion and lots of input on the growth of bits and pieces of--MR. JOHNSON. Well, okay.MR. KOHN. Except that households are a much smallerproportion than they used to be and businesses obviously are a higherproportion.MR. BLACK. We took a look at that Treasury study andconcluded the same thing that the staff did: that M2 is a littlebetter.MR. JOHNSON. I completely buy the staff study and--MR. BLACK. That's where we came out, quite independently ofwhat they had done, much to my disappointment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not crazy about this sentence thatfinishes with lower growth in M1; it says "the Committee anticipates".Shouldn't we say that "In the light of what happened last year theCommittee welcomes substantially slower growth of M1 this year thanlast year"?MR. ANGELL. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "In the context of continuing economicexpansion given the intensification of price pressures,"--maybe justleave that there. All this wording about "associated with substantialdownward movement of the dollar...and the abatement of the weakness inM1 velocity" is saying the same thing as the first part of thesentence.-59-7/7/87MR. ANGELL. So you want to take the whole sentence out?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, just the second half.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For the second half of that: "TheCommittee welcomes substantially slower growth of M1 in 1987 than in1986 in the context of continuing economic expansion andintensification of price pressures." I'm not quite crazy about that"intensification." I don't like to admit that the intensification-MR. ANGELL. I don't either.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Say "the continuing economic expansion anda greater tendency for prices"--MR. MELZER. "Some evidence of greater prices"--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Some evidence of greater inflationarypressures." How about that?MR. ANGELL. That's better.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Say greater--MR. ANGELL. Or inflationary expectations.MR. JOHNSON. Yes. The only thing I can think of is that themonetarists would say that there's a lag and that to look atcontemporaneous inflation and to adjust monetary policy is chasing thetail.MR. MORRIS. Milton Freidman predicted an explosion ofinflation in 1984.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is a vague sentence.MR. JOHNSON. Oh, I realize that, but I'm just saying that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All this says is that substantially slowergrowth of M1 in 1987 than in 1986 with a [unintelligible] that oughtto be--MR. JOHNSON. That's fine with me.MR. MELZER. It seems to me the last sentence could be endedafter "prevailing".MR. KOHN. Well, that's taken from before.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any preferences? I'm--MR. HELLER. Are we really planning to do that still? We'rein the second half of the year. Are we really going to starttargeting Ml?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is this exactly what we said earlier inthe year?-60-7/7/87MR. KOHN. This last sentence is exactly, which is--MR. HELLER. We may as well drop the whole sentence.MR. ANGELL. No, but--. Well, I think we might.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we should.MR. ANGELL. I think there might be some circumstance inwhich we would want to bring it back.MR. STERN. I think Tom Melzer's suggestion is probably agood one. I don't know why we would be particularly--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What we actually should do is this. I'llmake a more accurate sentence: "The Committee in reaching operationaldecisions over the balance of the year will take account of growth inM1, and at some point in time, in the light of circumstances thenprevailing if the Committee..."--MR. ANGELL. That's better, yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "The Committee in reaching operationaldecisions over the balance of the year will take account of growth inM1 in the light of circumstances then prevailing," [unintelligible]and all that business. The issue is if it's too low, we'll be alittle easier than we otherwise would be. Now we get to 1988. Wehave 5 to 8 percent as the Bluebook number for M2 and M3, right?SPEAKER(?). Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Leave this sentence about M1 just in--MR. ANGELL. Apparently, we could put M1 back in tentatively.MS. SEGER. I'm not sure it would fit.MR. BOYKIN. I think we need it because we address it for1987 and now we're talking about 1988.MR. ANGELL. Tentatively.MR. BOYKIN. Yes.MR. JOHNSON. All you need is that one sentence: "The issuesinvolved in establishing a target range for M1 would be carefullyreappraised."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, this is awfully thin. It saysnothing about the targets. Did we write this sentence in the pastpattern? It says we established the ranges for M2 and M3 and doesn'tsay another word about them. It goes on to a little baloney about M1.MR. KOHN. I think that is the past pattern for the tentativeranges.MR. BERNARD. Yes.-61-7/7/87MR. ANGELL. But I think we might have some language--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What I was wondering about is thisdiscussion of M1. Why shouldn't it all be combined in that oneparagraph on M1? So what would we change? With respect to M1 and soforth [as shown]. Then, "because of its sensitivity the Committeedecided not to [target it] over 1987 and has established no tentativerange for 1988." And then start with "currently the appropriateness,"and then add this last sentence saying "issues involved withestablishing a target range for M1 will be carefully reappraised inthe beginning of 1988." I would make M1 all one sentence. I thinkit's a little more straightforward that way.MR. ANGELL. I just wonder what, tentatively, we might thinkabout. Although we may not want to put it in, what would we have inmind? If at this stage you had to suggest M1 ranges for 1988 whatwould you suggest, Don?MR. KOHN. Our projections, of course, are keyed to theprospects of rising interest rates. And in that case we have prettylow M1 growth--on the order of 4 percent. Without those risinginterest rates, we'd probably have growth for 1988 in the 5 or 6percent range.MR. ANGELL. So, you'd want a range at least 3 percentagepoints wide?MR. KOHN. Well, with--MR. ANGELL. Or more?MR. KOHN. More than 3 percentage points wide would be myrecommendation. If you had 3 percentage points on M2, a comparable[M1] range that would encompass the same kinds of possible outcomes, Ithink, would be close to 6 percentage points.MR. ANGELL. So, you think 3 to 8 percent would be--SPEAKER(?). 3 to 15!MR. ANGELL. 3 to 9?MR. JOHNSON. There's a lot of uncertainty about the interestrate scenario that goes with these nominal GNP numbers.MR. ANGELL. I know, but I just want to have some notion incase we're going to discuss this seriously in January. I want to havesome notion about how well we might do between now and then as towhether or not we will be able to redo it. Otherwise, I don't want tosay we're going to discuss it seriously. You think it would take 3 to9 percent?MR. KOHN. Right now, if you asked me, I'd say 3 to 9percent, or 2 to 8 percent, or something along that line.MR. ANGELL. Then it would be---62-7/7/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This doesn't say we're going to establisha target range. All it says is that we are thinking of it; it justsays we're going to reexamine whether we want one at all. I don'tthink it commits you to anything.MR. JOHNSON. That's the same kind of range we were saying wehad--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that just leaves it where we are.MR. ANGELL. Yes, but it just doesn't--MR. JOHNSON. We have to have a target so we would--.Obviously, we wouldn't at all.MR. ANGELL. I'm just suggesting that sometime we will runout of ability to continue to say that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I agree with that.MS. SEGER. We've always said that.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We've run out of some other things,too.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just [review]. Logically, I thinkthis M1 sentence would come after both of them, then. The M1paragraph would be as it is with a small change in the middle of theparagraph: "The Committee again decided not to establish a specifictarget for growth in M1 over the remainder of 1987 and no tentativerange has been set for 1988. The appropriateness of changes in M1this year will continue to be evaluated," etc. Then right at the endbring up that other sentence: "The issues involved for establishing atarget range for M1 will be carefully reappraised at the beginning of1988."VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I would be--MR. ANGELL. You know, ironically, we took away M1 the yearthat we would have hit the target range if we had set one.MR. BLACK. I've been telling them they were playing withfire.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That would depend upon [unintelligible].Well, this leaves us one sentence for the long-term ranges for 1988.Is that all right? It says "the range is _ to _ percent;" itdoesn't say anything about [unintelligible].MR. KOHN. The one you had last July.MR. PRELL. That also was the last one, August.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh yes. We have a range on debt, which iswhat? Is debt 7-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent?MR. JOHNSON. That's what I get: 7-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent.-63-7/7/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We start out with no change in the rangethis year but we agree that growth in the aggregates around the lowerend of the ranges may be appropriate in light of developments withrespect to velocity and signs of underlying inflationary pressures,provided that economic activity is expanding at an acceptable pace.We will vote separately on these things. That is the pattern, right?MR. BERNARD. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are we prepared to vote on 1987 ranges?Unchanged ranges with that sentence--MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Boehne *President Boykin YesGovernor Heller YesGovernor Johnson YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor Seger YesPresident Stern Yes*--[Note: Mr. Boehne was out of the room at the time of this vote. Asindicated below, Mr. Boehne voted 'yes' when he returned.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now we move to 1988. We have twosentences: one saying 5 to 8 percent and one saying 7-1/2 to 10percent on the associated range for debt. But we also have thissentence or paragraph on M1.MR. JOHNSON. Say that again.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All it says is "5 to 8 percent for M2 andM3 and 7-1/2 to 10-1/2 for the associated range for domesticnonfinancial debt." It's two sentences. Then this paragraph on M1--MR. STERN. Can we establish that that's the way we've doneit in the past?MR. JOHNSON. Move toward price stability.MR. STERN. Or Governor Angell's thought about maybe lookingat it again with a bias toward--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. You can get a vote from Mr. Boehnenow.MR. KOHN. Last July we simply had a paragraph that gave thetentative ranges with a little extra verbiage about M1.MR. JOHNSON. I would prefer to have at least that sentenceabout why we're ratcheting the range down, saying--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I prefer to have one on why we arenot ratcheting it down enough.-64-7/7/87MR. ANGELL. But we want to continue to ratchet a longerperiod of time--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we've got to say that in theexplanation.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think that operational languagehas always been that stark. It has been in the other part of thepolicy record and in the testimony that we had all the verbiage andthe hallelujahs and hosannas.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have 5 to 8 percent, 7-1/2 to 10-1/2percent and the paragraph on M1 for the record. Does anybody needthat read to them? I will read it to you. Are you ready?MR. BERNARD. Can we pick up President Boehne on 1987?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.MR. BERNARD. President Boehne on the 1987 ranges?MR. BOEHNE. What was the number? 5-1/2 to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Unchanged.MR. ANGELL. Just vote no.MR. BOEHNE. I vote yes.MR. BERNARD. For 1988:Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesGovernor Heller YesGovernor Johnson YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor Seger NoPresident Stern YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now we get down to the operationalparagraph. Just to remind you: It is "maintain"; same language aslast time, but totally symmetrical with "woulds"; 5 and 7-1/2 percent,respectively, for M2 and M3; growth in M1 while picking up from recentlevels is expected to remain well below the pace in 1986; and 4 to 8percent for the federal funds rate.MR. ANGELL. In other words, just like last time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Please call the roll.-65-7/7/87MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesGovernor Heller YesGovernor Johnson YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor Seger YesPresident Stern YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anything else to discuss? We can justquit. If any members have changes in their projections, Mr. Prellwould like to receive them by noon on Thursday.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'd like for the record to show, ifI may, that of the other occasions to [unintelligible] us, in thisparticular case I think we have to acknowledge, at least I would doso, that this will be the Chairman's last Open Market Committeemeeting, hopefully.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How do you know?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Hopefully. But it has been, Ithink, 12 years and something like 119 or 120 consecutive--I don'tthink he's ever missed one--meetings of the Committee as a member andas Chairman. We've all come to learn the subtleties of "mights" and"woulds" and "snugs" and "oozes." But I think we've learned a lotmore sensible things and I think that we should acknowledge thisparticular occasion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] come back and bite you inAugust with another meeting where you could go off on your own"woulds" and "mights" and stuff. I appreciate the cooperation of all,in these recent years in particular. This is a wild and woollyventure sometimes, with so many people. But it works and I trust itwill continue with all your intelligent and forceful efforts. Thankyou.END OF MEETING-66-