Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeSeptember 22, 1987A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, September 22, 1987, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT:Greenspan, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellBoehneBoykinHellerJohnsonKeehnKelleySegerSternMessrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey and Melzer, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Kansas City and St. Louis,respectivelyMr. Kohn, Secretary and Staff AdviserMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Loney, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Lang, Lindsey, Prell, Rolnick, Rosenblum,Scheld, Siegman, and Simpson, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, SystemOpen Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, SystemOpen Market Account9/22/87 -2-Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMr. Slifman, Deputy Associate Director, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Office ofBoard Members, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Eisenmenger and Hendricks, First Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and Cleveland,respectivelyMessrs. Balbach, Broaddus, T. Davis, and Ms. Tshinkel,Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banksof St. Louis, Richmond, Kansas City, andand Atlanta, respectivelyMr. R. Davis, Senior Economic Adviser, Federal ReserveBank of New YorkMessrs. Judd, McNees, and Sniderman, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco, Boston,and Cleveland, respectivelyMs. Ann-Marie Meulendyke, Manager, Federal ReserveBank of New YorkTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meetingof September 22, 1987CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, all.SEVERAL (in unison). Good morning.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would somebody be good enough to movethe minutes?SPEAKER(?). I move.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Objections? Approved. Mr. Cross.MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Comments? Any motions?MS. SEGER. May I ask just one question?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sure.MS. SEGER. How much actual trading is going on in theforeign exchange market for what I would call corporate business use?In other words, not just trading for the sake of trading but for--MR. CROSS. Right now we have the feeling that corporationsare not doing very much. It varies a great deal, of course, buttypically the total turnover in the market is many, many multiples ofwhat the final users get. It may be 10 times as much. But right atthe moment we don't get a sense of a lot of corporate activity takingplace. It may be that they are holding off, for the kind of reasonsthat I mentioned. It may be that they are waiting to see if anythingemerges out of these dealings around the time of the IMF meeting. Or,from what I hear this morning, there is some expectation being talkedabout that the G-7 might do one thing or another that would give somegreater strength to the dollar. They may be holding off for thesekinds of reasons.MS. SEGER. I remember before when there was all thisturbulence, a lot of corporate traders did just sort of sit it out andhold off on decisions.MR. CROSS. At times they do this. They can be very bigplayers in this game, too, and they can do a lot of churningthemselves.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In general, based on a number ofthese periodic surveys that have been done, the thinking is that thepercentage of transactions that will in some sense be related to theunderlying exchange of goods is very, very small.MS. SEGER. That isn't what I would suggest at all. I amjust trying to sense what the attitudes in corporate America might be.No, I don't think--9/22/87MR. CROSS. This always seems to be a pretty important timefor an assessment. We have the sense that they come back after LaborDay and reassess their position; and they may be doing that right now.Frequently, in recent years, we have seen trends begin shortly afterthe summer holidays and after Labor Day. As I said, it may be thatthey are holding off to see if anything emerges from these meetingsnext week.MR. GUFFEY. There is some comment in the press saying thatthe G-10 or the G-7 had adjusted their target levels from 140 or 160to 131.50. Is that rumor, or is that--?MR. CROSS. That's total conjecture. There was a rumor lastweek of exactly that--that the target range had moved down. And thenthere was a rumor two days later that it had moved up. The dollarwent down a little when the first rumor occurred and moved back up alittle when the second rumor occurred. But these are all purelyimaginative.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I have a motion; do I have a second?MS. SEGER. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection, we'll assume thetransactions are now ratified. Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any questions for Mr. Sternlight?MR. MELZER. Peter, you reported on the first 11 days; thereis apt to be a pretty large borrowing spike Wednesday. How would youexpect that to be interpreted in this environment? This is a periodthat has had some technical problems with the tax date, so I guess youare not going to be able to conclude much from that either.MR. STERNLIGHT. I wouldn't be surprised if there were somekind of a spike. I don't know what the average would work out to be.We'll be seeking to put in reserves, so that if our estimates areclose and our estimates of the demand for excess are close, theaverage will come out around the $600 million level. There is alwaysan element of uncertainty as to just how far a spike takes you. But Ithink there is a lot of realization in the market that this is a verydifficult period for reserve management.MR. JOHNSON. Peter, you mentioned the market being nervous.I agree that there is still some of that, but I think we did achieve--though I realize it hasn't been fantastic--some flattening in theyield curve out of the discount rate move. Even though the long endwent up to around 9.80 percent at one point, it has settled downaround 9.60 percent; and we have seen a larger move on the short endof the market than we have on the long end, even though it hasfluctuated.MR. STERNLIGHT. I think if you measure it just from the timethe discount rate moved, there would be some flattening. The shortrates came up more than long rates. I think if you looked at the9/22/87whole intermeeting period, it is about similar at the short and longend of--MR. JOHNSON. I wouldn't do that because [unintelligible] itcould have been some fear of Fed tightening preceding it. But I thinkthe tone seems to be more inflation fears or psychology, or thedollar, and everything else, more than just--. I don't know how yousort all this out. But still it does appear that there has been someflattening achieved.MR. STERN. On the other side of that coin, and at the riskof some overstatement, I had the impression that the discount ratechange was received with a combination of indifference and resignationmore than anything else. Could you comment on that?MR. STERNLIGHT. I am not sure what to say. I wouldn't saythat there was a very widespread expectation; there was someexpectation of the move, and there were even some people who werethinking in terms of a larger move. And, initially, there were somewho expressed disappointment that it wasn't larger, although I wouldhave to think that a small, vocal, minority was expressing that view.I suppose there is a sense in which [your observation] is true; peoplewho recognized that the dollar had been under pressure and was likelyto be continuing under pressure have come to expect that our ratestructure and our policy formulation process will be under that kindof pressure. So there was that element of resignation to the process.MR. FORRESTAL. Peter, is there an expectation in the marketof further tightening by the Fed?MR. STERNLIGHT. Not in any imminent sense, but I think thereis an expectation that the dollar is going to remain under pressure,given that we have this awful trade balance picture; and that would bethe kind of atmosphere under which there would have to be furtherpolicy response.MS. SEGER. Peter, did I understand you correctly when thequestion was asked about the market response to what might happen toborrowings before this maintenance period is up? Did you say youthought we could come in around $600 million without stirring thingsup? Isn't the arithmetic to get $600 million in this period such thatit would require tremendous borrowings today and tomorrow? And ifthose borrowings occur in the context of the knowledge of this meetingdate, I think [market participants] might make something out of thatrather than just saying, well, it is one way to get the average towork out right. I don't think they know what we are shooting for.MR. STERNLIGHT. It would take some bulge in borrowing to getup to the $600 million [average]. I don't have yesterday's figureyet, but borrowing had been averaging $460 million through Sunday. Sothere would have to be some bulge, probably, on the final day. And asI said, if you ask the people who follow these things closely, most ofthem would probably think of us as using $500 million, although somewould say a range of $500 to $600 million. If they saw a number like$600 million coming out, some of them might regard that as indicativeof a little firmer aim than they had estimated earlier. On the otherhand, they also were aware that it was very tough to manage reservesin this period. So, I don't know that they are going to jump9/22/87immediately to any very strong conclusion if the borrowing comes outat $650 million, or something like that.MS. SEGER. Yes, but if there is all this nervousness ingeneral, and if you average, let's say, $625 or $650 million, with $2billion of borrowing on Wednesday--which happens to be the day afterwe meet here--there must be weirdos, anyway, who will think maybethere is a connection. Maybe in New York they may figure all thisout, but there are a few other market participants outside New Yorkwho might make something out of that whole sequence.MR. STERNLIGHT. Just because of the juxtaposition vis-a-visthe Committee meeting date, possibly more [than a few]; but I thinkmore of them would just tie it to knowing that Wednesday is thesettlement date of the reserve period.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think there will be critical questionsregarding what happens, not so much on Wednesday, but because thattype of spike is very difficult to interpret; they will look atborrowing very closely in the next maintenance period.MR. KEEHN. Peter, you suggested that the increase in long-term rates is a combination of factors, with inflation being one.But, in the combination of factors, how persistent is the inflationconcern and is it just one of those issues?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, the concern is very much tied to thedollar. And when concern about the dollar [is high], the market ismore concerned with what would tend to happen with respect toinflation. The market has been reasonably well impressed with theactual price index numbers that have come along in the recent period.But they do worry that, in the course of redressing the trade deficit,we are going to be imposing more demands on our resources--that theremay well have to be further adjustment in the value of the dollar andthat that will do things to import prices, and so on.MR. KEEHN. But it is more that side as opposed to domesticpressures?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think that even with the tradepicture, it is partly domestic pressure because, as you are redressingthat trade imbalance, you'll be putting more pressure on domesticresources.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Following up on Chairman Greenspan's comment,Peter, suppose that in the next maintenance period you do come inpretty close to $600 million and the market now expects $500 to $600million. Would you expect much rate movement if you got closer tothat figure?MR. STERNLIGHT. I would expect a modest firming. My guessis that you would get funds rates averaging in the 7-1/4 to 7-3/8percent area. I think we are averaging 7.15 or 7.20 percent so farthis period.9/22/87MR. PARRY. Peter, has there been much discussion of theimpact of higher interest rates on Treasury requirements? One hears alot of discussion from the Administration recently about the deficit,at least in fiscal 1987, being somewhat lower than their estimatesbecause of revenues going up. But I don't hear much discussion of theimpact of higher interest rates on future requirements.MR. STERNLIGHT. I have not really heard discussion of thatparticular factor. However, while people are well pleased with thedeficit coming out this fiscal year at $160 billion, or somewhatunder, there is deep concern that without the Congress gettingsomething together on fiscal restraint, it will be heading up by $20billion or more next year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further comments or questions? Ifnot, I will entertain a motion to ratify.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So move it.MR. JOHNSON. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Objections? Approved. Mr. Prell.MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think I can berelatively brief this morning. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you, Mr. Prell. Questions for Mr.Prell?MR. FORRESTAL. The only thing that kind of jumped out at mein your forecast this time, and I guess this has been there before, ison the real export side. You are showing a marked deceleration of the[trade] deficit; real net exports, for example, going from [an annualrate of $131 billion in] the third quarter of 1987 to $63 billion inthe fourth quarter of 1988. Most of the other forecasts that I haveseen would not indicate nearly that much progress. Can you tell mewhat that dramatic improvement is based on? Is it basically on theexport side or in the diminution of imports or a combination of both,or what?MR. PRELL. Well, the greater strength is clearly on theexport side. As we go out through the forecast period to the end ofnext year, we have very modest increases in imports; indeed, we wouldexpect that real merchandise imports, not only [nominal] merchandiseimports, will be going down slightly, largely in response to the pastand prospective depreciation of the dollar. We are also anticipating,of course, that domestic spending--consumption, in particular--will begrowing rather slowly, so we won't be sucking in great volumes ofimports because of the continuation of the kind of demands we haveseen previously.MR. TRUMAN. I don't think that should govern[unintelligible]. If you look at outside forecasts that go intodetail on real exports you will [not] find that much differencebetween [unintelligible] and exports over the forecast horizon fromours. Generally, they do show very substantial declines over theperiod. DRI, for example, has something very close, almost shockinglyclose, to what we have.9/22/87 -6-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. Mike, you spoke about the sharp increases inbusiness equipment spending. How does that break down betweenadditional capacity and efficiency enhancing?MR. PRELL. That's very difficult to get a handle on. Theanecdotal evidence--or if you want to characterize it in more solidterms than that, the kinds of survey information that are gathered byMcGraw Hill and others--suggests that vis-a-vis historical experience,a distinctly above-average percentage of this planned spending isdesignated as being for replacement, modernization, and so on.Clearly, in many industries there is plenty of capacity; in othersthere is less. And one can identify some areas of significantexpansion of capacity, with additional plants being built. But,generally, as we are looking at it, the major thrust will be oncontinuing to reduce costs, to modernize product line, and so on.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It is most likely to show up first inincreasing lead times on the delivery of materials. In other words,leaving aside the question of where the pressures are, that's thefirst sign that you are going to get something of that nature--thatis, capacity expansion. There has got to be some evidence on the partof the company that it is having difficulty in maintaining deliverieson a relatively quick pace. Am I correct in assuming that there hasnot really been any major change, or that there has been a slightincrease--MR. PRELL. For materials, the lead times have beenlengthening. I think, implicit in your comment, is the question ofwhether they have increased to levels that are not comfortable, and Isuspect that the strategy in many firms has been to run with a littletighter capacity than they might have in the past. And they may notbe uncomfortable with what they are seeing. In the capital goodsarea, average lead times don't seem to have lengthened much yet; andthat is probably consonant with the evidence that the capacityutilization in equipment producing industries is not especially high--not what one sees in some nondurable material areas, for example.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. I would like to ask two questions about yourassumption with regard to fiscal policy. This time, as has been thecase in the past, there is an assumption that there are spending cutsof around $25 billion. I think there is a substantial risk that thatwill not materialize. Some work we have done suggests that if policyis accommodative and you don't get that $25 billion deduction inspending, that it could add approximately a percentage point to growthin 1988 and a half percentage point to inflation. Would you thinkthat to be roughly [the magnitude]?MR. PRELL. I take it you are going to zero on the deficitreduction action with that.MR. PARRY. You don't get the $25 billion reduction; you getzero.9/22/87MR. PRELL. I think that is probably a little higher than ournormal econometric results would give us, but it is clearly thedirection in which we would go. At this point, the $25 billion lookslike a reasonable ballpark figure, given what is being discussedcurrently in a compromise--a Gramm-Rudman revision that would besomething like $23 billion, with no loan sales or that sort of thing.But I suppose there are still some risks that it would be less thanwhat we have and the result might well be somewhere in between thatzero and the $25 billion that we have.MR. PARRY. One further question: I notice the change in theassumption you have made with regard to the size of the deficit. Iguess it would primarily be the higher interest rate assumption overthe forecast horizon. Does that feed back into income? In otherwords, is the loop closed in the model so that you get higher growthof disposable income as a result of the higher interest payments onthe deficit?MR. PRELL. Well, the forecast isn't generated by a model,per se. As we go through and estimate the income flows, we definitelydo take account of the interest rate path that we've assumed andprojected. And we do have substantial growth in personal interestincome over the projection period.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I would like to follow up on Bob Forrestal'squestion. Basically, the U.S. strategy for turning the trade deficitaround is to shrink the value of the dollar and to get our tradingpartners to grow faster than we are growing. We have done fairly wellon the dollar, but we haven't done so well on growth abroad. It's anappealing strategy, but it strikes me as being somewhat novel if youlook at the history of these kinds of adjustments. What has happenedmost often is that the country that has the deficit ends up with arecession. In other words, you reduce domestic demand below what ishappening abroad and you also get downward adjustments on thecurrency. And I would think that the longer it takes for us to make aturnaround in the trade deficit--as we get month after month of thesedisappointing trade figures--that it would put additional downwardpressure on the dollar. And it might also begin to raise expectationsthat, well, as nice as it sounds to try this rather novel strategy, inthe end, the U.S. is going to have to go through kind of a wringer, asmost other countries do. My real question is: How much of a novelexperiment are we really running in light of what is happening inother countries and what has happened over history? I am having ahard time thinking of a country that hasn't turned around this kind ofa trade deficit without a fair amount of suppression of domesticdemand. And the question is not aimed at [criticism]; I like theapproach that we are on. But it does strike me as somewhat novel onthe broader stage of history. I would just like to see if that isright or if we have had lots of company with this experiment.MR. TRUMAN. Well, the truth of the matter is, PresidentBoehne, that there are some examples where this has been successful.A lot of them come from the early 1980s and, of course, during thatperiod where you had essentially [slow growth of] GNP without goingthrough a recession--that is essentially the question you are asking--in a relatively short period of time. There are several examples in9/22/87the early 1980s and, of course, those were [unintelligible]. Theother side of the equation, which you mentioned, is faster growth inthe rest of the world, which was then the United States. And thereare some other examples. We did look at this record about 18 monthsago and that is basically what it showed.MR. BOEHNE. Are these sizable countries?MR. TRUMAN. Germany and Japan [unintelligible]. We tend toforget that they had deficits in the late 1970s and at the beginningof the 1980s. They moved from small deficits to very large surpluses.One feature of the forecast is that, while we don't have a recessionin a GNP sense built in, we do have relatively slow growth in domesticdemand. In fact, we have a quite dramatic slowing of domestic demandbuilt into this forecast. In some sense, as Peter was saying earlierin answer to your question, that's part of the process--the processthat makes room for this external adjustment in an environment inwhich growth of production as a whole is kept relatively high butdomestic demand growth is low.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I have a couple of questions forMike with respect to the sections that caught my eye in the forecast.You mentioned that a further decline in the dollar was assumed in yourforecast. As I remember, the Greenbook only made reference to adecline much like that projected in the last Greenbook. Further, as Iremember, that decline was 10 percent on an annual basis, and most ofthat had been completed in the first half of the year. Am I correct,or is there further decline assumed?MR. PRELL. I guess I wasn't clear. The assumption is thatthe dollar will decline further over the forecast period. For ourpurposes, we put in a straight line path that averages about 10percent, at an annual rate.MR. GUFFEY. My second question has to do with yourassumption about rising interest rates in the fourth quarter. To bevery specific, do you have a level of interest rates in the fourthquarter that you assumed in this forecast?MR. PRELL. It isn't necessary that there be a precisecourse. We put in a smooth trajectory that moves the federal fundsrate, for example, into the 8 to 8-1/2 percent range by next spring.MR. GUFFEY. In the first quarter?MR. PRELL. We would be approaching it by the end of thefirst quarter. I don't want to be too precise about this. If therewere flatness over the next few months and more increase later on, wewouldn't be able to distinguish the economic effects in the forecastfor the period as a whole. But we do have a gradual rise here.MR. GUFFEY. My last question has to do with your commentabout inflation picking up--I guess that's in 1988, if I read theGreenbook numbers correctly, because your forecast has it actuallydeclining in the last quarter of this year, as measured by the fixed-weight index or the deflator itself.9/22/87MR. PRELL. There's a difference in our forecast between thedeflator and the fixed-weight GNP measure. In the fixed-weight index,we have 3-1/4 percent for the third quarter and 3-1/2 percent for thefourth, whereas there's a deceleration from 3-1/4 percent in the thirdquarter down to 2-1/2 percent in the deflator. The difference thereis the peculiarities of weighting shifts that occur in the GNPdeflator; and the decrease in oil imports, which have a relatively lowweight in the deflator, actually tends to depress the GNP deflatorrelative to the fixed-weight measure. Basically, we have a fairlysteady second-half inflation, as we see it; it's lower than in thefirst half, in large part because of lower food and energy priceinflation.MR. GUFFEY. So is it fair to say, Mike, that inflation inthe second half, and particularly in the last quarter and maybe eveninto the first quarter of 1988, is reasonably stable in your forecast?MR. PRELL. In some underlying sense, there is a fairlystable picture between the first and second half, but that's in thisgame of stripping away food and energy prices, which obviously areaffected by special nonmacroeconomic influences in the short run. Ofcourse, there are peculiar things that affect other sectors, as well.But, basically we have a fairly stabilized underlying trend, and someincrease next year in the rate of price inflation.MR. PARRY. But the underlying inflation must pick up quite abit, because you have a marked acceleration in labor costs.MR. PRELL. Some people would take that as an indicator ofthe underlying rate of inflation. And yes, we do, as compensationaccelerates significantly next year. In that sense, the underlyingtrend is picking up.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, most of the comments have beendirected at particular parts of the forecast. My feeling the lasttime was that the economy would be somewhat stronger than theGreenbook was projecting, and the staff, indeed, have moved theirforecast in that general direction. So, we have very little quarrelwith what they have done. We think the main driving force is going tobe an improvement in net exports of goods and services; and plant andequipment expenditures, particularly in the equipment area, alsoprovide a pretty good push. If we were to guess, we would say therisk might still be that the forecast is a little low. But reallywhat bothers us, I guess, is the feeling that they might be right onthis forecast. In saying that, I'm focusing on the inflation ratethat they are projecting for next year--when it goes up to 4-1/2percent. I think we ought to be able to do better than that for nextyear, and we ought to target something less than that. A 4-1/2percent inflation rate could easily become 5 percent; and 5 percent isnot really reasonable price stability. So, rather than thinking theymay have overestimated, we're afraid that they might be about rightand have come up with some results that are a little too strong on theprice side.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.9/22/87MS. SEGER. Yes, I just have a couple of questions that aretied to a few matters that we discussed yesterday at pre-FOMCbriefings. These involve whether or not we have completely factoredin the rise in interest rates that we have already seen, plus whollyfactored in the increases that we think are yet to come. Inparticular, on housing starts, which as of last month were at a 1.6million annual rate, we know that there are problems with high vacancyrates in the multifamily area, at least in some parts of the country.The incentives built into that kind of housing have been shiftedgreatly by the Tax Reform Act. As for single family starts, at leastsome people say they are sensitive to interest rate changes. I guessI have a hard time believing that for 1988 starts will not fall below1-1/2 million. I hope they don't, but I am sort of skittish aboutthis.MR. PRELL. It's purely conjectural at this point. Variouseconometric models would suggest that, over the relevant horizon here,you are probably dealing with an interest rate elasticity of about 1.We have a rise in mortgage rates from around 10-1/2 percent tosomething in the high 11's, [an increase of] roughly 10 percent. Wehave roughly a 10 percent decline in housing starts, from 1.6 millionto something around the 1.45 million area. In that sense, it's wellin line with the historical patterns. The other thing that providessome comfort--MS. SEGER. Is that true for both the single family and themultifamily?MR. PRELL. Well, I'm looking at it in the aggregate:clearly, they are both to be affected by the change in interest rates.Looking at it from another angle, mortgage rates are back up to levelswe saw in 1985, and we had considerably higher housing starts then--inthe 1.7 million area. Now, we've probably gone through some catchupperiod in home ownership, but that number seems fairly reasonable tous, looking at the response we've seen just so far to the substantialincrease in mortgage rates. It hasn't made the market fall apartentirely. We may not have it quite right, but this is a stab at whatwe think is a normal response.MS. SEGER. What if it just means that the lags are longer?Maybe we haven't even seen the full impact of the spike we had back inApril or May, which was quite dramatic.MR. PRELL. Well, clearly, we felt that we would be seeingmuch of that response by this summer, before we even elevated our rateforecast beyond what we had earlier. We only had a modest furtherdecline below the 1.6 million level in our previous forecast. As wehave taken the mortgage rates up more, we have lowered the housingstarts further. It's very difficult to say. As you noted, there areother influences at work, and there may still be some adjustment tothe tax law changes. There are still some problems of high vacancyrates in home rental properties in various parts of the country.Again, when you look at house prices, there too, the evidence suggeststhat, at least in many markets, there's still a pretty robust demandat these interest rates. And there is just no anecdotal evidence tosuggest to us that we are way off the mark in our assessment of demandpositions. Even the survey information suggests pretty high numbers-10-9/22/87of people whose attitude is that this is a good time to buy a house.That may be surprising, but that seems to be the pattern.MS. SEGER. The other question I have again ties intoyesterday's briefing, and relates to our heavy reliance on the tradeturnaround to produce a good 1988. If I'm reading the numbers right,about half of the real GNP growth, fourth quarter of 1987 to fourthquarter of 1988, is expected to come from improvement in net exports.Again, I think it's very, very difficult to get a $54 billion increasein exports in one year--namely, this year--and then tack on $57billion next year. That's just a lot to produce.MR. PRELL. One of the main comforts we can find in thenumbers is that it looks to us like the trend in real exports has beenquite strong thus far. And based on our exchange rate projection andthe assumption that there are probably still lags in the order anddelivery process, that means that some of the improvement in exportsis still not fully evident. We think that we are forecasting,basically, a continuation of patterns that are already perceptible.In some respects, I think a greater concern, given our outlook, wouldbe that we get both the improvement in the net exports somehow, andalso get greater domestic demand growth. That puts still greaterpressures on resources than some people would have thought in thepast. We have two years now, in our forecast, of consumption growththat is really subpar historically. So, in a sense, we have thesethings put together in a way that gives you a rather smooth adjustmentto the picture.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I don't have a question. I would just like tocomment on the outlook.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, if you'll hold that for just a fewminutes. President Parry.MR. PARRY. I just want to raise an issue to shed a littlelight on this concern about a slowing in the interest-sensitivesectors of the economy, such as housing. It seems to me that with theeconomy operating where it is, in terms of employment at least, if wedid not get that slowing in the interest-sensitive sectors of theeconomy at the same time we are going to get the strength in netexports, we would have a real problem. So, one can be concerned aboutthe implications for housing or for other sectors but the picturedoesn't really fit together very well if you don't get that kind ofslump. And I would assume that's the problem.MR. PRELL. That's what characterizes our outlook and I thinksome of the comments around the table suggest that there is a hopefulaspect of this--that everything falls nicely into place.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Melzer.MR. MELZER. Mike, if this linkage between dollar weaknessand inflationary expectations isn't broken, and you weren't able, forexample, to achieve over the forecast period the 10 percent annual ofdecline in the dollar--let's just say that that becomes impossible--how would that affect the forecast in a broad sense? In other words,-11-9/22/87if you couldn't achieve some of the external adjustment through theforeign exchange price mechanism--MR. PRELL. In other words, the dollar--I wasn't clear what--MR. MELZER. What I'm saying is that the box we are in rightnow is that, as a practical matter, if we tolerate that dollardecline, it kicks off inflationary expectations. So, let's say thatyou just assumed that the dollar was stable. How would that affectthe forecast?MR. TRUMAN. It depends a bit, I think, on what else is goingon at the same time. Much of the impetus to net exports from thedollar, at least as far as this forecast horizon goes, is what isalready in train. Less than half of the increase next year in netexports is directly traceable to a further projected dollar decline.But, presumably, if you didn't have the dollar decline, then youwouldn't have the same kind of pressures on interest rates. So youwould have less pressures in the interest-sensitive sectors of theeconomy. So you have some compensation in terms of the economy'soperation as a whole which, in turn, would tend to feed back again onthe net exports, so you would have less improvement in net exportstoo. But, there is a certain sense of [unintelligible] that isbasically the way we think about this.MR. HELLER. Wait a minute. You say that interest rateswouldn't be rising; but you can also come up with that scenario of acontinued stable dollar that comes about because we are raisinginterest rates in this country. Then, how would your answer bedifferent?MR. TRUMAN. Under that scenario, maybe instead of a $50billion change in net exports you would have something like $20-$25billion. So you would have less than 1 percent of GNP in thisforecast, and that's well within the error. Mike put it that way inthe overall forecast.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I guess that was sort of what I was going toask. One other question I had in mind: I'm not a big "aggregatesperson" but, in line with this whole issue of aggregate demand, itstrikes me that this recent uptick in interest rates is going to havea further damping effect on the aggregates. I think that is fine, butat some point, you have to ask how much aggregate demand is plausiblein that scenario. I think you are restraining it. You have to comeup with some fairly implausible velocity growth numbers to getaggregate demand outside of a range that would present a real breakoutin overall aggregate demand. It seems to me that we have it prettywell cornered here. In the long run, you could have a couple of badquarters under that scenario but, given these recent moves in interestrates, what are we projecting on the broader monetary aggregates?MR. KOHN. As you saw in the Bluebook, we are projecting thatthe rise in interest rates, which is not all that large but issignificant, would damp growth in M2 over coming months.MR. JOHNSON. You have about 4 percent.-12-9/22/87MR. KOHN. If you abstract from September and you just havethe fourth quarter. Now we have this August-to-December target. Andthen for next year, under the assumption of further moderate increasesin interest rates, we would have M2 growth in the 4-1/2 to 5 percentkind of range. That implies--MR. JOHNSON. Why would it pick up with higher interestrates?MR. KOHN. Well, first of all, the rate of increase ininterest rates may not be quite as great. And there are some thingsthat seem to have been depressing M2 growth that we really couldn'taccount for this year and we are assuming that they won't be quite asactive next year. For example, the IRAs won't be around, and thatmight boost M2 growth a little; so, we have this assumed pickup ingrowth next year. If that came about, with our GNP projection thatwould imply about a 2 percent increase in velocity. But, remember,we're damping domestic demand here; we have slower domestic demandthan we have GNP, so if you look at velocity from that perspective, itwouldn't be quite as big an increase. That's not all that large anincrease--MR. JOHNSON. That's sort of what I'm getting at. You haveit cornered a little, it seems to me.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Could I raise a question about what theGNP demand numbers would really look like if we were to recognize thatthe way we calculate the numbers is a function of the fact that we areusing 1982 as a base period? I was looking at the fixed-weight GNPdeflator versus the GNP deflator, which tends to pick up a differencein the mix, which is essentially an issue of how far we are from thebase period to a large extent. If I were to deflate the nominal GNPby the fixed-weight index--which is roughly, but not quite, theequivalent of moving the 1982 base up to 1987, the current year--itseems as though we're getting a good deal less in the way of realgrowth. Let's take a case in point: the fourth-quarter over fourth-quarter change this year and next, with respect to the differencebetween the GNP deflator and the fixed-weight deflator, is .3 and .4,respectively. Assuming that the nominal is the same, that wouldreduce real growth. The problem I have with that, however, is thatI'm not sure whether the model is generating the real first and then,by implication, the nominal, or vice versa. How do you look at thatissue? In other words, how do we interpret that?MR. PRELL. Well, it's difficult to dissect this precisely,but I think we are dealing mostly with a process that looks at thereal first, infers from that the pressures on resources, which thenfeed back through a short-run Phillips curve relation to the wage andprice side. That's a stylistic characterization.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let's be very specific. In 1982, oilprices, and overall import prices, were much higher than they are now.Therefore, a rise in oil imports on the import side of real GNP is alarger subtraction with 1982 as a base than with 1987 as a base. Iguess I'm really asking if you were to restructure the total system sothat say, 1987, equals 100 instead of 1982, how would your real GNPlook in that context?-139/22/87Mr. TRUMAN. These two years, 1987 and 1988, oil importsdon't rise very much. You may get some effect on GNP to the extentthat you don't have the same rise in domestic production of oil orenergy, measured in 1982 dollars. But there's not much subtraction,even in our forecast, from higher oil imports from fourth quarter tofourth quarter.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Also, assume that the overall non-oilimport price deflator is significantly lower than it was in 1982,which, as I recall--MR. TRUMAN. If I remember, it was just about 100; maybe I'moff by a few points. The non-oil price deflator was running about100.3 in the second quarter.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Which means that it's a relative issuethat the domestic thing is [unintelligible]?MR. TRUMAN. Well, you would get some impact, I guess, fromthat.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The reason I raise the issue is thatit's becoming a very crucial question, not of statistics, but for realevaluation here. We are trying to determine to what extent the netexports are the crucial issue. We are getting some signals out of theindustrial production index. That is basically saying, if anything,that the cutting edge of the net export figures is much sharper, so tospeak--much more positive--than the GNP numbers are implying, becausewe are getting extraordinary strength in industrial production. Doyou read it that way? Or is that--MR. TRUMAN. I don't know about extraordinary; maybe some ofthe comments earlier suggested that. One problem is that, to theextent you get this going on, you're producing things which, ofcourse, you're shipping abroad; and you don't see it showing up inconsumption and things like that. And that is part of the adjustmentthat President Boehne was talking about. You are not going through arecession actually, but you are going through a much slower growth in[economic] welfare, as measured in current consumption.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We could be building inventories forexport, which affects the industrial production index but doesn't showup in the trade figures. I think implicit in all of this is that ifthe industrial production index stalls, it would raise some seriousquestions about this hypothesis.MR. PRELL. I might just note that, while industrialproduction is growing much more rapidly than we think GNP is growingthis quarter--and the IP numbers must be regarded as still quitetentative--that growth is well within the range of variation in thatrelationship. And for the year as a whole, the gap is rathermoderate. So, at this point, we don't see a big disparity in thesignals coming from the industrial sector or industrial productionestimates and GNP, particularly when you start [unintelligible] GNPgoods output that most reasonably can be compared in industrialproduction.-14-9/22/87CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for Mike before wego to the general comments? May I request that, in the generalcomments, you address one question that is bothering me particularly,and I think it's really crucial to the outlook. I would appreciatehearing any views you have on how to interpret the rise in long-termTreasury rates--that is, to what extent would you disaggregate therise into inflation premiums, or expectations instability premiums,and what part do you perceive to be real? By expectations instabilitypremiums I mean expectations that bond prices fluctuate sodramatically that, in fact, you're imposing a premium on the overallinterest rate. It strikes me that much of what we are viewing outthere, and how we view it, is going to depend to a very substantialextent on how we evaluate the various components in what is a fairlysignificant rise in the underlying bond rate. I think PresidentBoehne wanted to open it up?MR. BOEHNE. Let me just comment on the Philadelphia region.It continues to perform well above the national experience. NewJersey, Delaware and eastern Pennsylvania continue to have very lowunemployment rates. As a matter of fact, I think that if there's adrag on growth in these areas, it is that there's a labor shortage andbusiness firms simply can't keep up with production needs. Even thetraditional manufacturing areas in our District are showingimprovement, and unemployment is coming down in those areas as well.Both residential and nonresidential construction are very strong;retail sales are healthy, except for autos; loan growth is runningabout twice the national average; and real estate lending is growingabout three times the national average. So, we have a rather bullishregion that is being constrained mostly I think not by a lack ofaggregate demand, but labor. The concern that I have picked up in thelast couple of months, mostly in the business community, is a concernabout inflation. And I think it's being triggered by these laborshortages that people report, particularly at the entry level. If youlook at the help wanted ads in the newspapers, and just the helpwanted signs generally, they are at pretty high levels. While wageincreases have been reasonably moderate, I think a lot of people inthe business community are concerned that this is just the kind ofsituation that triggers a wage-price kind of spiral.On the national scene, I think the Greenbook numbers lookreasonably good. In terms of the risks--and I am being influenced bywhere I sit and the people that I talk to--it seems to me thatwhatever risks there were of having too weak an economy, or even arecession out through 1988, have shrunk considerably. I see the risksnow on the side of triggering some kind of a wage-price increase.There is one point, however, in the outlook that I think bearsmentioning, and that is that both the fundamentals and the tradesituation indicate a continuing downward movement in the value of thedollar. Indeed, this is reflected in the Greenbook forecast. We arein this "inflation/dollar" box, as you aptly put it a moment ago. ButI think that fundamentals have a way of winning out, even over centralbank policy. So, as we deal with these bouts of a falling dollar andfalling bond prices, we have to bear in mind that this is really whatwe expect. We expect the dollar to go down. And I think we have tobe careful that, as we deal with these episodes, we don't lose trackof the fundamentals. That leads to the question that you posed, whichis a very good question. I don't have an answer, but I have asuspicion that more of this increase in long rates is real than it is-15-9/22/87inflation. I say that because, if you look realistically at the factthat the U.S. is going to have to import lots of capital over the nextseveral years, as we have the last several years, I think that callsfor a certain premium over foreign interest rates. What we may beseeing here is some adjustment to what it takes to attract the kindsof funds that we need.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, with regard to your question aboutreal rates, we look at it in two different ways: first of all, througha model approach and, secondly, at the survey that is referred to asthe Hoey survey from Drexel Burnham Lambert. Both of these give us asimilar reading with regard to your question. In both of thoseinstances, much of the increase in nominal rates has produced anincrease in real rates. For example, the Hoey survey shows anincrease of only two tenths of 1 percent in inflationary expectationsbetween January and June. So, in effect, what we got was a very sharpincrease in real bond rates when we saw bond rates increase so sharplyin the April-May period. This has a big impact on our forecast--and Ithink also on the Board staff's forecast--because it does damp thegrowth of the interest-sensitive sectors of the economy. In somerespects, I draw a little comfort from that because we also havestrong growth in the net export area and, in effect, it is theweakness in the interest-sensitive sectors that makes room for thisgrowth in net exports.With regard to our forecast more generally, we estimate thatreal growth will average between 2-1/2 and 3 percent over the forecastperiod. We have actually shaded slightly our expectations with regardto net exports, but we still have real net exports contributingapproximately 1 percent to real GNP growth, both this year and nextyear. Also, and here we have somewhat of a difference with theGreenbook forecast, we have greater strength in consumption in nextyear's economy than the Greenbook forecast. That has something to dowith differences about the growth of real disposable income, if I'mnot mistaken. We are concerned about the inflationary impact, notonly of our own forecast but also that of the Greenbook. As you know,in the Greenbook forecast, inflation averages 4 to 4-1/2 percent, atleast in terms of the fixed-weight deflator; and we are not muchdifferent from that. But what concerns us is that, in some respects,the composition of that inflation in our forecast changes ratherdramatically. We are somewhere in a zone close to full employment, atleast according to our staff work, and thus, in our forecast and inthe Greenbook forecast as well, wage costs begin to accelerate. Tothe extent that the inflation in 1988 is more a function of what Iwould characterize as underlying factors and less a function of someof the temporary factors that we drew on this year, we think that theinflation problem will become more persistent. Finally, I do thinkthat in some important respects, the risks to the outlook are on theupside with regard to real growth and perhaps in inflation as well.My primary concern here centers around government spending because Ithink that the assumption of the $25 billion cut used both by us andin the Greenbook may not materialize. And if it does not, then we arelikely to get more strength from that sector than is included in ourforecast. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Mr. Corrigan.9/22/87VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In terms of the forecast, it hasbeen true for some time, and it's still true, that our staff work inNew York has the same overall result as the Greenbook forecast butwith an unchanged dollar and a slightly smaller adjustment in real netexports because we have a scattering of stronger elements of domesticdemand, including inventories. So, while the aggregate numbers lookvery'much the same, what lies beneath them is quite different insofaras the dollar and real net exports. Our inflation outlook, despitethe fact that we have the dollar stable, is about the same, or maybe ashade worse than the Greenbook.Mr. Boehne raised a question earlier in the discussion aboutthis overall adjustment process that I'd like to comment on justbriefly, and then turn back. I think, Ed, your question was: can itwork? Or is the scale of the problem so big that you can't get fromhere to there? When you look at the big three countries--the UnitedStates, Germany, and Japan--the fact of the matter is that byconventional standards the adjustment is well underway in the sensethat for both 1986 and 1987, and in our forecast for 1988, the growthin domestic demand in both Germany and Japan is stronger tosignificantly stronger than is the growth in their own GNP. In thecase of the United States, we still had domestic demand stronger thanGNP in 1986; but in 1987, and in our forecast and yours as well--although there are some differences there--you get a widening out suchthat GNP growth in the United States is something like a percentagepoint greater than growth in domestic demand. It is true that overallgrowth in Germany and Japan is perhaps lower than one would like tosee. But, the dynamics of the adjustment have set in, in what I thinkis not an inconsequential way. Again, the evidence in all three ofthe major countries is basically working the way the textbook says itshould. The problem, to some extent, is what Ed touched on earlier,and that is the scale of the adjustment that we are talking about andthe scale of adjustment that is needed. When you look at it in termsof the behavior of exports--and this is all relevant to the outlook,I'm just getting there in a roundabout way--we all know these numbersare lousy, but the numbers for July 1987 versus July 1986 indicatethat U.S. export growth really has been, I think we can say, almostspectacular. And it's not confined any more to a handful of productsor a handful of countries; it's pretty much across the board,including very sharp increases in exports even to Japan. The strengthof those export numbers in the context of the overall dynamics of theadjustment raises a couple of questions in my mind. What's offsettingit in part, of course, is imports. Our own imports are still very,very strong, across the board, with few exceptions--perhaps lumber.But, by and large, those imports are still humming and a lot of thatis price. Then again, how many J curves do we have to see in terms ofimport prices? That's one of the reasons why I like our forecast--atleast right now--better than I like the Board staff's forecast. But,when you put it together, it leads me to one or two possibleconclusions. One is that there really is something systematicallywrong with the trade numbers, at least as we see them month to month.The second is that the domestic economy is, in fact, stronger than wethink it is, or at least than the conventional measures are tellingus. My hunch is that probably both of those things are true: that thetrade numbers are messed up and that the domestic economy, ifanything, is actually a bit stronger than we think it is.-17-9/22/87Partly for the reasons I've just noted, I would certainlyjoin those who have already said that, in looking at the outlook atthis point in time, the risks are decidedly on the upside. I find ithard at this point to ignore the galaxy of numbers in the businessfixed investment areas, industrial production, orders, and labormarkets. They all seem to be to pointing in that direction, in acontext in which I really do believe that the margin of upside error,if you will, is really quite slim. I think you can now make a prettygood case that actual GNP is brushing up against potential GNP; labormarkets, no matter how you look at them, have to be at least near thedanger zone; and I think it's not hard to visualize at least someselective bottlenecks beginning to develop, for example, in nondurablegoods areas where we already see that raw and intermediate materialprices are rising. Now, we could get a little help. There is a faintchance, at least in the near term, that the oil price pressures couldbe downward rather than upward. That would be temporary, but that'spossibly a favorable straw in the wind. But when I put it alltogether, it seems to me that both the global picture as well as whatwe can derive from our own situation statistically lead me to viewthat the risks are on the upside.Now, on your question about the long-term Treasury rate, Mr.Chairman, I thought we were framing the question a little differentlythan maybe you were. I was prepared to answer this question: what doI think is driving the rate up? Is that what you are asking? I'm notsure it is the same.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The point is that, implicit in that, isthe breakdown of the components.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, the breakdown of thecomponents to the increment and the breakdown of the components to thelevel may not be the same, though. But, let me try to answer.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do both.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. If it were the increment in thenominal rate, which is the question I thought you were asking, I wouldput virtually none of that on volatility, which was the middle factoryou raised. I would put the greater weight on inflation-relatedconsiderations, including the exchange rate of the dollar. But, I dothink there is something real there too; I can't be very precise as towhat. But I'd give zero weight on volatility, certainly.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So this is your increment?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It has been volatile; therefore, itcan't be more volatile?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes, but I would say that while Ithink the bulk of the increment has been driven by these inflation-related things, I also would say that the level of the real interestrate does come out higher. Maybe, just maybe, that's because there issomething happening in terms of the marginal productivity of capital.It's possible.-18-9/22/87CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But, it's almost impossible to tell atthis time.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No, I agree.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. With regard to our view of the economy andconditions in the District, I think what we are seeing is quiteconsistent with something like the Greenbook forecast. In general,economic conditions in the District are quite good and have beenimproving consistently for some time. The only areas I hear anyreservations about have to do with residential construction, wherereports have tended to be mediocre, and with loan demand, wherebankers say there is no demand to speak of. Labor markets havetightened up a good deal, again, in general; but what is striking inthat regard is that there is not any discernible increase in the rateat which salaries and wages are rising as yet. Apparently, at thispoint, people are just taking the strategy of not filling jobs orfilling them more slowly than they otherwise would in thisenvironment. With regard to your question about interest rates and soforth, I guess I would not have a definitive answer either, but Iwould start with the dollar. It seems to me that we sometimes talk asif all declines in the dollar are equal. I don't start with thatposition. It seems to me that it matters a heck of a lot why thedollar is falling. For example, if we had fiscal policy in a positionwhere budget deficits were declining in a sustainable way over time, Imight predict that real interest rates were going to declinesustainably and, therefore, the dollar might decline in thatenvironment. I would say that would be fine; but I don't think thatcharacterizes the current situation at all. I think we are in asituation where, in fact, the adjustment is unlikely to come throughfiscal policy. Therefore, particularly in light of the June and Julytrade numbers, there are a lot of market participants who seem to feelthe adjustment is going to have to come through other policy steps inthis country. I think this is kind of what Mike and Ted Truman weretalking about earlier--if you are going to get continued improvementin trade, that requires higher real rates here to damp residentialconstruction, nonresidential construction, and so forth.Alternatively, of course, we may at some point get into the situationwhere we are not prepared for rates to rise in that fashion so that wesort of arrest the improvement in trade; that is, we get strongerdomestic demand and stall the improvement in the trade balance. Ithink that's the kind of box we are in as long as we have the fiscalpolicy outlook that we have. That situation seems to me to bediscouraging, as it has been for quite some time.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would start withthe region, by repeating what I said last month--that economicconditions in the Sixth District are really booming and seem to bestrengthening. The reports that we're getting from our directors andfrom other business people are extremely positive at this point andvery optimistic. And, it's fairly much across the board. Forexample, we are seeing increasing evidence of improvement in thetradeable goods areas, certainly in textiles. We are also gettingimprovement in apparel production. Paper production and chemicals-19-9/22/87also are doing a lot better, and I might say that paper and textilemills and factories are going just flat out at the moment in our area.We are now hearing about labor shortages, particularly in the textileareas, and there are some bottlenecks beginning to appear. Forexample, we have had reports of shipments of carpeting being delayedbecause of labor shortages. But having said that, at this point atleast, we have not seen yet any pressures on wages, since labor seemsto be moving from the slower-growth areas into the areas that arepicking up. So far, the wage pressures have not followed, at leastimmediately, from the labor shortages. Even on the commercialstructures side, we are seeing excess supplies of space being absorbedmore rapidly, and that is particularly true in the fast growing statesof Georgia, Florida, and Tennessee. Construction figures are up also.We are not only getting absorption; we are getting more construction,particularly in the hospital and warehouse operations. Risingmortgage rates have cut into the housing sector, particularly in themultifamily area. In Louisiana--I would single that out because we'vehad nothing but bad news for a couple of years in that area--we arebeginning now to get some good news, marginally better news. The rigcount is up and all of the oil and gas support services are beginningto come back on line.Turning to the general forecast, our forecast for the lasthalf of this year has strengthened a bit in comparison to what we hada month ago. Consumption seems to have picked up somewhat more thanwe had anticipated and we are seeing investment respond to higherplant utilization. Looking ahead to 1988, we are marginally lowerthan we were at the time of the last meeting, and just about in linewith the Greenbook forecast. The only difference we have with thestaff forecast is in the area of consumption which, of course, I'vementioned a couple of times before. And, as I indicated earlier, wedon't see quite the level of improvement in net exports that the staffis seeing. But when you net that out, we are pretty close for 1988.Also, I think it is significant, as far as our forecast is concerned,that we did not build into the forecast any tightening of monetarypolicy, which apparently the staff did. On the price side, again,we're pretty close to the Greenbook forecast. So, when I put all thistogether, Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that the forecast is reasonableand even a little optimistic. And I would agree with those who wouldput the risk on the upside rather than the downside.Now with respect to your question, I think there are probablyingredients of both. At least from where I sit, there is someinflationary expectation in these higher rates, but to a large extent,I think they are real. But having said that, it seems to me from thefew market participants that I've talked to, that there may be anelement of irrationality in the way the market is reacting. Thereactions to even minor declines in the value of the dollar areproducing higher rates than might have been called for. I don't knowhow to assess this, really; I'm just talking to a few people in themarket who are sitting in Atlanta and who have made this comment.They are saying, and I think there may be some validity to it, thatthere may be some over-reaction, although some other factors areinvolved. Now, if that's true, I think the policy implication is uponus, because they are going to be reacting perhaps adversely to thetrade numbers for August, which probably will not be very good. Wehave just done some work which would indicate that the seasonalfactors that are present in July are probably present in August as9/22/87well. So, we may get some equally bad trade numbers. And, as theGramm-Rudman fiscal policy debate goes on in the Congress and we don'tget anything out of that, I think there's going to be a reaction inthe bond market as well. It seems to me that the market is lookingfor every snippet of bad news that it can find and reacting to that,rather than trying to find something positive in the scenario.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. From a nationalperspective, our forecast is really very consistent with the staffforecast. I would say that we have been a little higher throughoutthe year and, therefore, the last revision by the staff brings itpretty much in line with our perspective.With regard to the District, whereas we have been a laggardthroughout this recovery, certainly, at this point we have turnedaround. The conditions and the trends in the District I think arevery favorable. Employment, for example, is very consistent with thenational numbers. Our unemployment is still higher than the nationalaverage, but I do think the employment numbers are coming along quitewell.I thought I would comment on just a couple of industries thatare important to the District that I think are going through aninteresting and positive adjustment. First, the steel industry is avery dramatic example of a shift that is taking place in a verytroubled industry: We have had in the Midwest just a whole host ofclosings, bankruptcies, and near-bankruptcies, and, in addition, someshutdown of capacity; but those who have survived and those who haveput some money into the plants, and have modernized them, certainly atthis point are doing very well. The decline in the dollar and theimport restrictions have helped tremendously, but the demand fordomestic steel is strong, and as a consequence, the plants areoperating at a much better rate. The demand for steel products seemsto be quite broadly based, and now is as strong as any time since1981. In getting to a point you raised earlier, many of theseproducts are on allocation; the delivery times are clearly moving upfrom eight to nine weeks, so there is a slowdown in the deliveryprocess. The service centers, as I understand it, are trying to buildinventories but are not able to do it; inventory is going out as fastas it comes in. And, not surprisingly, there is something of a priceincrease going on in the industry and the price increases for thefirst time in this cycle may really seem to be sticking. A tangiblesign of an improvement in this industry in the last six or eightmonths is that we've had an announcement of two new steel plants inIndiana: one a joint venture with a Japanese company, which is quite asignificant installation; and the second a stand-alone facility.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. These are both [unintelligible]integrated plants?MR. KEEHN. No, the Japanese one, I think, is fairlyspecialized; but they are brand new plants centrally located.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Cold-rolling operations? Or importingslab?-21-9/22/87MR. KEEHN. No, not importing--they are taking slab out of aChicago mill and cold-rolling it in Indiana. So, I do think it's anindustry that has gone through a tremendous transition. The otherindustry that is important to the District is heavy duty trucks--Class8 trucks. Sales this year, I think, are going to be 13 or 14 percenthigher than last year, and the outlook for next year is anotherincrease of 3 to 4 percent. These will go up to 125,000 to 130,000units and this is just a lot higher than what we were experiencingthree or four years ago. There is still a lot of capacity in thatmanufacturing process but, nevertheless, this is a business that seemsto have gotten better. Pricing is still tough, however.Nevertheless, from the District's perspective, it has been good.Let me say a quick word about agriculture by adding a littleto what I've said in the past: namely, conditions seem to havestabilized, albeit at low levels. Land values are beginning to move;transactions are higher, and in a couple of instances, significantlyhigher. But, the point I'd make on what I find to be a newdevelopment is that general business conditions, not just agriculturalconditions, in the area of Iowa seem to be better.Turning to the price issue, I must say that I find this avery, very difficult read. I keep hearing about price increases; I'vecommented on steel, but specialized chemicals, paper, paper products,brass, and copper all seem to be moving up in price. They don't showup yet in the CPI numbers. The competitive conditions for finishedproducts are very tough and people are being squeezed on margins; but,at some point, you just have to think that this is going to pokethrough. On the wage side, I'd add to the comments that we arehearing about shortages. We were up in Michigan the other day doing apresentation and some of the people were commenting that they justcan't get enough people to work in some of the operations there. Iwould think that, at some point, we are going to see something of anincrease on wage rates that's beyond what we've had over the last yearor so.Turning then, Mr. Chairman, to your question on long-termrates, which is a very, very key issue, like Jerry, I think it isawfully hard to analyze each part. But, I think that the underlyingrate of economic activity here is pretty good; it may be a little morerapid than we expected and, therefore, there may be some real pressureon rates. Also--and I can't analyze what part equals what--on theinflation side, I think there is growing skepticism out there; thereis concern about inflation, and something in the rate increase that wehave experienced certainly has to relate to that. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I guess it's somebody's turn tosay something not quite as positive as we have been hearing. I guessit falls to my lot, being from the Eleventh District. I wouldcharacterize our economy in the Eleventh District as still somewhatsluggish and a little fragile, although there have been tentativesigns of improvement. Businesses around the District that serve anational or international market all seem to be saying that they areseeing some improvement. These would be primarily in electronics,livestock, chemicals, and defense. There is a little more optimismthere. The businesses that serve their own local area or region,-22-9/22/87though, say that their business remains flat; they really have notseen any signs of improvement. Obviously, there is a correlation inattitudes and sentiment related to oil prices, since oil is soimportant in our region. With the improvement there, and with theincrease in the oil rig count and additional activity going on, thereis more optimism. There is a little more activity in relatedbusinesses; all but construction-related manufacturing are growing.Agriculture is stabilizing, and cotton and livestock farming are doingfairly well. Our retail sales remain fairly flat. We continue toworry somewhat about the condition of our financial institutions.Pick up a newspaper and you'll still find reports of foreclosures andbankruptcies continuing. Last week in Austin, which was really thebright spot for the last several years in Texas, there was the postingof a foreclosure of a fairly major hotel-office complex that waspretty new. There were foreclosure postings in Houston, also, of twoor three fairly well known good projects. This doesn't mean theforeclosures will actually occur; the postings could be part of arenegotiation. Nevertheless, it is upsetting. We saw a report lastweek that Dallas had lost 40,000 jobs over the last year. That seemsawfully high to me, but those are the kinds of reports we are hearing.Though we hope that we are on a comeback trail--and, if oil priceshold, I think we will be--I don't think we have seen the bottom of ourcommercial real estate problem. I think we probably are going to beworrying about that for at least two years, possibly three, before wecan work through that.On the national picture, and possibly I'm somewhatinfluenced by our own Eleventh District, we would come out--lookingout through the rest of this year to 1988--a little below where theGreenbook is this time. Although we moved our own forecast upslightly, we didn't come as far as the Board staff has in theGreenbook. On the long-term rate, I don't know that I have anyparticularly useful insight into that except that the evident concernabout inflation does not seem to be quite as deep among the peopleI've talked to; certainly, in our District, there is not really[unintelligible] to the problem.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I'm afraid I owe some apology forhaving discussed my thoughts on the state of the U.S. economy at atime you wanted to consign to questions. So let me just address thatlast question you posed as best I can, which is not very well. Ithink you have to look at the negative correlation we have had betweenexchange rates and long-term interest rates since the fall of 1986 toget an answer to that. There are three possible explanations: one isthat this has resulted from still a third factor, which is the rise ininflationary expectations. A second--and maybe the most popularexplanation of it--is that this decline in the dollar rate has been adecline in the real rate because of the persistently larger tradedeficits that we have had, and fears that this will be reflected inhigher import prices, which also will spill over into the prices ofgoods from those industries that compete with imports. And the thirdexplanation is that the rates may be high because the market isresponding to what it thinks we are likely to do; but if that is thecase, tightening would clearly be inappropriate because that wouldmean, I think, that a large part of that was real. My impression hasbeen that there really hasn't been that much response at the long end-23-9/22/87to actions that we have taken. For example, the response to what Ithought was a very strong statement via the discount rate increase andalso the raising of the borrowed reserve level was big at the shortend; but we didn't really have all that much response at the long end.So, that suggests to me that some part of this is probably real. Iguess I would end up with a view along the lines that Jerry firstoutlined, and some others have endorsed, that part of this is real andpart of this is inflationary expectations. I don't know what the mixis and I guess nobody else does. But, I believe both factors are atwork, I'm afraid.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I wish we knew the answer to this.MR. BLACK. I do too.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice President Hendricks.MR. HENDRICKS. I like the comments made by Ed Boehne. Weare experiencing a bullish feeling with respect to business in ourDistrict. I'm really not sure how much significance, if any, shouldbe placed on this observation but, at a recent meeting of ourdirectors we did notice for the first time, perhaps, some concernabout risk on longer-term loans, and some adjustments in their basiclending policies, at the margin.With respect to our outlook, it's quite similar to thestaff's Greenbook forecast, but we still continue to see the consumerin a stronger spending pattern than indicated by the staff. We alsosee housing as less of a drag on the economy. We don't believeexports are going to be quite as strong as projected in the Greenbook.Despite the sectoral differences in the projections, we come out atabout the same place, with real GNP growing at about the same pace asthe forecast in the Greenbook. We would see that, however, beingaccompanied by some pretty strong wage and price pressures.With respect to your question, I don't know how much I canadd on that, but recent changes in the rates do appear to us to berelated to the rate of interest [needed] to attract foreign savings.We believe that some of the earlier increases that we saw might havebeen tied more closely to inflation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. First of all, I would say that over the lastyear or so, performance in our District has been somewhat strongerthan the national average. Employment has been about in line, retailsales somewhat stronger, and I guess the most notable area of strengthhas been construction, both residential and nonresidential. Over thelast couple of months, I would say things have slowed a bit,relatively speaking. We haven't kept pace with the employment gainsnationally either in non-ag employment or manufacturing employment.Retail sales have held up well, relatively speaking. Residentialconstruction is in line with the national averages and nonresidentialis still somewhat stronger but growing at a much slower pace than itwas. Anecdotally, we've picked up some evidence of the same thingthat has been mentioned around the table today in terms of laborshortages. There was a company with about 90 semi-skilled employeesthat was shut down, and another big employer in St. Louis in town-24-9/22/87expected to pick up, I don't know, somewhere on the order of a thirdto a half of them. It ended up getting only five of them, becausethere were so many other people bidding. You hear that in other areasas well. One other thing I've heard in that regard is that companiesthat have generally been stable in terms of employment, or maybe evenreducing employment here, recently have added employees. There aresome noises about trying to negotiate some of the give-backs that wereobtained over the last couple of years. I've heard just one exampleof that; it's not widespread.On the broader outlook, while I have been, and continue tobe, in agreement with putting the priority on price stability versusgrowth, the projections that come out of our Bank, which are based onmoney-driven models, have been showing for some time--and I thought Iwould mention it this month--the risk of a sharp slowdown in theeconomy in 1988 and even the possibility of a recession. Given thebehavior of velocity and so forth, I think it is hard to evaluate thisexactly, but one of the things that people continue to feel reasonablystrongly about is the effect of a sharp slowing in money in relationto trend, if it is sustained for two or more quarters. And, it'sreally on that basis that we come up with this forecast. So, that's avery different view than previously expressed. I think it's difficultto evaluate because you can't know the effect of all the liquiditythat was put in over the last couple of years, and whether that mightcontinue to have a stimulative effect looking forward.One last point on the interest rate question: I suspect it'sa combination of an increase in inflationary expectations and someincrease in the real rate. The only other thing I would mention thathasn't already been mentioned is that we are at, or have passedthrough, a major inflection point in terms of the interest rateoutlook that's internalized in, say, the minds of traders and soforth; and people I would say, as we do, just follow markets quiteclosely, very quickly. But, in terms of broad-based behavior, I thinkthat really gets built into prices over a surprisingly long period oftime. I think one of the things we are seeing here is peoplecontinuing to adjust portfolios to a different interest rate outlook,and probably thinner participation in the market, at least on thebuying side, by final investors. So, I think there's a certainelement of uncertainty associated with this adjustment phenomenon.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. In regard to long bond rates, I think what weare seeing has something to do with the development of an exchangerate policy that no one thought out that carefully ahead of time.It's unfortunate that there can't be some median ground betweenrecognizing that monetary policy needs to be adjusted to take intoconsideration foreign exchange developments and trying to pinpoint anddraw lines in the sand in regard to foreign exchange rates. If we hadbeen willing to make monetary policy adjustments before we drew thelines in the sand, we probably would have avoided some of thedifficulties we are now in. Nevertheless, the line got drawn in thesand. And when that happens, it is very difficult to unhitch during aperiod in which inflation expectations are on the increase--particularly, I think, when you have some commodity price pressuresthat would require stable exchange rates in order not to havecommodity prices rise. So, in that environment, it seems to me that-25-9/22/87long bond buyers are mainly anticipating what monetary policy andfuture short-term rates are going to be, and it's kind of a win-winsituation from their perspective, because they think that we mighthave to raise rates to support [the dollar in] foreign exchangemarkets or we might have to raise rates to resist inflation; andeither one works in the same way. Second, I think the long bondprices are affected today more strongly than they were ten years agoby a kind of speculative cycle. That is, at one point in time, longbond buyers really intended to keep the bonds. But we have developedan environment in which we have investors and fund managers whosesuccess is based upon their performance; and there are times when itdoesn't pay to be owners of bonds and, consequently, you're going tohave long bond rates move a little too far. In some ways, it doesn'tbother me to see long-term interest rates high. I think it wouldbother the U.S. Congress. I hope it would bother them, and I hope itwould indicate to them how much opportunity there is to help there bycontrolling spending.In regard to the Greenbook forecast, I really have nosignificant disagreement over the 1987 forecast. The staff has beenlowering their inflation rates for the second half of 1987, so I don'tsee much disagreement there. I do have three areas of difference inregard to the 1988 forecast. I disagree, I guess, with Martha andsome others who took one position with regard to real exports. I'mtaking another position: I believe real exports will maintain a longersustained growth path than is assumed in the forecast. I believe thatwe have many producers in the United States who have never learned tobe involved in international markets. But once the United Statesbecame such a huge importer, we began to change the whole nature ofthe opportunities that exist. So, we have many, many small andmedium-size businesses that have never taken that international marketseriously, and now they are learning that they do have to compete ininternational marketplaces at home and abroad. And so I think we havea long learning curve involved here. We have a lot of financialinstitutions that have not done very well with regard to recognizingexport lending. But I think that learning curve also will occur.Therefore, I expect that these present exchange rates will give us awonderful opportunity for a long period of export increases.As for my second disagreement with the 1988 forecast--and Iknow that Mike, or maybe Ted, mentioned the GNP deflator and itsstrange behavior--I would point out the staff's numbers on the CPI.In July, the staff had forecast a 60 basis point increase in the CPIfrom the third quarter of 1987 to the fourth quarter of 1988. Nowthey are projecting a 150 basis points increase in the CPI. Now, thatreally is making things get worse rather rapidly. I think that's notlikely, first of all, because businesses have found that theenvironment is one in which you do not make profits by being able toincrease your prices but you do it by learning to control costs. So,I think we are in a different environment than we were. Second, wehave already gone through the big oil price increase, which the staffis telling us should have occurred earlier. About the second half of1987 is when it should hit us, and I think that has kind of passed us.Third, I think foreign exchange rates are not likely to fall by theamount [indicated in the forecast], because I would presume that themajority of this Committee would not believe that the inflationforecast that we have is acceptable and they would be willing to takethe steps that are necessary to not have those inflation rates-26-9/22/87materialize. Consequently, the dollar should behave quite well inthat environment.The third disagreement [with the forecast] is in regard totax receipts. I think everyone is underestimating the effects of theTax Reform Act, which is our first tax reform act since 1963. It isthe first time we have broadened the base while decreasing the rates.All the evidence shows that the tax receipts are coming in higher thananticipated. We are going to have tax receipts that are going to bethe largest percent of GNP in any peace-time year in our history. Notall that goes away with the one-time capital gains move, so I amsomewhat optimistic in that regard. I am certainly willing to takewhatever steps are necessary to make certain that the forecast for1988 isn't correct because, if it is, then it is absolutely essentialthat we have policies that would lead to a tremendous slowdown in thiseconomy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will try to be verybrief in view of the coffee being outside! With respect to the TenthDistrict, we do see some very, very modest recovery. Looking atvarious sectors of the economy, starting with agriculture: commodityprices are up; red meat prices are very good; government transferpayments are outstanding; and, as a result, there is some comfort inthe agricultural sector--or at least among those who are still in thesector. Lastly, I would say that our most recent survey indicatesthat agricultural land prices have stabilized, and there is a modestuptick in those prices as well. So, agriculture, from a very lowlevel, has a good outlook for the rest of 1987 and quite likely in1988, depending upon what the farm subsidy program will be in 1988.When you look at energy, the same is true: from a very, very low baseit looks a bit better. In July, for example, there were 373 rigsworking in the Tenth District as opposed to [unintelligible] in June.That's not much of an uptick, to be sure, and it is only 20 percent ofthe level that was achieved in 1982, which was the peak of the energyboom. So, it is still at a very low level. [Unintelligible]supporting a bit. Commercial real estate has been very depressed inDenver, Oklahoma City, and Tulsa--those areas that built onexpectations [generated by] the energy and agricultural booms back inthe early 1980s, inflationary expectations, [unintelligible]. Thereis a very slow absorption rate of some very nice and new commercialstructures. In the Kansas City area there has been some damping incommercial construction, but nonetheless, it still looks veryprosperous. In some areas, there has been a bit of damping inresidential starts and sales, but activity is still above a year agothroughout the District in the aggregate. One last point that I wouldmake with respect to economic activity in the District would be on themanufacturing sector: the automobile industry is not working at fullproduction and, as a matter of fact, there continue to be layoffs inplants, particularly in the Kansas City area, in the GM plantsspecifically. There has been a bit of light at the end of the tunnelin the aircraft industry in the sense that sales most recently havebeen up in dollar volume but down in unit sales, largely because thesales are of jet aircraft as opposed to the smaller units.Let me just address, then, our view of the staff forecast.They are a bit more bullish than we are. We look for about 2-3/4-27-9/22/87percent growth not only for the remainder of 1987 but into 1988. Intrying to look at their forecast in relation to our numbers, I believethe difference is that they have a buildup in inventories in thefourth quarter that goes out into 1988. That may be the difference intheir forecast and ours, but it is such a modest difference that Idon't think there would be a lot to argue about. To be perfectlyhonest, I hope their forecast occurs. I don't feel there is much riskon the upside, however, of this getting away from us.Lastly, as to your question on long-term bond rates, Isuspect it is a part of all three of the things that have beenmentioned. I guess I would come out on the side of giving more weightto the view that it is an increase in real rates necessary to attractfunds to support this federal budget deficit as opposed to justinflationary expectations. The uncertainty created by all of thislargely accounts for it; how you disaggregate it, I don't know.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice President Eisenmenger.MR. EISENMENGER. Turning first to the regional economy, wemay have the strongest regional economy in the nation, and I think agood monetary policy for the New England region would be analternative D. When you get together with our businessmen, all theycan talk about is the labor problem--that they can't get the laborthey need. We hear scattered reports that people are spinning offtheir operations in eastern Massachusetts or Connecticut and puttingthem in the depressed areas of northern Maine, or they are talkingabout putting them in other parts of the country. They are not movingtheir entire operation, but are moving pieces of it. However, I don'tthink New England is typical. We have an overall unemployment rate of3 percent, and in New Hampshire, it is 2.2 percent. And that is nottypical of the nation, which is 6 percent. So, you can't really lookat the world through our eyes.In our view, the Greenbook forecast for the U.S. economy inthe next 15 months is almost the ideal scenario. If we have asufficient guiding system to accomplish what that forecast suggests,that is almost as good as we can expect, considering the constraints.It is showing a real growth rate of something like 2-1/2 percent withthe overall employment rates and capacity utilization rates onlyslightly different than they are now, which would suggest we wouldhave only this minor uptick in inflation next year. And that is anideal scenario. So the question is: Can we get there? At least as weread it, there is not much risk on the downside any more. The neworders that are coming in, the industrial production statistics, andthe probable greater strength from foreign orders, suggest that thedangers of a recession, at least in the next 18 months, are prettywell washed away. On the upside--the possibility of having somethingfaster than a 2-1/2 percent real growth rate--we have set in train twoactions just in the last 25 days which provide us some insurance[against that]. And the staff talks about additional actions duringthe next year that--it is our best guess--would provide additionalinsurance. Our hope is that we can achieve the forecast that theGreenbook so optimistically puts forward. I don't think I haveanything to contribute to what other people have said on the long-termbond rate.-28-9/22/87MR. JOHNSON. What has the regional inflation rate been doingin New England?MR. EISEMENGER. Well, wage rates are moving up faster.MR. JOHNSON. But overall, I mean the broader--MR. EISENMENGER. Well, you would have to talk about pieces.If you talk about the price of housing, we used to be--MR. JOHNSON. The Boston CPI?MR. EISENMENGER. When you talk about rental housing, itdoesn't show up that much. But, in fact, when you're trying to bringin professional people, you can't do it. All the businessmen wetalked to say they can't bring in anybody to buy a shack that costs$250,000; so there is no labor mobility in view of the housingshortage. Eventually, we will not have that housing shortage, as wedidn't have it in the long run in California. It may be three yearsaway. So there is not much mobility, despite the fact that we paysomewhat higher wages, because the real cost of living for someonemoving in and buying a house is almost impossible.MR. JOHNSON. Well, I agree with most of the discussion onthe economy. It has been covered pretty well. I do think the economyhas clearly picked up strength, and there is very little downside[risk] in the economy now. It is clearly in an expansion phase at ahigher level than it was on before, but there's still an outstandingquestion--we've already discussed this and Mike went over it verywell--as to how much of this is production-generated by the externaleconomy and inventory building versus an overall expansion inaggregate demand. I think that is the key to what we would have to doon the monetary policy side. As I said earlier, I think that a lot ofthis seems to be trade-related. Some of it is not. I think there hasbeen a buildup in inflationary expectations. I am fairly pleased atthe moves we have taken; I think they were proper and should have theeffect of eventually moderating aggregate demand to a level consistentwith the forecast. Now, we are hedging against the plausibility ofwhat kind of velocity number you could expect to go with thoseaggregates. Like I say, I think we are close to having the thingcornered. The lags are long; we may have to go through a few quartersof some pressure before we see the other side of that. But, I don'tsee a lot of room for nominal GNP under the kind of monetary policy wehave now. The numbers don't seem to add up, except for maybe a coupleof exceptional quarters, in the short run. A couple of other points Ithink are interesting: in spite of our concerns about the tradesituation and the deficit--and I agree those are the major fundamentalconcerns--we seem to pass over those large deficit items. I thinkthat's because we are concerned more about the longer run; but we passover the really tremendous improvement in the budget deficit thisfiscal year over the last fiscal year, without a dime's improvement inthe current account. The amount of pressure that has been taken offhas to be relatively substantial. We have gotten no real reduction inthe current account and a $60 billion dollar reduction in the federalbudget deficit. That has to be an important factor. Now, whetherthat continues is another matter. I think that is the question. But,if anything, we have relieved pressures on the capital import side.Maybe we are making up that difference on the domestic growth side and-29-9/22/87the demands of government are shifting more toward the private sector.But we have seen the dollar come down and we probably have seen netcapital outflows.In terms of the question of long-term interest rates, I tendto think that what has happened is mostly inflationary expectations.I think long rates have gone up primarily due to that. My personalopinion is they probably overshot, and eventually things will settleback down a little in the market. As I said, the flattening of theyield curve from our discount rate change was somewhat comforting;even though we didn't actually see a decline in long rates, we did seea flattening. I don't see anything out there that would push up thereal rate dramatically. I think some of that inflationaryexpectation--I really don't know how much--is sort of a risk premium,but that could be put in the inflation expectations category. I don'tsee anything that shocked the cost of capital that would, in a way,raise the real interest rate. In other words, I don't see anythingthat has improved real returns on capital investment dramatically. Ifanything, the repeal of the investment tax credit in the tax bill hasreduced returns on equipment; and there probably has been animprovement in terms of inventories because of the lower corporaterate; but, overall, I don't see any big shock to the cost of capital.So, I think it is mainly inflationary expectations and, hopefully, itwill run off over time.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. I still think the hallmark of the recovery isreally a better balance in the economy as a whole. The sectors thathave been strong in the past are not growing quite as rapidly, or areactually shrinking, and I think that is something that we should keepin mind. If you look, for instance, at the projections in theGreenbook for 1987 and 1988, you still see quite a few minus signs.Durables are contracting this year at a 2.3 percent rate; nondurablesare only up 0.8 percent; nonresidential structures are -2.7 percent;residential structures are -5.5 percent; and federal spending is -3.2percent. So, there are quite a few sectors that are certainly notcharacterized by boom conditions, while others like agricultural,business equipment, and so on, are doing quite well. As a result, youget that better balance. Also, as many speakers pointed out, thegreat improvement in federal revenues, together with the restrainedfederal spending, really does a lot on the fiscal deficit side andbrings a better balance on that score. I think it would be a mistaketo hold up the dollar with further tightening of monetary policy,because we would be inviting a slowdown in those sectors that, at themoment, are really carrying the economy: real estate would be furtherdepressed, and the capital sector would slow down. And, we also needthe exchange rate change that is projected in the Greenbook in orderto get that improvement in the trade balance that we are all hopingfor.Turning to the the long-term bond question, I agree with mostof the things that have been said before, but let me add oneadditional factor. If you look at the increase in interest rates thatwe have had over the last year, you see that there were noticeablysharper increases in the long-term Treasury bonds than in long-termmortgage bonds and long-term corporate bonds. I would put a lot ofthat, which amounts to 50 to 100 basis points, at the door of the many-30-9/22/87debt moratoriums that we have had, or the nonrenewal of the debtceilings, in the last five months. I think there have been four ofthose episodes; and that certainly must have a chilling effect,particularly on foreign investors who are looking at the United Stateswith a jaundiced eye and putting us in the same league with countriesthat can't service their debt. So, that certainly has been a factorcontributing to higher long-term Treasury rates in addition to thereal increase and the high inflationary premium we have had.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. In a prior life, I worked with corporateplanning, so I was just sitting here thinking of that in ourdiscussion this morning. First of all, when you work with corporateplanning, your bosses are always challenging your forecasts and theywill not allow--at least mine didn't allow--you to utilize a singleforecast. Or, if you did, they were always wondering about where theweaknesses were and whether or not something might hit them that wouldput them out of business. You are not allowed to bet the bank, or betthe company, on forecasts. So, I just wanted to mention a couple ofthings that I think we have to look at as we look ahead. One that Isort of hinted at it earlier is whether or not we are sufficientlyincorporating the interest moves we have already had into thisforecast. And if we are, are we incorporating the interest moves thatwe expect are yet to come? Also, there's the question: what if thedollar does not, in fact, decline more? So much of 1988 depends uponthe trade turnaround; and if we think a weaker dollar is needed toproduce at least part of that, then I think that is a vulnerability inthis forecast. Also, and this has been mentioned by Wayne Angell andBob Heller, I really think we are not paying much attention to thechange in fiscal policy. When you go from a $221 billion deficit to$160 billion--and I've heard this morning that it might even come inbelow $150 billion--that's a major change from one year to the next.I am not necessarily a Keynesian, but I do think there is such a thingas fiscal policy, and it certainly works with a lag. I remember thesummer of 1984, sitting around this table with many of the people whoare here today, and it was very easy then to simply project the trendsof early 1984, which looked tremendously strong. And, frankly, wemissed the fact that business was going to slow down; just about thetime we thought it was looking most terrific was when we got the 90-degree turn. I hope we are not doing that today.On the interest rate question, because I am an old lady Iremember being in financial markets before inflation was a big deal,mainly in the 1960s. And interest rates moved up; one of the reasonsthat long governments moved up involved simply the volume offinancing, which is, of course, tied to the deficit. And, as BobHeller said, recently we have had these problems with bumping upagainst the debt ceiling and postponements of auctions. Then, all ofa sudden, Congress gets religion and takes care of this, and you getfive auctions pushed through in a very short period of time, and thisjerks things around. And yet, if no one was talking about inflation,I think that would happen. It certainly happened in August. It'sprobably going to happen again in the next couple of weeks. Also,there is just uncertainty about what's going on, uncertainty aboutwhat we are doing here. I think we could help that problem if wereleased the minutes earlier so that people would not have to analyzeevery tea leaf to try to figure out what we're up to. I think that-31-9/22/87contributes to this situation. Also, there has been improvement incommunications and information flow. If you go back to the 1960s and1970s, not every person around America and around the world had a CRTon his or her desk. Now every gunslinger sits there and, whereas theyused to be told that the one thing to watch was M1, now they have beentold that the one thing to watch is the relationship between thedollar and the yen or the dollar and the mark in the foreign exchangemarkets. Most of these people are not economists; they are traders;and you give them two easy pieces of guidance and that is what theytrade on. So they contribute to this instability, I think, as you getthis transmission from the exchange market into the bond market withthe speed of light almost. There are just a lot more players and Idon't think they are necessarily really weighing what's going on inthe real economy; and neither do I think that they are doing athorough analysis of the inflationary forces at work or not at work.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It seems to me, asI've listened to the comments made around the table this morning, thatthere's a very, very strong centralizing character to the projectionsthat have been made by everyone--the Greenbook and the Districtforecasts. I think that they constitute, in their aggregate wisdom, avery responsible and good forecast; and I accept it. I would like tomake this comment: the projections arise, as they must, fromconventional economic analysis and historical experience; and I wouldlike to suggest that maybe we should be a little open and alert to thepossibility that there are some unconventional and untraditionalthings going on. Standing back from the trees and looking at theforest, I observe that we are about to end the fifth year of what hasbeen called a recovery. I'm not sure how long you call something arecovery, but this one is going to be five years old in another coupleof months; and I note that at the end of the fifth year the economyis, in fact, accelerating and inflation is declining by most measures.Inflation is projected to increase for some very good reasons, butright now you've got an economy that is accelerating and inflationthat is decreasing--which is pretty unconventional. Industrialproduction is going up at an accelerating rate; unemployment has beendropping very strongly and is probably now somewhere near its naturalrate. And yet, at the same time, we are seeing very, very smallincreases in the unit costs of production and a very flat producerprice index. In fact, last month, the PPI was zero. That seems to bea little unconventional and untraditional. On the trade balance andthe J curve, we are not getting the effects that would have beenexpected. They are stretching out; we still think they are going tobe there, but that has been behaving unconventionally. GovernorJohnson noted a few moments ago the fact that we have taken $60billion of fiscal stimulus out of the economy, and yet none out of thetrade deficit. And I think a lot of people would have been surprisedahead of time that those two things could have coexisted.Incidentally, as the economy is accelerating its growth rate, that isoccurring while $60 billion of fiscal stimulus is, in fact, coming outof the economy.I would suggest the possibility that inflation may behave inan untraditional way also. Maybe that also will stretch out and notaccelerate. I ask myself: What possibility is there that could occur?I see several possibilities. They are all soft, and I would hate to9/22/87have to try to defend any of them. But, for one thing, I suspect thatwe may be undermeasuring our productivity increase. We may be doingbetter than we know. I've talked to Mike Prell and some others aboutthis some. I think we have a much higher level of mobility in thiseconomy that is helping us deal with imbalances as they show up,rather than just suffer from them. For instance, instead of justaccepting higher wage costs in Boston, we are moving plants to therural regions of New England where wage costs are lower. That'smobility. A lot of bankers who are out of business in Texas are goingto places where the banking system is stronger. That's mobility.There's a lot of that going on and that didn't used to be there. Ithink we may be in an era of very intense competition from severaldifferent respects. For one, the U.S. is back. I think that ourindustry is waking up and beginning to compete. Governor Angell spokeabout that a few minutes ago and I agree with him. Also, there aremany more serious competitors in the world economy than just a fewyears ago. They are serious and they are fierce, and I think that isone thing that is going to tend to impede the advance of inflation. Ispoke at the last meeting of this group about what seem to me to bebasic long-running, underlying deflationary tendencies in the worldeconomy. I won't go back over that ground but I do think they arestill there. All this is to say that I would not quarrel with theprojection that we have over the next five quarters, but I'd like topique a little interest maybe--on the part of some of the researchdirectors around here, and some others, who are far better at thissort of analysis than I am--to see whether or not there are somediscontinuities going on that could be favorable discontinuities.And, I think we should be open to those sorts of possibilities andalert to them. Meanwhile, I think we definitely have to be ready todeal with these inflationary expectations and not let that genie outof the bottle unnecessarily. Thank you, sir.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you, Governor. Now let's move onto Don Kohn.MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As it turns out, andwith no coordination ahead of time, I swear, the initial part of mybriefing will deal with the question you asked and the answer willhave no more precision than any [unintelligible]. And then I want togo on and talk about perhaps some of the implications of any increasein the interest rates. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you very much. I think it'salmost dinner time, so let's break for coffee![Coffee break]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, we better get back to the agenda.As to the general discussion, I find myself probably about in themiddle of much of what I have been listening to. The point I wouldmake at the moment is this: while the economy is clearly quite strong,I think the orders pattern and all the various elements we usuallylook at are fairly balanced; to a certain extent the outlook is beinggiven to us far more concretely than it usually is. This is moreclassic than one realizes. I grant what Mike Kelley is saying: thatthere is something different. There is always something different;something that does not look like all the previous ones. There isnever anything identical, and it is always a puzzlement. But there is-33-9/22/87nothing very unusual about this one. And, it seems to have fairlygood momentum. The main issue, however, which I think Governor Angellmentioned, is that we do not yet have any evidence of actualinflation. By that I mean as distinct from expected indicators. Thenumbers really are remarkably soft. While we can anticipate theelements of labor tightening--and I think it is probably quite correctto say that we would expect wage acceleration to occur and labor coststo run up--that has not yet happened. And what that suggests to me isthat, while we are tight and are likely to get tighter, we haven't yettriggered anything. I think that the time frame in which these eventswill occur is often somewhat difficult to pin down, and I mean by thaton both sides. It is quite conceivable that three weeks from now wewill all of a sudden begin to get some stories of significant wagepatterns emerging. The Wall Street Journal will usually show up onthe front page with a real [unintelligible] of stories about prices,profits, inflation, and the like, and that could very well be thefirst indication that something is happening. The point is that noone can write that story at the moment; it is not in the numbers.Consequently, as far as policy is concerned, where we are atthe moment strikes me as quite appropriate to the outlook. I don'tfeel terribly strongly about it, but I would be inclined to start offmerely by assuming that we stay at "B", and that we stay with the $600million on the borrowing requirement, if for no other reason than itis not a significant edging higher from where we are currently. Thereis very little doubt in my mind that we can do nothing to the extentof the accumulation of economic activity that is occurring. But Ithink it does position us in the appropriate place. Having said that,I don't see the need to phrase the directive, as we did the last time,with a tilt toward further tightness. I think for the moment it isprobably well enough to stay basically where we are. I don't knowwhere that will fit me in the rest of this group, but I'd love tohear. Mr. Vice Chairman, would you like to voice your opinion?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'd be completely satisfied withthat formulation--that is, staying with $600 million borrowing andusing symmetric language. In a nutshell, I think that is where policyshould be.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's what?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In a nutshell, I genuinely thinkthat is precisely where policy should be.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. That's my policy prescription four square.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I am with the Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I support your proposition.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I would support the proposition.I would prefer, however, to drop back to the $500 million borrowing-34-9/22/87level. You said it doesn't take us much from where we are currently,but if, indeed, $100 million equates to about 1/4 percent [on thefederal funds rate] you are looking at least at that amount more yetto take place that the market has not perceived. And, since themarket doesn't know we have been at $600 million, the $500 millionseems more appropriate to me, and that would be my choice.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. I fully agree with these last remarks. I thinkwe are at $500 million and, therefore, we should probably stay around$500 million rather than do further tightening. Let me make onefurther remark: some data that I have just scratched up indicate that,yes, there have been [similar] episodes before. As a matter of fact,there is a precise duplication of our current situation as far as theexchange rate changes are concerned. And that is that Germany andJapan, between 1980 and 1985, had exactly the same drop in exchangerates. What was their policy? The discount rate was lowered in Japanfrom 7-1/4 percent in 1980 to 5 percent in 1985; in Germany it droppedfrom 7-1/2 percent to 4 percent in that period of declining exchangerates. Interest rates on three-month money dropped from 11 to 6-1/2percent in Japan and from 9 to 5 percent in Germany. As for the onething that we all worry about--inflation--the CPI in 1980 in Japan was8 percent and in 1985 it was 2 percent; in Germany it went from 5.4 to2.2 percent. So, I don't think that the exchange rate really shouldbe driving our policy. And in Germany and Japan, which successfullynavigated that period, the exchange rate certainly wasn't taken as acause to tighten monetary policy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In the time frame you were looking at,were they down more than we were in real terms in that time?MR. HELLER. In real terms what?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In other words, the differential betweenU.S. rates and German and Japanese rates in the time frame.MR. TRUMAN. Their long-term rates essentially rose duringthat period.MR. HELLER. They what?MR. TRUMAN. Their long-term real interest rates rose duringthat period.MR. HELLER. Real interest rates you are saying? I haven'tlooked at real rates; so far they have always been--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Ours were coming down very significantlyat the same time, so it is really a question of [differentials]--although I don't disagree with you, as you know, on the statement youmade on the exchange rates at this point.MR. HELLER. So taking that into account--and for me it isimportant not to get overly tight on the exchange rate question--Iwould go with the $500 million, which is current policy, I wouldargue.-35-9/22/87CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I would favor "B" as you specified it, includingthe $600 million borrowing target. And I think I would have at leasta mild preference for retaining the current asymmetry in the directivefor two reasons. One is, as you have pointed out, we really can'tfind concrete signs of acceleration of inflation in the price or wagedata yet. And that, it seems to me, gives us an opportunity to doperhaps a little better on the inflation side than the Greenbooksuggests--to lower inflation next year, if we are a bit careful here;and I think that asymmetry in the directive would help on that score.Also, as I think about the near-term outlook--the next six weeks orso--it seems to me the risks are still likely to be in terms of dollarweakness, or some disruptions in the bond market that produce higherlong-term rates [associated with] signs of tightening labor marketsand growing concerns about acceleration of inflation down the road.The asymmetric directive positions us better should that materialize,and, as I said, that's more likely to be the risk in the very shortrun.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do you think we'll see it in some of thedata before then or just in qualitative--?MR. STERN. I doubt that we would see it in the wage or pricedata in that time horizon.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So it is really a question of theevidence that emerges before the numbers begin to show?MR. STERN. Right. And people's attitudes about what isunfolding.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Si Keehn.MR. KEEHN. I agree with alternative B, and I have apreference, at least, for the asymmetrical language as it iscurrently. Also, if there were going to be a bias, then I suppose thebest nuance for the bias about borrowing would be up rather than downfrom the $600 million level. But I do think changing the fed fundsrange from 5 to 9 percent perhaps would accomplish that bias.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So you're going look at "B", $600million, and you prefer a tilt upward?MR. KEEHN. Right. I would be for "B", $600 million, and abias upward.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, my preference is to maintainthe current stance of monetary policy and I interpret your formulationas being somewhat of a tightening, albeit fairly slight. The reason Iwould like to maintain a current stance at the moment is, first ofall, as you've indicated, we don't really see any evidence ofinflation in the numbers. But, more importantly, as I think I saidearlier, over the next several weeks we are going to get some numbersthat might produce more volatility in the market. We have thislinkage, apparently, between the foreign exchange market and the bond-36-9/22/87market; if we get a bad trade number again, we probably are going tosee a fall in the dollar, and that will be translated into higher bondyields. And that suggests to me that, at that point, we may need totighten a little; and I would prefer to wait until that time to doanything. So, my difference with you is fairly slight, I think; myformulation would be for borrowing at between $500 and $600 million,with the center of gravity probably in between there, and anasymmetric directive to take account of what I think is going tohappen and our need to tighten.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You're saying "B" with $500 million buta tilt upward?MR. FORRESTAL. Yes, a tilt upward. It's a "B+" with anasymmetric directive. That's called fine tuning.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I must say I'm learning a new vocabularysitting in on these meetings.MR. BOEHNE. You have only begun, I might say.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We abrogate the English language everytime I come here, it seems. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, at this meeting, I certainly couldsupport alternative B, but I do have a preference for alternative C,for many of the reasons that I mentioned in the go around. Theprospect, in my view, is for growth in aggregate demand at, or above,long-run potential. Given the fact that the economy is operating inthe zone of full employment, this strength in demand, in combinationwith the declining value of the dollar can be expected to put upwardpressures on prices. Also, growth in labor costs, which is part ofour forecast and that of the Board staff's as well, should lead to anunderlying inflation rate that is higher in 1988. Moreover, thisinflation prospect could be significantly worsened if the expectedreduction in Federal government spending does not materialize. Giventhat it takes a long time for our actions to affect inflation, it isimportant, in my view, that we not delay until inflation already showssigns of becoming more persistent. Finally, I'd make the point that,if I read footnote 1 on page 10 correctly, it looks to me like, in thenot too distant future, alternative C is assumed by the Greenbook, asit is in our forecast. So when we talk about the economy and itsperformance, and particularly the Greenbook forecast, please keep inmind that that assumes alternative C in the not too distant future.At least that's the way I read that footnote.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The assumption, of course, is that youagree with that forecast. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I am in favor of no change in the reservepressure, which I guess is not really a stated option; I am somewhatbetween "A" and "B", $500 million borrowing target, and I would prefersymmetrical language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I think that in the short run therisks that we have here in the inflation area are more expectations-37-9/22/87than anything else, and we should maintain a posture against that, andmove against that. I think the economy can handle the slighttightening that going on to $600 million in borrowing would imply. SoI favor "B" with $600 million, and would like to see symmetricallanguage.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, you might think in view of how Istressed the unacceptability of the forecast for next year that Iwould be advocating "C" as Bob Parry did, but I really think the stepswe have taken already have been pretty strong. In fact, we haven'teven implemented all we agreed to do last time, so I would not favoranything beyond "B", particularly since I think that there has been arise in real rates. Also, we have had pretty subdued behavior on thepart of the aggregates. But I wouldn't want the symmetrical part ofit because I just don't see the likelihood that we would want to easeduring this period. As a general rule, I'd rather it be symmetricalbecause I don't think we usually know; but I think something would beread into it if we eliminated the asymmetry this time.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I am sort of caught between the $500 and $600million, but I am basically comfortable with alternative B withsymmetric language. I had thought about $500 million with a tilttoward tightening for the same reasons that Bob Forrestal mentioned;there is something in that, too. But I don't feel strongly eitherway. I would appeal to Peter, though, that in maintaining $600borrowing--which I think is fine--we ought to do that as smoothly aspossible, and not give any obvious signals that might confuse themarket into thinking that this is a tightening move. It is going tobe perceived that way by some anyway, but I think that we ought to tryto do it in as smooth a fashion as possible.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I would align myself with Bob Forrestal'sposition: "B", with a $500 million borrowings target and asymmetriclanguage. The main thing that is influencing me is a longer-term viewand, I guess, trying not to get out of position. And I think BobBlack said it: any way you look at this--whether you look at rates, atthe provision of reserves, or at the behavior of the aggregates--overthe course of this year, we have taken some significant steps. And Iam not quite sure, as I expressed earlier, what the impact of that isgoing to be. But, being an old market participant, when everybodythinks the same there's a chance that it won't work out that way.Sometimes you get a little afraid of a consensus that is apparentlythat strong. Having said all that, I could certainly accept "B", witha $600 million borrowing target and symmetric language. But I have aslight preference for the position Bob Forrestal mentioned.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice President Hendricks, would you liketo comment?MR. HENDRICKS. Our preference would be to line up fairlyclosely with Si Keehn's suggestion on the decision. We would go with$600 million, but would lean on the side of further tightening.-38-9/22/87CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice President Eisenmenger.MR. EISENMENGER. I support you, Mr. Chairman: $600 millionand a symmetric directive.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, it is clear that there is a fairlystrong consensus here for alternative B, at $600 million on borrowing;there is a small support amongst the voting members for a tilt towardsomething stronger in the language, and something on the other side.I, personally, would go along with those vague notions of GovernorJohnson on the issue of not fighting the world to try to get $600million in this maintenance period, because it may be a futileendeavor. It may, in fact, give signals, which is a point thatGovernor Seger raised earlier in this meeting that struck me as areason not to specifically fight that number. But, as I read theinstructions that I've just been given, the language apparently shouldread: "In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, theCommittee seeks to maintain the degree of pressure on reservepositions sought in recent weeks. Somewhat greater or somewhat lesserreserve restraint would be acceptable depending on indications ofinflationary pressures, strength in the business expansion,developments in foreign exchange markets, as well as the behavior ofthe aggregates. This approach is expected to be consistent withgrowth in M2 and M3 over the period from August to December at annualrates of around 4-1/2 percent and 6 percent, respectively. M1 isexpected to continue to grow relatively slowly. The Chairman may callfor Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager for DomesticOperations that reserve conditions during the period before the nextmeeting are likely to be associated with a federal funds ratepersistently outside a range of 5 to 9 percent."MR. HELLER. Mr. Chairman, did you have symmetric language inthere?MR. JOHNSON. Yes, it's in there.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Symmetric language.MR. HELLER. I didn't catch it.MR. JOHNSON. It's "would" either way.MR. HELLER. Are they both "somewhat"?MR. KELLEY. Both "somewhat" and both "would".CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. "Somewhat greater or somewhat lesserreserve restraint would be acceptable depending on--"MR. KOHN. My comment, and it's my fault for putting it inthe Bluebook, is that the 4-1/2 percent for M2 sounds excessivelyprecise to me, given my knowledge of how these forecasts are puttogether. I shouldn't have put it in there, I guess, and I wonderwhether--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You mean you would be precise for us butfor the public you don't choose to be precise?-39-9/22/87MR. KOHN. Yes, I wonder whether growth rates of from 4 to 6percent or something like that wouldn't--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You mean for both aggregates?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes.MR. KOHN. Yes, wouldn't that capture the spirit? Well, 4 to6 percent would encourage--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In other words you'd say "consistentwith growth in M2 and M3 over the period from August through Decemberat annual rates of between 4 and 6 percent."MR. ANGELL. I like "around" 4 and 6--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, no. "Around" means a number--thatthere's only one number there.MR. JOHNSON. It says respectively, but you would take--MR. ANGELL. I know, but, Don, you have a different numberfor M3 than you do for M2, don't you?MR. KOHN. Yes, it's 6 percent for M3 and 4-1/2 percent forM2.MR. ANGELL. See, really, around 4, and around 6.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh, I see. Around 4 and around 6. Isthat what you're saying?MR. JOHNSON. Yes.MR. KOHN. No. I was actually thinking of 4 to 6, going to arange; but around 4, around 6 would be--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You mean 4 to 6 percent for both?MR. KOHN. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's what I thought you said.MR. ANGELL. But you're actually anticipating 4-1/2 percentand you're anticipating 6 percent.MR. KOHN. That's correct.MR. ANGELL. I still think you could miss quite easily with abetween 4 and 6.MR. JOHNSON. You want to say 4 to 6 percent for the M2?MR. ANGELL. I just asked him--MR. KOHN. Governor Angell's suggestion would be fine.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What did he say?-40-9/22/87MR. KOHN. Around 4 percent and around 6 percent,respectively.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So be it. Around 4 percent and around 6percent, respectively.MS. SEGER. When the minutes come out do you think a lotwould be made of the fact that the fed funds range has been moved? Ican just see someone looking at that and saying "Well, clear the decksfor the next big tightening of the screws; batten down the hatches."SPEAKER(?). Well, we really didn't.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We have set a range that is reallymerely plus or minus 2 percent from--MS. SEGER. I know, but people pick at everything that goesdown here; and I can just see a big deal being made of this move.MR. ANGELL. But quite often we really attempt to kind ofkeep it centered, don't we? We don't like--MR. JOHNSON. This is what would have been consistent with$600 million borrowings, even before, I think.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, but the interesting issue would be:if we are now at 7 or 7-1/4 percent and then we came in with the old 5to 8 percent range, then I think that would really be a big signal.MR. JOHNSON. 4 to 8.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But 4 to 8 would essentially be sayingthat--. You know, I think this reads perfectly. I think thisbasically says we are already here and we are not going anywhere.MR. KOHN. In the past when we have done this, we haveexplained it as a technical adjustment to keep the actual rates moreclosely centered around there.MS. SEGER. So there will be an explanation?MR. KOHN. Yes, there would be some explanatory sentence.MR. ANGELL. But, I do think it is somewhat important that wefollow that suggestion of easing in to the $600 million so as not tocause the markets to believe that we have made a policy change at thismeeting.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, I think the general language on theactions we are taking basically would indicate that we did nothing atthis meeting.MR. ANGELL. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As I hear the discussion, that is wherewe want to be.-41-9/22/87MR. BLACK. Could we rephrase that and say we did not changepolicy rather than we did nothing?MR. MELZER. Although there will be a perception for a whilethat we did, I think, as the $600 million shows through--MR. KELLEY. Sure.MR. JOHNSON. Well, Peter's skills will take care of that.SPEAKER(?). Good.MR. ANGELL. Yes, we have watched him before, and he justknows how to do that.MR. KEEHN. Not really [unintelligible] instructions; itmeans he will just do it.MR. GUFFEY. But he hasn't been too well the last twomaintenance periods, have you, Peter?MR. STERNLIGHT. I haven't been very good.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Unless there are further comments can wevote?MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesGovernor Heller YesGovernor Johnson YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor Seger YesPresident Stern YesEND OF MEETING-42-