Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMay 19, 1987A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, May 19, 1987, at 9:10 a.m.PRESENT:Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Volcker, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellBoehneBoykinHellerJohnsonKeehnSegerSternMessrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey, Melzer, and Morris, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis, and Boston,respectivelyMr. Kohn, Secretary and Staff AdviserMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Loney, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Lang, Lindsey, Prell, Rolnick, Rosenblum,Scheld, Siegman, and Simpson, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, SystemOpen Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, SystemOpen Market Account5/19/87Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Office ofStaff Director for Monetary and Financial Policy,Board of GovernorsMr. Hendricks, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bankof ClevelandMr. Fousek, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bankof New YorkMessrs. J. Davis, T. Davis, Mmes. Munnell and Tshinkel,Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks ofCleveland, Kansas City, Boston, and Atlanta,respectivelyMessrs. Beebe, Burger, and Cook, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco, St. Louis,and Richmond, respectivelyMs. Lovett, Assistant Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of New York-2-Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meetingof May 19, 1987CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll proceed with approval of theminutes.MS. SEGER. I'll move approval.MR. JOHNSON. I'll second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. The Report ofExamination of the System Open Market Account dated May 11, 1987 hasbeen distributed to you. Any comments or questions? If not, I wouldentertain a motion for approval.MR. JOHNSON. So moved.MS. SEGER. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Mr. Cross.MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any questions or comments?MR. BOEHNE. I have a question, Mr. Chairman. What are yourthoughts on the likelihood of additional stimulative actions, eitherfiscal or monetary, by the Japanese and/or the Germans?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, me! I thought you were talking to Mr.Cross.MR. CROSS. He's looking at you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Very limited. I don't think either ofthem has the intention of doing anything, on their own initiativeanyway, in monetary policy right now. Their discount rates are wellbelow the market rates. They are both moving a little to lower theirmoney market rates. I understand what's going on. It is going on[unintelligible]. On the fiscal side, of course, the Japanese saidthey would do something. They have had a bit of a political problemthere getting the budget passed and all the rest. They have said thatthey will do something and will do something, I suspect. Whether it'sgoing to be effective before fall, say, and just what it will be Ithink is questionable. For the Germans on the fiscal side, I thinksome of them, including some people at the Bundesbank, are quiteworried about the business outlook. There was a lot of talk at theOECD meeting in Paris, and their representative there said well, ofcourse, they would look over the situation again if things didn'tdevelop in a favorable way in the next few months. When he got backhome Mr. Stoltenberg said they have no intention of changing anythingand they've done all that they can do. So, I don't think the talk inParis was indicative of any reason to sit at the edge of the seat forany move on the fiscal side. I don't think it's terribly right butthat's the--5/19/87MR. BOEHNE. Do you have any sense that any kind ofunilateral action that we might take would have much influence ontheir thinking?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it probably would make thatmuch difference on the fiscal side. But maybe if all the other forcesmove in the direction of embarrassing--is that the right word?--theBank of Japan or the Bundesbank--. I wouldn't expect either of themto make a deal right at the moment or to respond immediately if wetook any action. I think it would improve the chances, but how muchis beyond me. It pretty clearly would set up a situation where thenext step was up to them; they would have to recognize that.MS. SEGER. Doesn't fiscal policy in those countries reactwith a lag as it does here? If they don't even consider it and thenmaybe move in the fall, it seems to me that the kind of impact--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's correct. You're nottalking about anything very relevant for 1987 at this point without asudden massive change in mind by the Germans, which we don't expect.Even if the law permitted them to act quite quickly on taxes and thecircumstances arose to [warrant] triggering it, they don't appear tohave any desire to trigger it.MR. PARRY. In Japan, it appears that what they're suggestingis mainly increased construction. And those kinds of projects take along time. It isn't so much taxation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, they're going through this usual[routine]--it's almost an annual ritual now--of saying maybe we'llmove the public works budget into the first part of the year and speedup construction and all that. I don't think that amounts to much.MR. PARRY. Right.MR. FORRESTAL. Are we having ongoing discussions with theGermans and the Japanese with respect to their economies or have wegiven up for the moment?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know what you mean byongoing discussions. We have a certain amount of conversation withthem but I don't sit on the edge of my seat, as I indicated, expectingthat these ongoing conversations are certainly going to result inspurring them to new activities. The Bundesbank itself is quite splitabout what they should do--about 50/50. There is a lot of worrywithin the Bundesbank about the economic outlook.MR. GUFFEY. When you speak of Germany, do you include all ofEurope or the major players?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I could say that Germany kind of[represents] the rest of Europe, frankly, except for the British whoare outside the EMS. There the expansion is pretty good relative toother countries; it seems to be not a breakneck rate but a pretty goodrate of expansion. Among the others, I think a lot of them would liketo do more but they feel they can't so long as Germany sits there.They're worried about their exchange rate and so forth. I don't knowif any economy in the rest of Europe is really growing; they're5/19/87probably going backwards too. Am I wrong about that, Mr. Truman, interms of the rate of growth slipping rather than the reverse?MR. TRUMAN. You are right, sir.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Except for the British?MR. TRUMAN. Definitely, and Italy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The French [economy] slowed down quite awhile ago.MR. TRUMAN. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So, it's not a very buoyant situation,wherever one looks. The last time I talked to he seemedquite worried about the outlook, even more worried than before. Buthe's been worried quite a lot [unintelligible]. It's a tone of voice;[he seems] more worried than he has been.MR. JOHNSON. He said the last time we talked that they don'tget excited there unless the unemployment rate rises. He said ithasn't really gone up in the face of this weakening growth. If itwere to start to rise he would have more of a political problem.Without it, will take the position he has.MR. MELZER. Sam, how do you reconcile this negativesentiment on the dollar with these very wide interest ratedifferentials that you mentioned? What is that saying here?MR. CROSS. I think the interest rate differentials areprobably having some impact, but it makes it more costly to recommend[the dollar]. People think: If the dollar is going to be lower nextweek than this week, then we're better off to wait. They have apretty short focus on how long they make these investments for thesedays. If the dollar is going down, it's better to wait. There are alot of people who think it's going down further and there arecertainly not very many who think it's going to go up. So, there'snot much danger of losing [by waiting].MR. PARRY. But doesn't the differential itself indicate thatpeople think it's going to go down?MR. CROSS. The differential is partly because of what themarkets have done. The Japanese long-term rates have declined quitesubstantially, and much of this is because money is going back intoJapan.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When you look at monetary policy in Japanin particular, these long-term rates have gone down primarily becauseof monetary policy--maybe because it has been relatively stricter.This one bond issue that people follow got down toward 2-1/2 percentto get this [unintelligible].MR. CROSS. Close to 2-1/2 percent, [the] number 89 [bond].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It has been a long time since we've seen along-term bond rate at 2-1/2 percent any place.5/19/87MR. CROSS. The Japanese are really quite worried about theirsituation because of all the liquidity and the vast [unintelligible]or growth in the stock market where some stocks are selling at 250times earnings and so forth.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible.]MR. KEEHN. Sam, given the magnitude of the intervention sofar and the results, what is the appetite of the other central banksto continue with this kind of magnitude?MR. CROSS. I don't think we're going to see this kind oflevel of dollar purchases for a continuing period; there's no questionabout that. The market certainly has that view. So there are goingto have to be some policy moves or we're going to have to begin to seesome results from policy moves already taken. We haven't seen anyvery good statistical numbers to show that the trajectories haveshifted and that things are going in the right direction. We haven'tseen very much other than these monetary policy developments; wehaven't seen developments on the policy front to show that somethingis being done that's going to do it. It's certainly the attitude ofthe market that intervention isn't going to remain at these levels fora continuing period. It's either going down or we're going to seesome more adjustment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Of course, when we raise the questionabout what they're doing on fiscal policy they raise that questionwith us, too. It's rather a symmetrical question. Are there anyother comments? We need to ratify the transactions.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Move it.MS. SEGER. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They say that's enough. Comments orquestions?MR. MELZER. Peter, just in a technical sense--and I knowthat extraordinary things were going on in this recent period--if youhad a spread of 125 basis points between the discount rate and theprevailing federal funds rate, does that provide enough of anincentive to borrow that it makes it more difficult to hit aparticular borrowings target? And does that, therefore, perhapsintroduce a little more volatility in open market operations? I knowthat in the most recent period, as you've described, there were someother things going on. I guess my question really runs to the spreadon an ongoing basis.MR. STERNLIGHT. It has been very hard day-to-day to predictwhat that spread is likely to be. We have such a mixture ofexpectational elements still in there. The high Treasury balance hasreceded as an operational factor; it's not entirely gone, but it hasreceded some. I think the fairly substantial anticipation thatsomething may well happen on the discount rate--and that we are not5/19/87too unhappy with funds in a 6-1/2 to 6-3/4 percent or even 6-7/8percent range--contributes to the funds rate staying up there, eventhough in some pure theory sense, going back to earlier modelrelationships of what funds rate we'd expect with $400 million ofborrowing, I would come out with something considerably lower than therecently prevailing rates. I would agree with what the Bluebooksuggests of a tendency for the rate to drift back to, or below, the 6-1/2 percent level. One could even make a case for something like 6-1/4 percent on the funds rate with planned borrowings holding at $400million.MR. BLACK. Peter, something you said earlier suggested to methat if you were to get that drifting back of the funds rate you wouldexpect to see the dollar weaken right much. Is that a fair reading ofwhat you said?MR. STERNLIGHT. If the funds rate drifted back to that, Ithink that would be cause for renewed pressure on the dollar, yes.Sam might want to comment on that, too.MR. PARRY. On what you've said about the market's reactionso far, are you saying that the market is probably assuming that theborrowing target is higher than it is?MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes. Most people I've heard comment on itwould be thinking in the $500 to $600 million range for borrowing,though I've heard some talk about $400 to $600 million, and I've heardone who thought it was above $600 million. But most would put it inthe $500 to $600 million range.MR. JOHNSON. Do you think that's probably because borrowingshave averaged about $700 million?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, yes. But, certainly, the period whenit was $1.1 billion they realized was extraordinary and unusual; andthe period just before that, when it was nearly $700 million, theytended to think was on the higher-than-intended side as well.MR. JOHNSON. When borrowing actually turns out to be $600 or$700 million, I think they expect the policy to be there.MR. BLACK. They think we've got alternative C instead ofalternative B.MR. JOHNSON. I think we've got alternative C.MS. SEGER. "C?"MR. BLACK. That's what Peter said, really, I think.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other questions? We need to ratifythose transactions.MS. SEGER. I'll move it.MR. ANGELL. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Mr. Kichline.5/19/87MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions?MR. BOEHNE. Jim, do you have any sense beyond what we'veseen in autos, for example, that domestic producers are responding tohigher import prices not so much by trying to grab off a bigger marketshare but by raising their own prices? I've sensed some anecdotalevidence of that. I was wondering if you have any sense of the extentof that.MR. KICHLINE. As you know, the auto case is one you canpoint to. Beyond that we don't have anything explicit. If you lookat the producer price index for April, in fact, very little washappening there taking away energy and food and cars. Basically,we're talking about prices that seem to be moving up at about the samerate. It's something we've been looking for. We run across thesecomments about producers looking for every opportunity to increasetheir margins but, at this point, we don't really have any hardevidence in hand.MR. BOEHNE. a medium-sizedmanufacturing company that does a fair amount of export business aswell as domestic business in office supplies and recreationalsupplies, that sort of thing. complaining for a couple ofyears about how they just can't make price increases stick. But inrecent months they've been able tomake some of these price increases stick. And notalone.MR. PARRY. Jim, your forecast for consumption is quite weak,particularly the nondurable and services components and I have acomment and a question. With regard to services, as I'm sure youknow, there's a strong secular component for the growth of services.The growth rate that you have probably is the kind of growth rate thatone sees in recession periods. To me, that's a bit surprising. Ithink I understand why this is occurring in terms of your forecast. Iguess the decline in the value of the dollar causes the PCE deflatorto go up, which hits real income and then slows the growth ofconsumption. What I'm not sure I see is this: Why doesn't thatincrease in the PCE deflator affect other prices as heavily? I don'tthink I see it in your inflation rate. I don't have these deflators,so I'm trying to--MR. KICHLINE. If you look at the GNP deflator or the GNPfixed-weighted index you have the persistent effect of net exportsbeing subtracted, which tends to depress those GNP measures. If youlook at private domestic final purchases prices, the PCE fixed-weightmeasure or deflator picks up very directly all of these import pricesthat we're talking about rising at double-digit rates. So you'reright: we have prices for personal consumption expenditures risingeven in excess of 4 percent--4-1/4 to nearly 5 percent in 1988. Andthat has the effect in this forecast of depressing real income growth.So you have it right in the sense of why we believe we will be facinga fairly weak picture on domestic consumption. I view it as part ofthe adjustment process and rising import prices depressing[consumption].5/19/87MR. PARRY. Would you say, looking at the risks in theconsumption area, that they might be on the high side? Well, notdurables.MR. KICHLINE. Well, given everything, I'd say theseconsumption numbers outside of durables are at really very low growthrates. One might expect to find those rates happening in a recessionenvironment. So in that sense consumption might be higher. On theother hand, we're starting with inflation picking up and thedepressing effects of real income growth and other characteristicsthat I think would act to damp demand. You're quite correct; theseare low rates of consumption.MR. STERN. Jim, with regard to domestic auto sales,especially in the next couple of quarters, are you assuming anythingin particular about incentive programs or anything that accounts forthe strengthening you have here?MR. KICHLINE. Explicitly, we've assumed that in order toreduce the stocks on hand, which are running at something like 75days' supply, they will have to maintain incentives of one fashion oranother. As we get into the third quarter, we have assumed a furthercutback in domestic auto production and probably somewhat limitedsales incentive programs to continue to sell those cars. So, I thinkit's a combination of incentives as well as some further cuts inproduction.MR. MELZER. Jim, what is your assessment of the inventorysituation other than autos?MR. KICHLINE. Autos are the only area where we sense thatthere's a problem lurking. The data lag, and at times they're hard tointerpret. In the manufacturing sector, certainly, for a long periodof time manufacturers have been running with very low inventories. Infact, in this forecast the inventory/sales ratios are flat or driftingdown. So we haven't spotted any sectors where unusual things aregoing on outside of autos.MS. SEGER. Jim, do you really think that the producers ofdurable equipment will snap back after only one quarter of weakness?Isn't the tax reform impact going to, unfortunately, last longer?MR. KICHLINE. This is, in part, the arithmetic. Januaryjust plunged and plunged partly because included in businessinvestment would be auto and light truck purchases. So part of thearithmetic is that as February and March came back, orders sort offlattened out. We know auto sales were rising a bit, and so for thesecond quarter, instead of the 13 percent drop recorded in the firstquarter, we have a pickup in real terms to something like 6-1/4percent. In part that's arithmetic; in part that's a pickup in autosales. But I think one ought to read through that; and when we readthrough it we have essentially unchanged business spending for theyear in real terms. I think that's a more accurate picture.MS. SEGER. Thank you.MR. PARRY. Compensation per manhour, which I'm sure is thekey element of your inflation forecast, seems to change dramatically5/19/87in 1988. Why is there such a change so abruptly? I'm not questioningthat it's going to rise. It just seems to be going at one level, andyou have a step function, and then it stays at that [higher] level.MR. KICHLINE. There are a number of things going on. Tobegin with, in January 1988 there is a sizable increase in SocialSecurity taxes and, along with that, an assumed further rise in thewage base. We've assumed that compensation will kick up by 4/10ths of1 percent beginning QI '88 because of the large Social Security taxincrease--the employer share. Other features are that we assume thatwe're going to begin to have a more forceful effect of higher pricesfeeding back into wage behavior in 1988. In this forecast, as you mayhave noticed, we have a lower path for the unemployment rate. We werecaught by surprise by the numbers that have come out. We think theremight be a little problem there. Essentially, in the forecast, we'regoing to be looking at an unemployment rate of 6-1/4 percent later onin 1988. Who knows what the natural rate is, but we think that we'reprobably in a range somewhere pretty close to that. So we're notgoing to have a damping effect on wage growth that we had previously.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I'd just like to make a comment on businessconditions generally. In our District, I think the economy hasperformed better so far this year than most people expected.Unemployment for the region, for example, is under 5 percent. Stateslike New Jersey and Delaware are in the 3 percent range and even areasof Pennsylvania are doing fairly well. Strength continues inconstruction, both residential and nonresidential; the retailers aregenerally upbeat; loan growth in all categories continues to be abovethe national average. In manufacturing, I would say that the erosionof jobs in manufacturing areas has tended to cease and there is amodest comeback. So, I think the manufacturing [sentiment] hasshifted from a negative attitude to one that's somewhat positive,although I must say I was with a couple hundred manufacturers lastweek and they still like protectionism and they don't like higherinterest rates, or snugging up, or whatever we call it.Turning to the national scene, it seems to me that while ourforecasts are generally on target, if anything, the economy is turningout to be a touch better. In the trade area, at least I feel better--not so much because we're exceeding expectations but because someevidence supporting the forecast of a turnaround, while not dramatic,seems to be there. There is some positive evidence that exports areimproving and that we can expect some strength in that area. However,I think the real news on the national scene is what's happening toinflation. It's not so much that the indicators of inflation aregoing up; I think we expected that in terms of energy and importprices. What is of concern--and we see it in financial markets, butwe also hear it in just talking to business people generally--is aheightened concern about the future course of inflation. I think itreally comes down to some doubt about whether we can keep theseadjustments to be one-time adjustments or whether we're about to setoff a new upward trend in inflation. I think that is the real changein the last six weeks to two months--that concern about inflation issignificantly higher than it was the last time we met.5/19/87MR. JOHNSON. Are we going around the table now? I wanted toask Jim something before we did that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can insert a question.MR. JOHNSON. Okay. The Board had a briefing yesterday onthe Greenbook material. I'm going to ask you to go through the pointsabout employment and the full employment unemployment rate. I thinkit's important that you try to reconcile again for everybody here thiswhole issue between industrial production and capacity and theunemployment numbers and work hours. The statistics don't tell thesame story. And I've never gotten a really satisfactory explanationof which one makes the most sense.MR. KICHLINE. I don't think you're going to get one noweither! It is curious that we are seeing what is really a fairlysluggish industrial sector, particularly for the last couple ofmonths. We can explain the autos and trucks, and that's the bulk ofthe decline. But in the detail in the industrial production index, asI noted yesterday, in many of the sectors where we thought we'd seesome rise because of export orders growing nothing is happening.There have been really widespread weaknesses for two months. We havesome difficulty reconciling that, obviously, with total payrollemployment, which gives the picture of a lot of spending. Virtuallyall of that is in the trade and services areas; it's not reallyspilling over into manufacturing. One of the concerns in the forecastis that we have built in, frankly even for the current quarter,increases of 0.3 to 0.4 percent in industrial production in May andJune, which we think needs to occur to rationalize what has beenhappening. We have a month or two divergence between these varioussignals. We also have, as you know, the problem--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have how big of an increase?MR. KICHLINE. We have about 0.4 percent per month in May andJune. We think that would be consistent; it sort of reconciles theproblem that Governor Johnson was raising that the industrial sectorlooks very sluggish. Whether or not that materializes is, for now, anopen question. I can't really do a lot more than to say we do--MR. JOHNSON. No, I just wanted that repeated because it isconfusing in that we have a situation where the unemployment rate isprojected to get down to very low levels and yet we're still at closeto record levels of excess capacity and low industrial production. Itend to believe the employment numbers a little more, but I don't knowexactly how to reconcile them either. I'm just saying that's adilemma I think everybody ought to know about.MR. PARRY. Well, I'm not sure that they're completelyinconsistent. Almost all the increase that we've seen in theemployment area has been in the services area, outside ofmanufacturing. As far as policy is concerned, the question is whetheror not relatively full employment of labor resources could lead todemand pressures. That could occur in the services area and Iwouldn't--MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I know; there's no doubt about that. Butgiven the way the forecast is shaped, we've got a situation where5/19/87there is low growth in the services area, which you alreadyacknowledged, Bob, and a shift to trade-related, industrial-related,types of functions. It's not showing up in the numbers even though weare feeling better about it. Bob has just said he's feeling betterabout it, and I'm feeling better about it. It's just not in thenumbers. And if there is going to be that re-composition, one wouldexpect to see it in industrial production.MR. MORRIS. Wait a minute. Are you talking [unintelligible]the workweek number of--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. There is nothing wrong with weakindustrial capacity where we need it.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Take autos as the classic case inpoint.MS. SEGER. The autos don't have [a] capacity [problem]?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes. They don't.MR. KICHLINE. Let me note that the 0.4 and 0.3 percent--pickwhichever month you want that in--but we're stuck with minus 0.4percent in April. On a quarterly average basis, that pickup will givezero growth in industrial output in the second quarter. We have 2-1/2percent growth at an annual rate in the first quarter, but we need apickup even to get zero, given that we are starting out at a lownumber.MR. PARRY. Is that excluding autos?MR. BLACK. It's still down; everything--MR. KICHLINE. Autos and trucks, for example, were worthalmost 3/10ths of the 4/10ths decline, so 2/3 to 3/4 of the depressingfactor came out of the motor vehicles sector. President Morris, youasked about the workweek. You're quite correct: the numbers in theworkweek were depressed because there were religious holidays duringthat week. For manufacturing production hours, they're down somethinglike 1 percent. Looking at the path over the last 20 years, in thefew years in which this has occurred virtually 3/5ths to 2/3rds ofthat is alleged by our folks who do this to have been accounted for bythe effect of the holidays. So, a lot of that has been discounted inputting together the industrial production data.MR. FORRESTAL. Jim, I wanted to raise a question aboutcommodity prices. Obviously, they shot up in the most recent month.Are there any special factors that would account for that or do youthink it's a more permanent type of adjustment?MR. KICHLINE. Well, there are lots of special factors. Itdepends on which market. On the CRB futures, Don was reporting onFriday that before it rained it was the dry Midwest; and then therains came in the Midwest and prices plummeted. So part of it, Ithink, is just heightened expectations in looking for anything [as areason]. Some of the livestock prices, we think, reflect the late-10-5/19/87winter weather and the snowstorms in the Midwest. In lead and zincmarkets, we've looked at Canadian strikes. When you go through all ofit, you can look at special factors. The fact is simply that themarkets have been very sensitized to inflationary expectations andsort of look for an opportunity to drive prices up. But there arelots of special factors, and perhaps some reactions have been verymuch overdone. It's clear to me that it's just heightened sensitivityto inflation at work.MR. GUFFEY. Do you call that speculation?MR. KICHLINE. If you wish.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Parry, you wanted to make more generalcomments, I hope.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, basically, I agree with the staff'sforecast of real GNP for this year and next. The growth rates of 3percent and 2-1/2 percent, respectively, certainly seem reasonable tome. I also would agree that the primary source of strength is likelyto be an improved net export position. However, as would be indicatedfrom some of our discussion, I would expect the improvement in thisarea to be somewhat less and the strength of consumption, particularlythat of services, to be slightly greater. In the inflation area, Ithink a good case can be made for a 4 to 4-1/2 percent rate ofinflation in the remaining quarters of this year, as compared to thestaff's forecast of a gradual decline to a 3.2 percent rate in thefourth quarter of 1987. We have seen a large increase in the realprice of oil, which could have significant effects on the inflationrate during the rest of this year. I think it's generally agreed--certainly in our forecast and the staff's forecast--that prices ofnon-oil imports are going to continue to rise in an area in excess of10 percent. Moreover, the decline in the unemployment rate, Ibelieve, takes us into the range of full employment of laborresources. And, finally, inflationary expectations seem to be moreserious, judging from financial market developments for the last sixweeks. As far as 1988's inflation rate is concerned, there is quite apickup in the staff's forecast of the inflation rate. And I think thefactors that I mentioned are likely to cause that to occur.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I come out pretty close to theBoard staff's forecast. We are a tad stronger than they are and hadbeen even stronger; but we moved more closely to them because of theweakness in consumption in the first quarter, even abstracting fromthe automobile situation. I agree with the point that Bob Parry justmade that the balance of trade is going to be the strongest part ofit. I think Ed Boehne really put his finger on what is a moreimportant issue there, and that is the extent to which the generaloutlook at the moment is correctly reflecting the amount of inflationthat we're going to have. There are a lot of inflationaryexpectations around the economy, as indicated by the bond markets.And there's some question in my mind as to whether that's justified.I think all of you know that I believe the primary objective ofmonetary policy is price stability; but based on what knowledge we nowhave about prices I think there's at least some chance that themarkets have overstated the extent to which there's a risk of5/19/87acceleration in price pressures. We're clearly experiencing a lot ofincreases in prices in the energy area and in food prices, both at theconsumer and the producer price levels; and we've gotten scatteredprice increases because of depreciation of the dollar. But these areall relative price increases; they don't necessarily mean that we'regoing to see that much increase in the overall price level. Ofcourse, we've had this strength to which many people have alluded inthe commodity prices and in commodity futures. But, again, there's alot of noise in these data; there are a lot of special factors andthere is some question as to how accurate these are going to be inpredicting what the overall price level is really going to do. Idon't want you to misunderstand me; I'm not saying that I don't thinkthere's any chance that we're going to have a pronounced rise ininflation. I just simply am not quite convinced yet that those fears,as expressed in the changing nature of the yield curve, are reallyquite justified at this point. The economy still looks sort of weakin spots, so we ought to think about it pretty cautiously. But thisis the point at which I think we usually have made our errors inpolicy in the past, so it's something to which we want to give a greatdeal of attention.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, with respect to the staffforecast, in principle, I pretty much go along with it, although it'shard to be looking at it from the perspective of our District, whichcauses me to think that, if anything, it might be a little on the highside. But it's probably about right. On the inflation issue, I doshare the concern that has been expressed by the staff, particularlyin the Greenbook, about the rise in inflationary trends. I'mespecially worried about that if it should translate into wagepressures next year.Our Eleventh District economy would be characterized as beingflat and stable at a pretty low level, certainly for us. If the U.S.economy can maintain the 2-1/2 to 3 percent growth, I think that wehave some possibilities or potential for our District. A few of thesectors that have been performing poorly have begun to show a littlesign of improvement. Of course, what's happening to energy prices hascaused a bit of encouragement, although to get a great amount ofrecovery there I think prices of oil are going to have to go higher.In agriculture, we think the financial strains are not quite as greatas they were; certainly, the livestock prices and cotton look prettygood. We do think that we're probably seeing now the bottom of thedecline in land prices, both in ranching and agriculture. Inmanufacturing, we're seeing some signs of general improvement withdefense and electronics leading the way there. In real estate, Ithink we're seeing a little change in psychology as opposed to anyreal change in substance. Most people involved in real estate aresaying that by year-end we will see rental prices and rental ratesstarting to move back up and some improvement in the price of land.We had a very real psychological impact with JC Penney moving out ofNew York to Dallas. For some reason, that seems to have convincedeverybody in the metroplex that our worries are over now. I thinkthere has been a bit too much euphoria regarding the interest ofcompanies in moving to Houston and Dallas because of attractive realestate properties and other incentives that are there. Of course, wehave had the sharp drop off in construction; we're feeling that.-12-5/19/87Banking conditions continue to deteriorate. We're leading, certainly,in bank closings. In Texas so far there have been about 27 and we'relooking for maybe 3 or 4 this week. We don't see very much slowdownon that, although our new branching law in Texas has certainly made itmuch easier to find potential buyers and resolve these problems. Onthe whole, we don't have a lot of cause for optimism, but certainly,we think the economic conditions are no longer deteriorating in ourpart of the world.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With regard to thenational economy, it seems to me that, at least on the real side, sofar things are unfolding about as we expected. The first quartergrowth was in inventories and in net exports, and I think that waslargely anticipated. Some of the weakness in other components seemedto be due to changes in tax laws that accelerated expenditures in thefourth quarter--in auto sales and so forth. So, it seems to me that,basically, we're on course and the Greenbook forecast is certainly inthe ballpark. If there has been any surprise, to me it has been thereal strength in employment. If you go back over the last 4, 6, 8months, the increase in jobs has been running at about a 3 millionpace, at an annual rate. Even if the base is somewhat sensitive towhen strikes did and didn't occur, there certainly seems to be noevidence to date of any slowing in employment growth relative to thelast couple of years, to put it cautiously. One surprise that hasoccurred is in states in our District where I think it's trueuniversally that both the fourth quarter of last year and the firstquarter of this year were better than we had expected and better thanmost other analysts out our way had expected. Good weather may havehad something to do with that; it's hard to know how to quantify that.Certainly, the employment gains and the income gains in our states inboth the fourth and first quarters surpassed expectations.With regard to commodity prices, I did have a chance to talkto some of the people at the grain trading firms in the Twin Citiesthe last several days and I got a two-part explanation. Part of theexplanation with regard to agricultural commodities was based onweather concerns here and abroad, coupled with the acreage set-asideprogram and the idea that this was the first time in several yearswhere, because of those concerns, purchasers wanted to lock things in.But the second explanation I got was simply that commodity prices arelow and the dollar is low--kind of an inflationary-expectations viewthat they were about to go up, or at least they didn't seem likely togo much lower. Frankly, I think it's the phenomenon we're seeing inthe bond market as well. It's clear, or at least I think it's clear,that you can't explain what has happened to commodity prices with anyreal phenomenon today. It has to be largely expectations.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Our outlook for the economy is certainlyconsistent with the staff's forecast. As we look at developments inour District the situation really does continue to improve, and Ithink the general outlook is certainly more positive. Auto productionis an exception; Jim Kichline has already commented on that. But Iwould say that maybe we have a slight difference on the truck side ofthe automotive business. From the people I've talked to in Detroit,-13-5/19/87they would anticipate a slight increase in their production schedulefor trucks, both in the second and third quarters. The steel businesshas been surprisingly good, better than we would have expected. Someof the sheet steel producers are operating pretty much at capacity,with a lot of that going into appliances. Also, the demand for somecategories of steel that in the past has been very slow is beginningto pick up. I am somewhat surprised, for example, that steel goinginto gas pipelines is improving, and even steel for railroad equipmentis higher than it has been. Construction activity continues to bevery strong. I never cease to be amazed, but commercial buildings inChicago are continuing to be started and to go under construction.Residential construction has been very high in our District. Homestarts this year so far have been significantly higher than thenational average. As a consequence, the demand for building productshas been strong. For example, they've produced gypsum in the firstquarter at an absolutely record level.On the agricultural side, I'd confirm what Bob Boykin hasjust said. It seems to us that the land values really are beginningto stabilize. Our first-quarter survey indicated some stability therefor the first time in a long time, and though one quarter doesn't atrend make, nonetheless it is certainly an improvement. Of course,the commodity prices--the increases for both corn and soybeansrecently--have been a very significant help relating to land values.This has not gone through to the tractor and implement manufacturerswhere the situation continues to be very, very tough. Dealerinventories are low. There's a lot of floor traffic, I'm told, butvery few sales. The farmers are reducing their debt; it certainly isa good thing that they're reducing their debt just as fast as theycan. And, therefore, they're not in a position to take on newobligations for equipment. But it's possible that the agriculturalsituation is stabilizing, admittedly at a low level, and that it won'tcontinue to decline.I must say that I find the inflation issue very, veryperplexing. Absolutely everybody is talking about it and worryingabout it, and I think that in itself can be a little self-fulfilling.[It's not in] the numbers we look at, as we have commented. Outsideof the food and the energy sectors, I can find very few people who aretalking about price increases that seem to be out of line. There area wholesale series of price increases of the 2 or 3 percent category;those seem to be the norm. I guess the difference is that this timelast year, and really until very recently, we were talking about pricedecreases; now we're talking about price increases of 2 to 3 percent.I think there's a very important shift in the psychology that goesalong with that change of going from decreases to increases.Certainly, long-term rates are telling us something. They're eithersaying we're going to get very, very strong economic growth or therate of inflation is going to pick up. And, related to Bob Black'scomment, I think that it is perhaps appropriate that we take somesteps to try and reassure the markets with regard to our commitment toprice stability.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Let me say a brief word or two about theregion first. Conditions in the Southeast are pretty much the same asI've been reporting over the past couple of months, with weakness in-14-5/19/87the energy states continuing and generally favorable outlooks for mostof the other states in the District. Even in the stronger states,very little pressure is being reported on wages. Tennessee is alittle different. That state has been pretty much functioning at thenational average but we're now beginning to see some softness sincemany of the industries there are geared to consumer durables, whichhave been pretty weak. Many, of course, are suppliers to housing aswell as to the auto sector. And, I guess symptomatic of what's goingon in the automobile industry, there is a scaling down of GM's highly-touted Saturn plants near Nashville. Together with that, we've seensome unwinding of the speculative increases in the land pricessurrounding that plant. Another interesting phenomenon is in thetextile industry, which had been complaining bitterly about importsand crying for a long time for protectionist measures. They arecontinuing to report very good demand, high levels of activity, andrecord earnings in many plants. Maybe this is an example we can pointto of how more efficient management, automation, and cost cutting canpull an industry that is dealing with import problems out of theirproblems without protectionist legislation. As others have reported,farm values are stable now and moving somewhat higher in some parts ofthe District due to the generally better agricultural outlook andpartly to stronger economies in the area. In general, I think theoutlook in the region is a little more favorable than it had been--outside of Louisiana, which continues to suffer from the energy-related problems. But even there, there is some feeling that thingsmay be beginning to turn around.Inflation is clearly the number one topic of conversationamong people I talk to. Interestingly, though, while they're talkingabout inflation and their fear of inflation, some of my directors arealso reporting that they're unable to get any price increases. Theyreport that as soon as they try to get a price increase, the customerputs the [proposal] out for bids. Very often, those bids are acceptedat a lower level, so they have to run back and get the customer bookedon the lower price.With respect to the national economy, our outlook is prettymuch the same as it has been for some time. I had been concernedabout the downside risks in the economy; I still have some of thatconcern but I guess it has diminished a little since the economy looksjust a tad better than it had been. On balance, I think we're quiteclose to the Greenbook forecast although we, like some others, wouldexpect higher inflation in the latter part of the year rather than atapering off as the Greenbook suggests. All things considered, itseems to me that the outlook is generally favorable for the economyand I think we're doing about as well as we can. If we get 3 percent,we're probably going to be at about the potential for the economy.Although inflation clearly is a concern and I would share thatconcern, the big change I would note is that we've successively overthe past couple of months lowered our expectations of growth in ourtrading partners abroad. And my major concern at the moment is thatthe world's economic performance is becoming increasingly dependent onour economy. Given the reluctance that was confirmed this morning ofsome of our trading partners to stimulate their economies, I thinkthat we have the potential for risks globally. So, in terms ofpolicy, I guess I'm willing to live with a little more inflation, ifin fact that comes about, since it seems to me that the risks to the5/19/87world from a significant slowdown in our economy are even moreworrisome.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As to the outlook on anational level, we're very close to the Greenbook forecast; I have noreal quarrel with it. We're just a tad higher on inflation than theGreenbook, but beyond that, it seems to be a reasonable forecast.With respect to the region, it seems to me that there hasbeen a bit of a change in the outlook of participants in the business,agricultural, and energy sectors. It isn't clear to me why, becausethe numbers don't really reveal that things have turned up. What hasoccurred includes developments that have been mentioned around thetable: for example, the stabilization, or the lack of further decline,in agricultural land prices; and a bit of greater activity in theenergy sector, both in the petroleum and natural gas area. It may bethat, as a result of having looked at a decline over roughly the last3 to 4 years, when people don't see the decline continuing then that'scause for optimism. As a matter of fact, in the agricultural sector,for example--and the comments about the agricultural land pricesstabilizing are revealed in our most recent survey as well--there havebeen some fairly sizable agricultural land sales, but they aregenerally led by the Federal Land Bank. And those are all induced byconcessional interest rate arrangements. That is, they will sell butthey'll finance at 2, 3, or 4 percent and, therefore, it makes itreasonable for some of the producers to pick up that land. When itcomes to other land sales, we find they are largely to the farmer nextdoor who wasn't caught in the debt burden situation and who simplybelieves that the agricultural land values at the moment are such thathe wants to add to his other land holdings and can make the numberswork at these prices. I would say that this quarter was the firsttime in six years that agricultural land values have not continued thedecline. And they're roughly now 55 percent of what they were invalue in 1981. That is coupled with other things in the agriculturalarea--for example, the projection that the wheat crop that will beharvested starting now and into June and July will be something in theneighborhood of the sixth largest wheat crop ever produced, whichmeans that the government agricultural policy is the one that is goingto pick up and buy that grain unless exports pick up. There has beensome euphoria, if you will, among those producers because of theRussian agricultural wheat and grain sale and export prospects. Inthe cattle/red meat market, they are still making money and thatshould continue.With regard to the question of inflation, in talking with theagricultural and small business representatives, our Board ofDirectors, and other business people, I don't hear as much talk aboutprice increases in our region as I've just heard around this table.As a matter of fact, I've heard of some price increases being put inplace but not sticking; they are backing off from them. If we'reconcerned about inflation--which obviously we should be if ourobjective is price stability--it seems to me that the pressures arecoming largely from food and energy and import prices. Those allshould be one-time increases. As a result, unless one believes thatinflationary expectations are going to be built into the wage levels,-16-5/19/87I don't believe we should be taking actions, at this point at least,to offset higher prices coming from those sources alone.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ms. Seger.MS. SEGER. I continue to be concerned about the sluggishnessthat I see in the economy. I thought the industrial productionfigures for April showed widespread weakness. Admittedly, it wasconcentrated in autos, but that certainly wasn't the whole story.Even the March figures showed some weakness beyond autos. I discussedthis with Jim Kichline and I am wondering if we have enough weaknessbuilt into our figure for 1987 for the auto industry because, in myjudgment, we haven't yet seen the impact of the recent runup ininterest rates on most of these indicators since so much of it tookplace in April and so far in May. So, I am concerned that theforecast may be a bit high there.Because I am interested in autos--and from the commentsaround the table some others may be too--I will share a couple ofobservations that I got fromThey are basically verydisappointed in the auto sales figures in April and, particularly, inearly May. At General Motors, they are using incentives selectively;generally, they have a combination of the rebates to consumers, thespecial deals on interest rates, and also some rebates that they aregiving directly to the dealers themselves. For example, Cadillac willpay between $1000 and $2000 per car for every one that the dealermoves of certain slow-moving models. That's tremendous. Also,imports for the first time are not selling very well. The Japaneseare not selling up to their quota, even with the incentives that theyare offering, lost money in January and February; that'snot a terribly good sign. Inventories, of course, are extremelyheavy. The comment was that they have no more asphalt to put the carson and now they are going to corn fields and wheat fields. Also, itwas pointed out to me that the statistics that have been reported sofar this year may, in fact, overstate the strength of the true retaildemand because the fleet sales were concentrated in the first couplemonths of the year and they have been running 25 to 30 percent of thedeliveries so far. Fleet sales do go through dealers and, therefore,are picked up in these numbers that we follow.A couple of comments again, they are verydisappointed with the pace of auto sales, particularly in April andearly May. They point out that trucks also were showing someweakness. They think forty thousand more units will be removed fromproduction schedules over the next three months because of thecontinued oversupply of new cars. They don't have the same attitudeabout dealing with their retailers as what toproduce and then dumps them on the dealers, takes intoaccount more what the dealers would like to receive. Also,is using a negative real GNP growth figure for this quarter, aboutminus 1-1/2 percent seasonally adjusted at an annual rate, mainlybecause there is no inventory buildup. They expect auto sales of 10million units for 1987 versus 11.4 million last year. If they areright, of course, that's around 400,000 less, I believe, than what we-17-5/19/87are using.But again, these are numbers that arebeing reviewed because of the recent uptick in interest rates. Acrossthe board, there is a massive effort to hike sales because there aregreat economies to keeping the production lines running. Therefore,where it used to be that auto production was cyclical, now theproduction is more stabilized and profits are cyclical. A final pointis--and this isn't a very good sign as I read it--that more and morepeople are taking the rebates, when offered, because they need it forthe down payment. In other words, they are that marginally in themarket. They are also going for the longer-term contracts in order toget a monthly payment that will fit into their budgets. So, thoseobservations made me even more concerned about the fundamentalstrength of the economy.In terms of what's happening on the inflation front, I thinkin a way maybe we ourselves are contributing to it because we talk somuch about it. I think it's wrong to read every wriggle in the bondmarket as a sign of inflation or inflation psychology. Having workedwith investments for 10 years, I can tell you a lot of people whotrade bonds don't have anything in mind; they are just throwing piecesof paper around. To attribute great analysis to the move, I think,can really be a mistake.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Hendricks.MR. HENDRICKS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The mood in theFourth District has improved. Some have said it has gone fromlackluster to hopeful to reasonably satisfied. Much of theimprovement seems to be due to the improving trade situation.According to our information, employment, orders, and output areexpanding and labor costs of manufacturing continue to remain rathermoderate. In a relative sense, I guess, we have not heard so muchoptimism around our board of directors table in quite some time.People in the metals industry tell us capacity is being used up hereand abroad and that price increases are achievable in certain productlines. We are also told that the worst of the over-building incommercial construction may be behind us. With respect toagriculture, our lenders are anticipating a better year now than sixmonths ago. Those who follow oil indicate that some oil companyexecutives are even beginning to talk about the possibility of somedrilling late in the year. This better mood is encouraging to usbecause it is consistent with what we feel the outlook is for theeconomy--generally moderate growth. And, we are pretty much in linewith the Greenbook projections.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I would like to reinforce thecomments of Bob Black and others who have argued that the inflationhysteria on Wall Street is greatly overdone. We have manicured thenumbers and we cannot find in the numbers any increased inflationother than that which we would have expected from the agricultural andenergy areas 6 or 9 months ago. If you look at the broad indexes, theproducer price index excluding food and energy, for example, was up ata 2.2 percent rate in the past 6 months ending April. For the past 12months, it was up 2.6 percent. I don't see yet in either the consumerprice index or the producer price index any evidence of increased-18-5/19/87inflation outside the agricultural and energy sectors. That's notsaying it may not be coming at some point. I don't see yet in thenumbers any significant impact of the decline in the dollar in theaggregate price indexes.MR. PARRY. Non-oil import prices were up over 10 percentover the last quarter. That's strong. That's one area.MR. MORRIS. Pardon me?MR. ANGELL. Non-oil import prices were up over 10 percent inthe first quarter.MR. MORRIS. That may well be, but I don't see it showing upin the broad indexes. What we are going to see, I think, is a declinein the volume of imported products and a lesser share of imports inretail sales.MR. MELZER. Were you talking about the CPI? You mentionedsome very low figures. I have some here--MR. MORRIS. I was talking about the producer price index,excluding all food and fuel. I would expect it to show up there firstif there is going to be an increase in prices on the part of ourproducers in response to the greater market opportunities stemmingfrom higher import prices. I am not saying it may not be coming downthe road, but it is not there yet. It just seems to me that the WallStreet hysteria primarily reflects the losses that bond dealers havetaken in their bond portfolios; that was a function of the decline inthe dollar rather than any real change in our inflation outlook.On the manufacturing side, I have the sense that New Englandmanufacturing is rising. It certainly is showing up again in myBoston airport numbers. The first-quarter export air freightshipments were up 35 percent and import air freight shipments weredown 3 percent. This is the first quarter since the series began inthe first quarter of 1984 where the physical volume of export airfreight shipments exceeded the physical volume of import shipments.But what I don't see is any reflection in the employment numbers formanufacturing, which have flattened out; that has been essentiallyunchanged in New England since the middle of last year. That suggeststo me that we are getting some pretty big gains in manufacturingproductivity and that perhaps we are not going to see sizable gains inmanufacturing employment but rather more sizable gains in productivitythan we have seen. That is a tradeoff that I find quite acceptable,if that turns out to be the case.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I can be relatively brief. I amabout where Mr. Boehne was an hour ago. As a matter of fact, Mr.Boehne captured my assessment rather well. I think there are risks inthe real economy, here and abroad, but basically the way things haveunfolded so far this year is pretty much in line both with what wasexpected and, indeed, with what I think constitutes a fairlysatisfactory performance, given where we are. I do think that therehas been a change in the past six weeks on the inflation front, and Ithink it goes well beyond Wall Street. I think six, eight, ten weeks-19-5/19/87ago, there was a whiff of inflation--that was the phrase--and that mayhave been more concentrated on Wall Street. But at this point I thinkthere is more to it than that. Si Keehn's comment puts it in verygood perspective. If you have a sector of the economy where you hadprice decreases and now you have small increases, and everything elsestays the same elsewhere in the economy, the cumulative weight on theinflation side is obviously greater. As I look at the indices, Icertainly would agree that some of the forces working in the directionof higher measured rates of inflation were predictable--energy prices,and to some extent, agricultural prices, and certainly import prices.But even if they were predictable, it seems to me one of two things,or both, may be operative: first, that the amounts of those increasesmay be larger than most people thought they were going to be; andsecond--I am by no means saying that--that there isn't any such thingas one-time price increases. I think there is a tendency for thesethings to cumulate. So, whether it's in terms of forecasts--and notWall Street forecasts, but forecasts from any number of sources aroundthe country--or what is in the actual statistics themselves, I comeaway with the view that either actual or forecast rates of inflationhave stepped up by something in the area of a half point and maybeeven as much as a point. We are looking now at consumer priceincreases, excluding food and energy, probably on the up side of 4-1/2percent. It doesn't take a lot to get to 5 percent; and once you getto 5 percent, I think the argument that it will wash out becomes thatmuch more questionable. So, I think there is a change on theinflation side.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We seem to have disagreements about somefacts and analysis. What is going on in the consumer price indexoutside food and energy, Mr. Kichline?MR. KICHLINE. Well, I don't have the monthly numbers, whichmay give a different pattern, but on a quarterly average basis for thefirst quarter all items less food and energy were up 4.4 percent at anannual rate; they were up 3.8 percent in the fourth quarter of 1986.When I mentioned non-petroleum import prices feeding through morevisibly, in part our reading is in the CPI excluding food and energy,which we say is up 1/2 point or so in the recent numbers.MR. MORRIS. But that index was at least that high in thefirst quarter of 1986.MR. KICHLINE. Correct.MR. PARRY. The other point is that the forecast has therate--again excluding food and energy--at 5 percent and above for1988; so it's not only that it has been running relatively high, it'santicipated to pick up as well.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Melzer.MR. MELZER. I am not going to try to defend Wall Street, butI think there is another aspect to this market behavior we haveobserved, and that is, as we all know, that we have a tremendousgrowth in debt in the economy. And when you get markets whippingaround like these have, there are losses out there. It would befortunate, in a sense, if a $275 million loss ended up with MerrillLynch; they can afford to take it. But what if one of those ended up-20-5/19/87in Financial Corp. of America or one of those? Maybe it has; I don'tknow whether it has or not. All I'm saying is that this kind ofbehavior tends to widen quality spreads; you see it a little in thenew issues, though there haven't been many of them. But you can havea situation where somebody needs to realize liquidity with some of thelower quality paper they have bought and there might not be a bid outthere. So one of the aspects that hasn't been brought out about thismarket behavior, which I think has been very much fueled byinflationary expectations, is the financial fragility that these kindsof swings can bring to the surface. Beyond that, as Jerry mentioned,six or eight weeks ago when we were talking about this initially,there was just a whiff of inflation; basically, it came through aweaker dollar and that psychology was transmitted into the bond marketand so forth. But I think now what we are seeing is poor performance,if you will, in the bond market based on sources other than the lowerdollar--other reports of commodity prices and so forth. I thoughtwhat the Board staff did in sections 23 and 24 of part II [of theGreenbook] really makes the case that there are a lot of thingshappening with spot prices that go well beyond the realm of what Iwould consider just speculative behavior. I think there is definitelya tendency out there to sort of poo-poo all of these developments bysaying: this is just speculation on Wall Street and these guys deserveto take their losses anyway. In a sense, I don't think enoughattention is paid to it. We had some corporate treasurers in lastweek and, in terms of how they are operating their businesses, I was alittle surprised that they are not concerned about inflation. Theyare still enjoying the good wage performance that we have observed; ofcourse, that would only adjust with lags. They haven't really changedtheir inventory behavior and, in a sense, I think that gives us anopportunity. If we nip this in the bud now--when maybe it is largelyexpectational, as Gary Stern said before--we can have some impact onit. But if it gets deep-seated enough that business people begin tochange their behavior with respect to inventories and so forth, thenit really becomes a much more difficult problem to deal with.As to economic activity in our District, growth both inmanufacturing and non-agricultural employment in general continues tooutstrip the national figures. I would say that the attitude isgenerally positive and that there are no major weaknesses in anysector.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Heller.MR. HELLER. I find myself much more in agreement with thenumbers in the Greenbook than with the general tenor of the discussionhere. Looking at the numbers, first of all, we have a sharp downtrendin GNP from 4.3 percent to 2.2 percent in the third quarter. Domesticpurchases are going down to 0.9 percent in the third quarter and 1.3percent in the fourth. On the inflation front, so much pessimism hasbeen expressed, but the GNP deflator is actually declining to 2.6percent in the fourth quarter of this year and nominal GNP is cut byabout 1/3, from 7.8 percent in the first quarter to 5.5 percent in thefourth quarter. So both the real economy, as well as the aggregateinflation numbers, are trending downward for this year. Next year itgoes the other way. As we all know, production in March and April wasrather dismal in every single category except defense, where it wasflat. Inventories were up sharply in the first quarter. Consumercredit was slowing down a lot. Thank goodness, in a way, there was-21-5/19/87also less federal stimulus. The one area where I disagree with theGreenbook is that I think it is probably a bit too optimistic on thevery sharp swing in exports and the improvement in the tradeperformance it projects. It projects an export swing from a growthrate of minus 1.6 percent in the first quarter to plus 17 percent inthe fourth quarter. The aggregate numbers go from a minus $134billion to minus only $46 billion by the fourth quarter of next year.In other words, by the end of next year, 2/3 of our trade imbalancewould have been eliminated. In view of the slow growth abroad thathas been noted by many other speakers, I am rather skeptical that weactually will be able to achieve that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Those are not real numbers. Practicallynone of the trade imbalance would be eliminated in nominal terms.MR. HELLER. No, they are real numbers; they are 1982-basereal numbers. In addition, we have a real interest rate, as we weretold yesterday, of 4 to 5 percent, which incorporates a bit of theextrapolation of current expectations. And we continue to have ourproblems in the financial sector. Overall, I come out on the rathersubdued side, if not outright pessimistic.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I am very much of the view that inflation is areal problem for us at this point in time. If we wait until the GNPdeflator and the CPI show a problem, we will have waited much longerthan I think historical evidence would suggest we should wait. Irecognize that a lot of the commodity price movements look like theyare extra-sensitized to circumstances, but it's this sensitivity,surrounded with the attitudes concerning the dollar and commoditiesthat are linked hand in hand, that is so worrisome. I have watchedmany times when a drought was actually underway and wondered whycommodity prices didn't move; now commodity prices move based upon theforecast of a drought. I think that is an indication of howsensitized the players are to expectations. Some of you seem tobelieve that those people who are participants in the market--whetherit be Wall Street or New York or Chicago--somehow or other may justhave their own self interest at hand and that that's not a true test.I would be much more inclined to look at those who are putting moneydown than I would those who are making forecasts that are not backedby money, because it is really the shift in preference between holdingfinancial assets and real assets that is involved. We have aphenomenon that is emerging that is significant, and it seems to me itwill continue until there is marketplace realization that the FederalReserve plans to follow a scarcity path for the monetary aggregatesthat will slow down. So I am somewhat of the opinion that we had somegains out of this because, certainly, it does give real sectorstimulus any time you have commodity prices move upward. Our economyI thought was weak enough going into 1987 so that a little stimuluswasn't a bad thing. But it seems to me that we now have to face thetest as to whether or not we really mean price level stability. Ithink that the Greenbook puts it very well: that if we choose not todo that, then that's consistent with a continuing decline in theexchange rate of the dollar. Over time, I think that will not give usany better improvement in our nominal trade balance than we would getif we dealt with it, because we will just incorporate a rate ofinflation into the U.S. economy that I think matches this falling-22-5/19/87value of the dollar. So, I am of the opinion that we have given thisplenty of opportunity to see that it's a real phenomenon.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I must admit I am a little torn between whichway things are going. I don't have a clear view myself. Obviously,the financial markets are indicating some inflationary expectations.The question is--and it has certainly been the question here--whetherwe think they will be realized or not and whether we want to betagainst the markets or whether we think something more needs to bedone or has already been done.In terms of the Greenbook forecast, I agree with a lot of itexcept that one of the major factors feeding into the projection ofrising inflation in 1988 in this forecast is further expectation of aweakening dollar. Of course, that feeds right into import prices; soin the forecast you don't have a one-time adjustment in import pricesthat washes out over time. You have a continuous feed-through of adecline in the exchange rate that is causing continued upward pressureon the inflation rate. Now, if I really thought that was going to bethe case, I would be a lot more concerned. It may be possible, so Ithink that we need to concern ourselves with stabilizing the dollar atsome point. If I thought the dollar was going to deteriorate on acontinuing basis, I would have some concern about the continued upwardpressure on the inflation picture. So, I would hope that we couldachieve some conditions that would stabilize the dollar without acontinuing deteriorating trend. I think the question then is: Whatdoes it take to do that? We now see some growing spreads in interestdifferentials between the United States and our other tradingpartners. My own opinion is that, hopefully, we are getting to thepoint where the dollar is finding some legs under it and will have tostabilize. I think the real question is whether we have done or areabout to do enough in monetary policy to convince the markets that weare dealing with the inflationary risks in terms of the dollar andother domestic pressures on inflation. As Peter Sternlight pointedout, borrowings--inadvertently or advertently--averaged $700 millionover the last intermeeting period. I am not sure whether we want togo further than that or whether I personally want to continue thatsort of a borrowing assumption. So I think the question is: What doesit take to stabilize these conditions? I don't want to overreact anddeal with more than just what the inflationary risk is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Kohn, maybe you can give us a briefanalysis.MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me mention one thing that I was goingto discuss later. I will discuss it later, but some rumors are flyingaround the markets so I thought I should identify it now, anyway.Citibank is making the great move this afternoon, unless the marketforces them to announce it earlier. They are making a reallocation oftheir capital accounts and are going to put $3 billion into reservesagainst general contingencies, which will get pretty preciselyidentified with LDC risk. They say that is not their intention butthe accountants are forcing them into it, looking for some explicit-23-5/19/87excuse. This will be a record loss for any bank, by some multiple, ina quarter, and a big loss for the year. I am sure the idea they havein mind is that they will then show very favorable earnings insubsequent quarters; they won't have this quarter-by-quarter drag oflarge provisions and everything is going to look much better. Infact, what's happening is that a couple of numbers on the balancesheet are changing. It is going to raise a lot of questions,obviously, in the minds of a lot of people about other banks. Thereare a lot of rumors about around the market. Wecan discuss later what is going on in the market.MR. PARRY. Paul, are the rumors sufficient that I could callan institution that I might have some concerns about?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The problem is that I don't know what youcan tell them right now because we have inside [information]. We havethis problem with some banks; that is right. I just don'tknow what you can tell them.SPEAKER(?). Not to go out to lunch, I think.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can talk to them if you want and seewhat they know, because they are obviously the other bank that will bevery much affected by the psychology. A lot of them will be but--MR. BLACK. Why don't you say we were sitting around the OpenMarket Committee table and didn't know what was happening and wantedto--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On our more immediate problem--I don'tknow, that problem could be pretty immediate in terms of the decisionwe have to make--it is obvious that one of the variables for theFederal Reserve as a whole, but not for the Open Market Committee, isa change in the discount rate. A number of Federal Reserve Banks havemade a proposal and we have had some discussion. I don't know what Ican say about that. We could change it immediately; we could changeit if the dollar seemed to require; or we could change it not at all.I think those are the three options before the house. I just think wehave to have those in mind as possibilities; it may affect one'sjudgment about how to conduct open market operations. For what it isworth--if I mention this there is a chance you will be overlyinfluenced, but I suppose not these days--our latest M1 numbers look alittle stronger than what we thought yesterday. Instead of unchangedin May, M1 may be up a little.MR. KOHN. Instead of down a little in May, it now looks likeM1 may be up a little in May.MR. JOHNSON. You might point out that there is a specialcircumstance in it.MR. KOHN. Well, for some of it. Even abstracting from thatthe numbers are a bit stronger.MR. PARRY. Do you mean an unwinding from April? Is that thespecial circumstance?-24-5/19/87MR. KOHN. No, there is another transaction we are trying totrack through the System that may be boosting demand deposits in thecurrent week; we don't have a really strong handle on it, but that iswhat Governor Johnson was referring to. But even before the currentweek, it is still looking a bit stronger than we had expected.MS. SEGER. What is happening in the money markets thismorning?MR. STERNLIGHT. Federal funds are about 6-3/4 percent.Borrowing was about $600 million yesterday, so it is averaging alittle over $500 million. We are well over our reserve paths forright now, at $600 million or so, and we plan to just let that workits way into the money market. If those estimates are right, thingsought to ease off considerably. We ought to lose a bunch of theremaining repurchase agreements that are on, although so far that ishappening quite slowly.MR. BLACK. Do you think it is going to reverse itselfwithout help from you, Peter? Or do you think you will have to unloadsome?MR. STERNLIGHT. As the reserve period draws to a closetomorrow, if the numbers that we are looking at stand up, there oughtto be a big easing at the end of this reserve period.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who would like to say something? Mr.Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I would support Bluebookalternative C. It seems to me that the prospect of high inflation isthe main reason to support some tightening from the stated policy atthe present time. As I mentioned before, it is my view that theeconomy is certainly close to full employment in terms of laborresources, and we expect the economy to expand this year at a ratewhich is slightly faster than its current long-run potential growthrate. It seems to me that this consideration is particularlyimportant now because of the declining dollar and recent increases inoil prices, which are causing and will cause inflation rates to go upeven without any demand pressures. I think there is a danger thatincreases in inflation this year and next could become imbedded ininflation expectations. And, given what I think is the apparentstrength in the economy, the risk of cutting economic expansion shortby such a tightening of policy seems to be small. I would have apreference, too, as to how that is accomplished if that is somethingyou want brought up.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You were just saying alternative C; I waslooking at it literally to say either an increase in [the borrowingbuilt into] the reserve path or an increase in the discount rate.MR. PARRY. Yes. I would prefer an increase in the discountrate. I was going to say that sooner would be better than later but Imust admit that this little item that you brought up would suggest tome that maybe it should be a little later.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Mr. Boykin.-25-5/19/87MR. BOYKIN. I would agree with what Bob Parry just said andI really can't add very much to it. Alternative C does look like thebest alternative to me. A lot of reference has been made to inflationand that it is probably not real; but there is some expectation thereand it seems to me that what we really need to move against is theexpectation. That was what was probably so hard to wring out the lastgo-round. So, I would go to alternative C. Likewise, I wouldprobably favor an increase in the borrowing assumption from $400million to $600 million versus a discount rate change right now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You would prefer the borrowing.MR. BOYKIN. Yes. Primarily with what is going on that wejust want to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.MR. JOHNSON. Can I ask a question again? Alternative B isassociated with $400 million in borrowing? Okay. This is kind ofconfusing because, in some sense, "C" is actually a more modestborrowing level than we have been experiencing. It is definitelybelow the average during this last intermeeting period. I think thequestion is: What would we expect to happen? Are we going to see aborrowing average of $600 million or what is it going to be? Are wegoing to try and truly target a $600 million borrowing level so thatwe are talking about a tightening of policy relative to the $400million level that we sought? I guess that is what I am asking.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure I understand the question.We were truly seeking what we were seeking before; we may not havemade it. When we say $600 million, or whatever, we shall truly seekit.MR. JOHNSON. Well, I don't think we truly sought $400million. I don't think that there is any doubt: you can't go throughan entire six-week intermeeting period with a $400 million target andhit $700 million and say you truly sought it. I think we could easilyhave offset that; it wouldn't have been--MR. BOYKIN. But we didn't start out there; we actuallystarted out with $300 million, leaning in favor of moving that updepending on what happened to the dollar.MR. JOHNSON. From $300 to $400 million; that is differentfrom $300 to $700 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would submit that we've had two two-weekperiods, which is two-thirds of the time between the meetings, wherewe couldn't hit it.MR. JOHNSON. I recognize the serious problem with theTreasury account at the Federal Reserve. But as that continued and wecould see that borrowings were going to run very high, we could havedone more on the reserve side. Given what was happening to thedollar, we shouldn't have. But I am just saying when we are crossingover into something that is a change in policy, I would just like toclarify where that is. At some point, going to $700 million borrowing-26-5/19/87from $400 million or even $500 million seems to require somethingother than just saying--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I tell you. Let's defer those questionsuntil we know what we want to do in concept. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. I share Governor Johnson's confusion on this. Iwould be for alternative C, at least conceptually, because I thinkthat represents a slight snugging and, for all the reasons we havesaid, I think that is appropriate at this point. I also think it isperhaps appropriate to take a step that is a bit visible in terms ofreinforcing our policy of price stability and, therefore, I would bein favor of recommending to you a change in the discount rate. Idon't know how to evaluate this Citibank issue as to what kind ofeffect that is going to have on the market. Certainly, that has to bebehind us before we take any move on that. But I would be in favor ofchanging the discount rate. And alternative C is a way of moving alittle against this.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I am a little concerned aboutthese inflationary expectations in the economy, but like some othershere, I don't see it being translated at the moment into anything thatis terribly worrisome in real numbers. My greater concern is with thestate of the economy and what a higher level of interest rates wouldbring not only to the domestic economy but to our trading partners andthe LDCs. So, if we need to do some tightening, I would like it to besmall in scope and very gradual. The dollar has stabilized; maybe weare at a level we are not comfortable with, but it has been around the140 level against the yen. I would prefer it to move up just a bit.I, too, am a little confused about what we are keying off of. If itis $400 million that we are using, I wouldn't mind moving to $500million. I would suggest that a discount rate might be saved for amore significant development with respect to the dollar--if the dollarwere to move down or inflation actually did move. I would prefer justto use open market operations in a very gradual, slight, way over thenext intermeeting period. I am not sure whether that is "C" or "B"; Isuppose, conceptually, that I am somewhere between the two.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Hendricks.MR. HENDRICKS. It seems to me that the best course is closerto "C" than to "B", unless the expansion weakens or the current turnupin prices subsides. Financial markets seem to have marked upinflation expectations. We don't see a pickup in prices working intothe cost structure yet, but when it does occur, we feel it would bemore difficult to deal with. Markets have snugged a little, with thefunds rate up to the 6-1/2 percent area or slightly above. We believethat a borrowing level consistent with that outcome is appropriate.It would reduce the risk that inflation expectations would generatefuture price pressures and would provide some insurance against risingimport prices becoming the basis for domestic price increases. Wewould prefer to set the borrowing level at $600 million and hold onthe discount rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.5/19/87MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I would support alternative Cbecause, despite my earlier statements, I think if we were to go foralternative B, we might give the market an impression that we wereeasing policy and that could, of course, be very troublesome. I think"C" is more in line with what, in fact, we have been doing and, as wasindicated earlier, represents more of a no-change policy than "B".With respect to the discount rate, I think we ought to keep that inreserve for use when we have the next downward fall in the exchangerate. I don't know when that is going to come, but it seems to merather than raise the discount rate in a period of stable exchangerates, we ought to hold that to have something in our armory for useon that occasion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ms. Seger.MS. SEGER. I am in favor of no tightening. I am not surewhich alternative that is, the way these things drift. As I saidearlier, the real economy is very sluggish. Furthermore, I don't seeany sign of real life in any sector; certainly, I don't see any sectoroverheating at the moment. As Manley said, we've already tightened.What I think we have is something that is beyond alternative C lasttime; I believe that the majority voted for maintaining, which wasalternative B. Also, we have not seen in the real economy yet theeffects of the tightening that we already did. The world economy issluggish, and even the staff has revised its projections of the growthin industrialized countries. The important danger, I think, is thatwe will tighten monetary policy and the foreign countries are notgoing to offset with some easing on their side. Also, the monetaryaggregates have slowed and are expected to be weak. I think arecession would be a disaster. It would certainly not make our budgetdeficit any better. It would hurt the lesser developed countries; itwould make their debt burdens a lot heavier. It would not help thefinancial system, particularly the savings and loans that are alreadysort of shaky. And, finally, I don't think inflationary pressures canexist very long in an environment with excess capacity and commoditygluts worldwide. I would like to vote for "B" but not a "B" thatwould drift.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "B" is where [unintelligible] drift. Mr.Stern.MR. STERN. I favor alternative C, which seems to me not veryfar from where we are at the moment. It seems to me appropriate underthe circumstances, given the continued vulnerability of the dollar andwhat we are seeing--at least what I think we are seeing--in the pricenumbers. I know that it is possible that what we are seeing here issimply large relative price changes in some commodities and energy,and so forth. But I think the bond market is telling us somethingdifferent. Given the policies that we have pursued over the lastcouple of years--not just monetary policy, but fiscal policy--andgiven what has happened to the dollar, in some sense, one could askthe question: What has taken the markets so long to react the way theyhave? So, "C" seems to me to be appropriate, and I would prefer tocouple that in the relatively near future with a discount rateincrease. At this point in time I think that has a chance, at least,of being salutary as far as the dollar and the bond market areconcerned.-28-5/19/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I am for alternative C and I think we ought tohave a discount rate increase. I think a discount rate increase nowor relatively soon buys us more than if we wait a few weeks. I don'tthink they are of equal value. The longer we wait the more it getsdiscounted and just doesn't buy us very much. I think it would havebeen worth more a week ago and will be worth less two weeks from now.So, I would move fairly promptly on the discount rate in conjunctionwith "C."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Melzer.MR. MELZER. I would be in the same position that Ed Boehnejust expressed. I think that if we wait on the discount rate untilthere is another test on the dollar, there is a good chance that a 50basis point move wouldn't be enough. By showing some resolve sooner,I think we have a better chance of dealing with that. Also, as GaryStern pointed out, that deals with the inflationary expectationsdecisively.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I apparently led some of ourcolleagues into thinking that I did not see any inflation pickup atall. All I meant to convey was that I thought that markets may beanticipating more than, in fact, is likely to happen. I do think thatinflationary expectations and some indications of inflation haveactually appeared. But, in view of the weakness in the domesticeconomy and even greater weakness abroad, and now this Citibanksituation, I think maybe we ought to proceed with some caution. I wasinclined to favor a position that was more a "B-minus", but afterlistening to comments around the table, I think what I really wouldlike is a level of borrowed reserves that would produce a federalfunds rate of around 6-3/4 percent, as it has been recently. I'd putthat in either the "B-minus" or the "C" category. I would also favorgoing toward variant II [of the directive language], and moving thatforeign exchange reference back to its usual position. And I wouldlike to use "would" and "might." Also, I think it might be worthconsidering moving up that point on the concerns about inflationarypressures before the reference to the strength in the businessexpansion as a way of showing that that is now a more importantconsideration. This refers to what you'd find in the directivelanguage with the brown cover on lines 110 and 111 or on page 15 ofthe Bluebook. And, I would hold that discount rate move in abeyancefor a while in case we get some real pressure on the dollar so that wecould move very quickly on it at that time. I don't feel terriblystrongly about that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. I agree largely with what Mr. Black just said; Iam also in favor of "B-minus," especially in view of the fact that M2is lying at a level substantially below the target cone and M3 is justat the bottom end of the target range. Like Mr. Black, I am also infavor of variant II, moving the foreign exchange language further downin the priority list.-29-5/19/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I stand in the "C" category, mainly because Ithink that is basically no change in current policy operations. Ithink that would be consistent with about a 6-3/4 percent funds rate,or something like that, maybe even less. But I see two things thatcould be done with "C" that could involve both the adoption of ahigher borrowings and a discount rate change, without a further moveupward [in the funds rate]. If we want to hold off on the discountrate, [saving it] as ammunition for a future event in terms of theannouncement impact, we could go ahead and change the borrowing levelto $600 million from the $400 million but have some sort ofcontingency where, if we decide a discount rate change is neededlater, then we would lower the borrowing. The discount rate changewould be a substitute so that there is no additional pressure on thefunds rate but we get the announcement effect of the discount rate.So, it is not impossible to do both with the same policy. I wouldsupport "C" assuming--and that is why I had the technical questionearlier--that "C" represents basically current operating procedure,and I would add the option of the discount rate substituting for thatat a lower level of borrowing at some point when we might want to useit. I don't know what the possibilities are, but the Chairman made itclear that it is probably not very likely that we could work out somesort of coordinated move with Japan of Germany.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the probability is zero now.MR. JOHNSON. Zero. Yes, I think that is right. Mysuggestion is that we go ahead and adjust the borrowing but thenreserve the discount rate for a point when--maybe not this week butnext week, or whenever, depending on developing events in the exchangemarket--that might be something that could be used. So, to someextent, you get the dual effect of the announcement of the discountrate and the higher borrowing level within the same period withoutreally having to make an adjustment. That would be my preference. Idon't know what you would call that; I guess you would call that "C"with a variation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is "C."MR. JOHNSON. Yes, acute "C."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In my view, what hashappened is not a result of Federal Reserve monetary policymanagement. The fact that we have a 6-3/4 percent, or a 6-7/8 to 7percent, funds rate is largely a result of the markets' misconceptionor perception of what has occurred. That is, I still view ourborrowing target as $400 million, with $850 million excess reserves;with the technical problems that the Desk has encountered, we didn'thit that simply because the market took it elsewhere. Further, giventhe forecast of domestic growth--which is fairly modest, it seems tome, at 2-1/2 to 3 percent--the only reasons that one could justifyraising the interest rates at this point, either through open marketoperations or the discount rate, are: (1) if you were concerned aboutinflation, and I don't share that at the moment; or (2) to support thedollar. It is my understanding that for the moment the dollar is-30-5/19/87fairly stable. So, neither one of those two things looms very largeto me and, as a result, I would probably generally opt to go with "B."But given the uncertainty in the market and the fact that they havetaken the rate up, to come down too quickly would put some downwardpressure on the dollar. As a result, I would go with a "B/C", with aborrowing level of about $500 million. But that would be simply tomoderate the downward movement of interest rates if we can achievethat without putting pressure on the dollar.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I am very sympathetic to the point made by EdBoehne, and seconded by Tom Melzer, that there would be more cloutfrom a discount rate change if it were to occur prior to moving to, orconfirming, a $600 million borrowing level. I think it would havemore impact. But since the Governors of the Board will be the onesvoting on that, I belong in camp "C."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I would be for "C" too. As far asthe Boehne/Melzer/Angell twist, that is something I have someconsiderable sympathy for--trying to get out ahead of this a little.I think a discount rate change now would give us the kind ofmaneuvering room that Manley mentioned, as well. I might be a bitmore skittish about the discount rate this morning than I wasyesterday, just because the market has gotten pretty jumpy in thecontext of this Citibank development. But the right policy, in myjudgment, is the Boehne/Melzer/Angell twist on this, which affects thetiming, as far as I'm concerned.MR. JOHNSON. Another question. If we went for a discountrate change soon, and that was the policy, what borrowing would gowith that?MR. ANGELL. Well, it seems to me that a $400 millionborrowing assumption should go with the discount rate move to give you"C." And then if conditions changed, that would call in the rest ofour directive as to the room we would have later.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Peter, is that how you and Don thinkabout it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is what "C" says.MR. JOHNSON. Yes. That is right. Now that I think aboutit, it is in the Bluebook that way.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All this perceived wisdom says that halfthe people would like to see the discount rate moved right away andhalf the people would not like to see it moved.MR. ANGELL. Well, Mr. Chairman, you haven't voted yet.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is correct. I would interpret mostpeople's comments as indicating that they are reasonably happy in avery general way with the way things are now. How do we express thatin detail? I guess it depends on what we do with the discount rate.-31-5/19/87I will look at the wording to see what wisdom that implies. Verybroadly, is the preference for variant I or II? A couple of peoplesaid they would like variant II and many didn't say anything. I amnot worried about the precise words in either one, but variant Iclearly gives more prominence to the exchange rate. Is that closer tothe center of gravity or the reverse?MR. JOHNSON. My preference would be to emphasize theinflationary expectations issue. I guess that is in variant I--it hasthe exchange rate mentioned in there but not as prominently as theindications of inflationary pressures.MR. BLACK. You've got that in Variant II, Manley. I wonderif you would be amenable to putting that in front of the strength ofthe business expansion, which is the idea that I threw out.MR. JOHNSON. Okay.MR. BLACK. I think it gets to the same sort of thing.MR. KEEHN. Are you saying, Bob, variant II but move theinflationary pressure phrase up in the sentence?MR. BLACK. Yes, that's what I would do: move it up to line110 instead of 111 and put it right ahead of the "strength in thebusiness expansion."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it is pretty close.MR. BLACK. Well, it is; I grant that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the argument is straightforward;we can move up the inflationary pressures phrase. I feel that a lotof comments suggested that maybe the timing of the discount rate oughtto be primarily influenced by one thing or the other. Whatever oneconcludes about the timing is a foreign market question. And, if aninflation expectations question is really what we are talking about,then I am not so sure whether we're not better off putting inflationin with the exchange market in the first clause: "developments inforeign exchange markets and indications of inflationary pressures"--or vice versa--"taking into account..." etc.MR. ANGELL. Yes, let's do that. Put inflation in front ofthe dollar. Let's go with variant I, but put inflation in front ofthe foreign exchange.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Depending on indications of inflationarypressures and developments in foreign exchange markets."MR. ANGELL. Yes.MR. BOEHNE. I like that.SEVERAL. I agree.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --developments in foreign exchangemarkets, taking into account the behavior of the aggregates," then whydon't we just say "and the strength of the business expansion"?-32-5/19/87MR. KOHN. The phrase "conditions in credit markets" is thereat the end of that sentence.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I know, but does that add anything?MR. ANGELL. No. Let's leave it out.MR. HELLER. The aggregates are thrown out too.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. "Taking into account the behavior ofthe aggregates and the strength of the business expansion." We canleave in credit market conditions; I am not sure what it is supposedto mean in this connection.MR. ANGELL. With inflationary pressures highlighted, I thinkthe credit market conditions might be reflected by that same phrase.If it is, we don't need--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suppose that phrase is meant to say ifconditions in the credit markets are too bad, we would get easier.MR. KOHN. Yes, at least the Committee would take that intoaccount if a serious problem arose. At one point it said foreign anddomestic credit markets.MR. ANGELL. Well, I think we ought to leave it out.MR. KOHN. If a problem--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's go back to the earlier part of thatsentence.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It raises a question in my mind asto what we're thinking of.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "This approach is expected to beconsistent with growth in M2 and M3 over the period at annual rates of6 percent or less" is what we had.MR. ANGELL. I still like 3 to 7 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the projection explicitly?MR. ANGELL. Well, because M2 does run a little low; on M3--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's "the aggregates." If M2 runslow--MR. HELLER. M2 runs low.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But the projection is about 6 percent forM3 and only 3-1/2 to 4 percent for M2. We can say "4 and 6 percent,respectively,: or we can say "6 percent or less."SEVERAL. 6 percent or less.MR. JOHNSON. Say around 6 percent. I don't care; I am notgetting into this one again.-33-5/19/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just reading what we have here: "Growth inMl is expected to slow substantially over the balance of the secondquarter."MR. ANGELL. I don't think that--MR. KOHN. Compared with 18 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is a great daring statement: it maybe below 18 percent for the rest of the quarter!MR. ANGELL. It looks to me like you are apt to get double-digit rates for the quarter. What do you think, Don?MR. KOHN. Well, you could. We have an 8 to 8-1/2 percentgrowth rate in the path; but you can't rule out a 10 percent pace.The previous directive had something about M1 is expected to remainsubstantially below its pace in 1986, which is pretty safe since thatpace was 15-1/4 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could say something even safer--below18! We said it would be below 15; we now say below 18. Can we saysomething a bit more substantive maybe?MR. BOEHNE. We don't know what will happen.MR. ANGELL. Say below its pace in the first quarter. It was13 percent in the first quarter. I think it is safe to say it will bebelow 13 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 13 percent was the average?MR. ANGELL. The first-quarter average over the fourth-quarter average.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What was it, say, December to March?MR. KOHN. I'm not sure. November to March it was 11percent. December to March probably was less than that becauseDecember was so high. I don't know what the December to March ratewas.MR. ANGELL. I can give you the December 31 to March 30.With the hump taken out, it was 5-1/2 percent. But with the hump onit was--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can say below its pace in the firstquarter, but there are two ways of looking at the first quarter. Itis--MR. KOHN. Q-IV to March was 10 percent. December to Marchwould have been single digits. Dave Lindsey, I hope, is getting thenumber right now.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Doesn't over the quarter usuallyconvey December to March?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It would to me.-34-5/19/87MR. KOHN. 4-3/4 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was only 4-3/4 percent. Say 10 percentor below. That's a little--MR. ANGELL. That's all right. You may have to ease policy alittle to achieve that, but that would probably be very appropriate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Say 6 percent or less for the broaderaggregates and growth in M1 is expected to be 10 percent or less.MR. ANGELL. Yes, that would be fine. That would beappropriate restraint.MR. KOHN. Trying to make a little mental allowance that wehave a special factor here that may give it a little boost, I wouldsay "around 10 percent or less" to give us a little--MR. ANGELL. Saying "expected" is--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Expected" is what we say about theothers. That worries me a little. Does this mean that M1 has thesame importance as M2 or M3?MR. JOHNSON. I definitely think we should downplay that.MR. ANGELL. The problem is it is more influenceable than M2and M3--that is, if you really want--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have already said we don't have atarget for it. We can have a target for it, but is that what we aredoing?MR. JOHNSON. No, I don't want to.MR. HELLER. But when you say 10 percent or less, what areyou taking as the base?MR. ANGELL. You're taking the second-quarter averagecompared to the first.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. End of March to the month of June.MR. HELLER. In March you have a very low--MR. JOHNSON. You're going from a low base to a big Aprilnumber and that is going to be--MR. HELLER. You're pushing way above the 10 percent.MR. ANGELL. Yes, but April comes back off. It is notmeasuring April. It is point to point.MR. JOHNSON. You are still raising the base from which ithas to--MR. BOEHNE. I have a couple of problems with specifying anumber. First, I think it conveys that we now know more about M1-35-5/19/87specifically than we did a few months ago, and I don't think we reallydo. Secondly, in the same directive that we move inflationarypressures up to the top of the list, do we want to put a double digitfigure for an aggregate like M1? I just think that sends the wrongmessage.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's all terrific. What language do yousuggest?MR. BOEHNE. "Growth in M1 is expected to slow substantiallyfrom its pace in 1986" or "to be below its pace in 1986."MR. ANGELL. Just leave it the same as we had the last time.MR. BOEHNE. Essentially.MR. ANGELL. If you want to be vague, that does it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Growth in M1 is expected to remain wellbelow." I was worried about "this approach is expected to beconsistent with M2 and M3." Do we want a stronger phrase than that?We make this sound more like a target which it is supposed to be."Expected to be consistent"--the magic words. Oh, forget about it.We'll leave the funds range 4 to 8 percent. Now the substantive issueis--to go back to the beginning of the first sentence--we don't haveto make it fully asymmetrical, but last time we didn't leave in theclause about slightly lesser or somewhat lesser. We just said thelast time "somewhat greater reserve restraint might." One way to doit is "somewhat greater reserve restraint would and slightly lesserreserve restraint might."MR. JOHNSON. It seems to me that this time there is nocontingency; we are stating a change in policy. "Might" and "would"are not necessary. We just state what it is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We do? It's nice to know--we haven'tgotten to the first sentence yet. I think it probably should be notquite so asymmetrical as last time, which was fully asymmetrical. Ifwe keep this general structure we can say: "Greater reserve restraintwould and somewhat or slightly lesser reserve might." Or we can makethem both "somewhat" and make one word a "might." Let's go back tothe first sentence. I think we can either say "maintain" or"increase." If we say increase, we will say "increase the degree ofreserve pressures sought in recent weeks" and it will all be explainedin the policy record. Or we can say "maintain the existing"--MR. ANGELL. I think it should say "increased somewhat."Because from the last policy directive--MR. JOHNSON. As long as it is made clear that that isrelative to what we sought.MR. ANGELL. Assuming that there is no great tidal wave hereto release the minutes earlier than the next meeting, it would seem tome that what should be in the record is increased reserve restraint.MR. BOEHNE. I agree with that.-36-5/19/87MR. JOHNSON. I do too. I just think it should be made clearrelative to what.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible.]MR. ANGELL. It is increased reserve restraint relative tothe position.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It says increased. Somebody thinks itought to be "the degree of reserve pressure sought in recent weeks."SPEAKER(?). You have to read it against the background ofwhat we said in the policy record earlier.MR. MELZER. One concern that I have is that all we havedone, in effect, is just ratify the level of reserve restraint that wehave right now. Listening to what Sam and Peter said, that theremight be some expectation out there--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Presumably we could be very technical; theborrowing average in this two-week period will probably come outaround $500 million.MR. MELZER. Yes. I am not talking about the minutes now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Reserves--MR. GUFFEY. But we sought $400 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is correct. But it is not going tobe $600 million.SPEAKER(?). We may get a lot of borrowings tomorrow.MR. ANGELL. Well, it seems to me that we have alreadydecided what we want the policy to be. What we now are doing isdiscussing what we want the minutes to say when they are released insix weeks. It seems to me that the minutes should say that we havesomewhat increased reserve restraint.MR. HELLER. Going from existing levels.MR. JOHNSON. No. I think going from seeking $400 million toseeking $600 million is a pretty good change. I agree from existingconditions it is not big; it shouldn't be noticeable in the fundsmarket.MR. ANGELL. Well, let's use the word "sought."MR. BOEHNE. That's what is in there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When is the last time we used this kind offormulation? You say we have used it several times?MR. KOHN. I'm not sure. Maybe Mr. Bernard has that.-37-5/19/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When we have used it, I think we have hadexactly this same problem. There is a debate about whether we want toget public credit for tightening up. We're actually tightening.MR. JOHNSON. We are tightening after the fact.MR. KEEHN. I wouldn't feel strongly about it, but in lightof the fact that we have tightened and we are suggesting wording thatwe are, would there be any sympathy for moving toward the federalfunds range consistent with "C," namely 5 to 9 percent? That wouldput the rate we are getting about in the middle of that range.MR. JOHNSON. That goes with "C" anyway.MR. ANGELL. No. I thought the Chairman said 4 to 8 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 4 to 8 percent is what we have been using.MR. KEEHN. I am suggesting that in light of changes thathave occurred in the rate structure and the way this drafting isbeginning to shape up, would there be a basis for changing the federalfunds range to 5 to 9 percent?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. I would think that is unlikely butit could conceivably happen. It is a question of how we want it toread. I think most of the time we have not moved the range when weare this far--and where we would anticipate being is this far--fromthe edge. That is much more frequently [the case] than not. We havenot moved it until we get quite close to the edge.MR. HELLER. From 4 to 8--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But it is all psychological. Well, whatdo you want to say? "Seeks to increase somewhat the degree of reservepressure sought in recent weeks"? One question is whether we want tosay--which we have also done at times--"depending upon the level ofthe discount rate," or "taking into account any changes in thediscount rate." In the directive of August 19, 1986, we said "In theimplementation of policy for the immediate future, the Committee seeksto decrease slightly the existing degree of pressure on reservepositions, taking into account the possibility of a change in thediscount rate."MR. ANGELL. I don't think we need to mention the discountrate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we have to, but probably itwill have to be mentioned in the text [of the policy record] that howwe will conduct open market operations will depend on what thediscount rate move is.MR. BOYKIN. I think I would because I think it would make adifference. Not knowing what the Board will do on the discount rate,I would go for the $600 million borrowing assumption. If I knew therate was going to change, I would go for the $400 million.MR. ANGELL. Well, I thought that was assumed by everyone.-38-5/19/87MR. BOYKIN. I think the comment on the discount rate shouldbe there for those of us who don't get to vote on that--that at leastwe have it in mind as a possibility.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that it has to be in the policyrecord anyway. There is a more limited question here: whether it hasto be mentioned in the directive itself.MR. BOYKIN. I am arguing yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will interpret the degree of reservepressure in the text to mean a composite of borrowings and discountrate, which is what we have done before. I think that has beenestablished many times. So, presumably this degree of reservepressure will be read as some combination of discount rate andborrowings, whether or not the discount rate is explicitly mentionedin this particular sentence. I will declare that. Still, it doesn'tanswer the question of whether it is better or not visually to putsome mention of it in there. It will be reasonably clear, I trust, inthe last few paragraphs of the policy record leading up to thedirective that the Committee very much had in mind that we might havea different level of borrowing depending upon what the discount rateis.MR. GUFFEY. Having said that, Mr. Chairman, what level ofborrowing do you have in mind?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will get to that in a minute. How manywant the discount rate mentioned in this sentence?MR. JOHNSON. I am neutral; I don't care.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are going to be 5 to 5.MR. JOHNSON. I'm not against it.MR. ANGELL. I'm against it. I prefer not--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm indifferent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have a number of indifferentones.MR. ANGELL. So, you have more votes to have it in.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There are more votes to have it in,probably. "In the implementation of policy, the Committee seeks toincrease somewhat the degree of reserve pressure sought in recentweeks, taking account of the possibility of a change in the discountrate."MR. JOHNSON. $600 million borrowing goes without a discountrate change; $400 million goes with a discount rate change.MS. SEGER. What are the odds for getting an increase in thediscount rate and borrowing--not the borrowing target, but actualborrowing--around $800 million? Could you conceive of that?-39-5/19/87MR. ANGELL. We are not going to hear of any huge[unintelligible] gains of a type that we are unable to offset.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "In the implementation of policy, theCommittee seeks to increase somewhat the degree of reserve pressuresought in recent weeks, taking into account the possibility of achange in the discount rate. Somewhat greater reserve restraint wouldor somewhat lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable depending onindications of inflationary pressures and on developments in foreignexchange markets, taking into account the behavior of the aggregatesand the strength of the business expansion. This approach is expectedto be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the period at annualrates of 6 percent or less. Growth in M1 is expected to be well belowits pace during 1986." The 4 to 8 percent range. How do we deal with[two] "taking into accounts?"MR. PARRY. Put "depending on."MR. STERN. Put "depending on" back.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now we've got two "depending ons"!MR. BLACK. I think you can leave the second one out, butthat may put more emphasis on the aggregates than you want to givethem.MR. JOHNSON. "Given" or "in the light of."MR. BOEHNE. If you want to separate it, you could have acomma and then "as well as the behavior of the aggregates and thestrength of the business expansion." That puts it in two slightlydifferent categories.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we could do it that way, I guess."...acceptable depending on indications of inflationary pressures andon developments in foreign exchange markets, as well as the behaviorof the aggregates and the strength of the business expansion." Ithink clearly what we are saying, and this is too simple is: If wechange the discount rate in the next day or two, we would aim around$400 million or so and if we don't we would aim at $600 million. Whatis more questionable is what happens if time passes and we go to--Idoubt we're going to $600 million right off the bat--as a way toprocrastinate, go to $500 million or so.MR. ANGELL. On the way.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Initially. And leave open whether we goto $600 million on the borrowings or just change the discount rate.MR. ANGELL. I like that. It gives us a little more optionthan a discount rate change.MR. JOHNSON. Given what we are doing today, what would goingimmediately to $600 million look like in the market, in your opinion?MR. STERNLIGHT. What troubles me a little is that there isstill this kind of overlay of expectation of a discount rate move. Iwonder, even if action were delayed on that, if we would immediately,-40-5/19/87or starting next reserve period, put in $600 million and still lookfor a discount rate in addition whether that wouldn't give a littlemore than--MR. ANGELL. I think that is what we want to avoid.MR. STERNLIGHT. --what people are looking for. That wouldsuggest, one would think, maybe $500 million or something as an in-between, to keep options open.MR. JOHNSON. That is what I am asking. You are saying $500million. What do people think we are putting in there? From what yousaid earlier, they think we are putting in something well above that.MR. STERNLIGHT. They think we are putting in $600 millionnow.MR. JOHNSON. Yes. So, I am just--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me try this out. I think it couldreasonably be $500 million or thereabouts now. If we move thediscount rate we could go on the light side of $500 million. If wedon't, it seems to me consistent with all this conversation that wemight well go to $600 million, depending upon the exchange markets andthe inflationary indications.MR. ANGELL. What happens if we decide to do the discountrate cut earlier?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Discount rate increase.MR. ANGELL. I mean increase. Wouldn't it also be possibleto do a discount rate increase and go back to $400 million?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I myself think it is a little hard toreverse by any sizable amount. I am not talking about a shading.That is why I prefer not to get very tight and then reverse anything.I think it gives peculiar signals. But, if we are around $500million, we can shade it on the low side or the high side, dependingupon what we do on the discount rate, and not be way off.MR. ANGELL. Are you suggesting that if we were to move onthe discount rate today or tomorrow that going to a $400 millionborrowing assumption would be--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The borrowing assumption would be around$400 million.MR. ANGELL. Well, that's what I--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we don't do that, the borrowingassumption would be around $500 million.MR. ANGELL. Yes, I understand.MR. JOHNSON. It seems to me that if we raise the discountrate and try to get to $400 million it would still seem like an easingof conditions in the open market.-41-5/19/87MR. ANGELL. No it won't. You're going to have all theexpectational effects that go with a discount rate move and thefederal funds rate is going to tend to move.MR. BOYKIN. There is the further question: If we go with the$500 million and then the discount rate change doesn't happen, when dowe go on to $600 million?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That depends upon exchange markets andinflationary pressures, and so forth.MR. ANGELL. Yes. That would mean more tightening.MR. BOYKIN. That is what I am trying to get at. At least asI see it, some confirmation of additional tightness is desirable--whether it is through open market operations or the discount rate.I'd argue for going through open market operations right now,particularly given whatever is going on today. That seems to me to bethe way to start out today. It may be a little different tomorrow.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would suggest something like $500million now without a discount rate change--that assuming no discountrate change, there would be some predilection--. Something else wouldhave to happen to go to $600 million, but we would be ready to do thatwithout too much strain. If we moved the discount rate, presumably wewouldn't go to $600 million and would shade the $500 million down. Ifwe moved the discount rate in the next couple of days, we'd never goto $500 million.MR. GUFFEY. This policy implies a 6-3/4 percent fed fundsrate?MR. JOHNSON. That is a good question. Nobody knows anymore.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I happen to think it is a good thing thatnobody knows. It could well be consistent with 6-3/4 percent, but howmuch money I would put on that--? I don't think it is necessary--MR. ANGELL. It depends on what the expectations are aboutthe discount rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess what the staff says in theBluebook is that it could even be below 6-3/4 percent.MR. KOHN. What we had under alternative C, the $600borrowing assumption, was a funds rate of something like 6-3/4 to 7percent. So, with $500 million I would guess it would be around 6-3/4percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. I am talking about with the discountrate change. With $500 million it might be a little less. But $600million borrowing or the change in the discount rate with $400 millionon borrowing are more or less equivalent.MR. KOHN. That was 6-3/4 percent--or maybe a little higher,to 7 percent.-42-5/19/87MR. MORRIS. There is also the question of how much thediscount rate is raised, if it is raised.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am assuming we are talking about a halfpoint, but obviously--MR. MORRIS. Well, if the funds rate is at 6-3/4 percent, itseems to me a half point is a little [unintelligible]. Normally, onewould expect a 6-1/4 percent discount rate. If we are doing it to getsome impact on the foreign exchange market, which still makes sense tome, I think an increase above a half point might attract a little moreattention. And it would certainly align the discount rate better withthe funds rate than a move of a half point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Assuming the funds rate stays where it is.MR. MORRIS. Yes, assuming it stays at 6-3/4 percent. Thatspeaks for itself.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But you're against moving the discountrate.MR. MORRIS. Yes--only because I like to have something inthe closet. Otherwise, the only alternative response is a stilltighter monetary policy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that is the argument about thediscount rate. Do you pre-empt or keep it in reserve?MR. BLACK. That is what I would recommend to our Board onThursday. But in the interest of Gramm-Rudmann, if the Board acts toapprove a move on the discount rate before Thursday, we have to spendanother $300 to get our executive committee together to go along withyou.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I will discuss that too. I may saveyou $300.MR. BLACK. There is going to be a bunch [of discount rateactions] coming in. There are more [boards of directors] that meet onthis Thursday than at any other time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What we are talking about here is a kindof "modified C plus," or something--$500 million without a discountrate change, with the readiness, certainly, to go up to $600 millionor so--MR. GUFFEY. For what?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If the exchange markets and inflation orwhatever seem to justify it, and the business expansion wasn't fallingout of bed, and the aggregates were more or less as expected, we wouldbe quite ready to do that. But we wouldn't do that unless there weresome reason for it. We could raise the discount rate; and we could dothat today or tomorrow, in which case we'll stick with borrowing ofaround $400 million or so with some possibility of going above that ifwe need help later. If we start out at $500 million, we could shadeit lower if we raise the discount rate later. But if we raise the-43-5/19/87discount rate later, under those circumstances, we'd probably havesome reason for wanting to tighten up some or we wouldn't do it--unless it was part of some international agreement. [The likelihoodof the latter] seems a little thin to me at this point, but in thatcase we might want to be totally neutral. We have two ways oftightening up as we proceed if we don't move on the discount rateimmediately: either change the discount rate or change the borrowingsa little, which is quite a normal situation. On those understandings,can we proceed?MR. KEEHN. Would you read the wording as we now have it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "In the implementation of policy for theimmediate future, the Committee seeks to increase somewhat the degreeof reserve pressure sought in recent weeks, taking into account thepossibility of a change in the discount rate. Somewhat greaterreserve restraint would or somewhat lesser reserve restraint might beacceptable depending on indications of inflationary pressures and ondevelopments in foreign exchange markets, as well as the behavior ofthe monetary aggregates and the strength of the business expansion."The rest of it is "6 percent or less," "below the pace during 1986,"and "4 to 8 percent." Okay? What it means is that without changingthe discount rate, the borrowing assumption is $500 million right now,the possibility of going up to $600 million is reasonably remote, andif we change the discount rate today or tomorrow the borrowingassumption is $400 million.MR. JOHNSON. I do have a request. I agree with thatcompletely. But I do think that we have to get a better understandingof this borrowing/funds rate relationship. I don't think it isacceptable that we continue on drifting, trying to figure out therelationship between borrowing and the funds rate if we are going totarget borrowing as an approach to monetary policy. If we don't havesome better understanding of the underlying funds rate associated withthat, we've got to change because--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can discuss that, because Idisagree with that. I think it is a positive benefit almost--notgetting driven into--SPEAKER(?). That is what gets you into interest ratetargeting.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the problem.MR. JOHNSON. If you don't understand it better.MR. ANGELL. I don't want to see us get to interest ratetargeting and I would favor--MR. JOHNSON. Well, neither do I.MR. ANGELL. I would favor the pegging of the nonborrowed,adjustment borrowings. But I would like to see us agree that we couldsell coupons so that if we ever get into a situation like this again,we would thereby have enough coupons so as to let the markets knowwhat our target was. If we have bought the coupons---44-5/19/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why do we want to buy bonds or sell bonds?MR. ANGELL. I want to be able to buy bonds when there arenot enough bills out there for repos.MR. JOHNSON. What I am suggesting is that we still don'tknow if the discount window is going to act in an erratic fashionrelative to what our intended policy is. I think that is anunacceptable degree of uncertainty. It has been a lot tighter thanthat in the past.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is only unacceptable if you are verysensitive to where the federal funds rate is--that this might be amistake. That's what the argument is all about.MR. JOHNSON. Well, I think there are times, obviously, whenwe are more sensitive to the funds rate. It varies. So, if we don'tknow what kind of funds rate is going to be associated with a certainamount of borrowing--. Am I right to say that that relationship hasbeen much more stable in the past than it has been since the turn ofthe year?MR. KOHN. Maybe than in the last couple of weeks. But ithas always been unstable and difficult to determine. Even when wewere on a nonborrowed reserve target, we used to have to take intoaccount shifts in the borrowing function--certainly in 1984 whenContinental was in [borrowing at the discount window]. There wasconsiderable uncertainty then, too. So there has always been a bit ofwiggle room in that.MR. JOHNSON. Well, obviously, when there is specialborrowing, you always--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you are really sensitive to where thefederal funds rate is, the most efficient thing that you can do istarget the federal funds rate.MR. JOHNSON. The federal funds rate--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you want to do that?MR. ANGELL. No.MR. JOHNSON. I am not sure I want to, but the relationship--MR. ANGELL. You can decrease the uncertainty as to what theborrowing target is. What we've ended up with--MR. JOHNSON. Okay, but there are studies--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Oh, those studies are a lot of[unintelligible]. They average everything.MR. ANGELL. We've ended up with a lot of participants andmarket watchers believing that our borrowing target is $500 to $600million. It seems to me that it would be better to conduct policy insuch a way that there would not be as much uncertainty as to what---45-5/19/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Even that always exists. It is notunusual to miss these targets for several weeks. We had great bigmisses around the end of the year. Now people are more used to itaround the end of the year, and they say: Okay, they are way off.Around the end of the year, we were way over a billion--MR. JOHNSON. There are obviously special borrowing[situations] that come up. But, in the pattern of breaks that we haveseen recently I don't think you can identify a special borrowing ineach of those cases. The staff's response was that the demand forborrowing had shifted. That is something that I don't think we have agood understanding about.MR. BOEHNE. The beauty of this nonborrowed target is that itallows for some ambivalence. You know you shouldn't be targeting thefederal funds rate, but sometimes you would like to keep at least abroad eye on it. It makes for a nice kind of--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we are getting diverted by thisargument. I don't think we have voted yet, have we?MR. ANGELL. We have not.MR. JOHNSON. No.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we better adopt a directive. Thisis a continuing saga, but let's get this vote out of the way.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesGovernor Heller YesGovernor Johnson YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Seger NoPresident Stern YesMR. JOHNSON. I don't want to waste too much--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is a relevant question that comes upall the time, so maybe we should have a little paper on it for thenext meeting.MR. JOHNSON. I think there probably would still be aconsiderable debate at this table about which is more important to theconduct of monetary policy and which affects the economy more: levelsof interest rates or the quantity of reserves.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know how big a discussion you wantto have. We can have a great big discussion on operating techniques,but maybe we'll start it off, anyway, with a rather small paper onprecisely [unintelligible]. [Laughter.] We will see whether thatleads us into much deeper water, which it is very likely to do. Idon't know if anybody is terribly happy about our current operatingprocedures. In fact, the weak [unintelligible] the money supply.-46-5/19/87 -47-MR. JOHNSON. I know.END OF MEETING