
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 0

<START>Moreover, I am concerned that retaining the unbalanced risk assessment along with a 50 basis point reduction in rates could leave the impression that the Federal Reserve sees the economic situation as more serious than I believe it probably is and that we’re willing to cut rates further than I believe we should with the information now in hand.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
At the last meeting or maybe even at the last two meetings, I could have gone with a 25 basis point reduction in rates and called it insurance.
So I’m clearly in the camp of reducing rates.
And given the incoming data, 50 basis points probably is a better insurance policy than 25.
I find this discussion of the balance of risks pretty tricky.
On the point that Vincent included in exhibit 4
—that the Committee might retain unbalanced risks if in the near term resource slack is expected to build
—whether we reduce the funds rate by 50 basis points or not, resource slack is expected to build in the near term.
Even the GDP growth numbers shown in the forecast for 2003:
H2 are not robust, though I guess they do get back to 4 percent by then.
But November 6, 200290 of 122GDP growth in H1 is still going to seem rather slow, and that time frame is my definition of the near term.
As you know, I meet with a group of investment professionals before each FOMC meeting, and I have to echo a little of what Bill Poole said about a move of 50 basis points.
These observers felt that the outlook was dicey enough that their sense was a cut of 50 as opposed to 25 might make a negative splash in the market.
In their view, 50 might make people even more uncertain and concerned, and they might think that we see something worse than they see.
<START>I think the balanced risk statement helps to offset that.<END>
So I’m a little at odds with the logic and the market impact of your recommendation, but I’m willing to go along with it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Broaddus.
MR.
BROADDUS.
Mr. Chairman, I think we face a different situation from the one we were facing a year or so ago when I made the comment that you referred to.
So, if I had my druthers, I personally would continue to be patient a little while longer than Jack Guynn and Tom Hoenig suggested.
But if we ease
—and I have thought through this as I expected that the Committee would ease this time
—I have a strong preference for a ½ point reduction rather than only a ¼ point reduction.
A 50 basis point drop would be decisive.
I think it would give us a fighting chance of preempting the downside forces that you discussed and that I recognize certainly exist in the economy.
To me a ¼ point move would be the worst of the three alternatives laid out in the Bluebook because I think it probably would raise the most doubts and uncertainties about monetary policy going forward.
So I’m comfortable with the 50 basis points.
I think we need to act decisively rather than tentatively.
On the tilt, I must say I’m a little ambivalent.
<START>I wish I had more time to think through this issue of the risk statement, but my instinct is that we ought to leave it unbalanced.<END>
I say that November 6, 200291 of 122mainly because, if we’re going to ease and accept whatever longer-term upside risks may flow from that, I’d like to maximize the chances that this policy action is going to do the job completely.
<START>This is not an issue that I would fall on my sword over, but I personally would have a preference for retaining the tilt toward weakness.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Parry.
MR.
PARRY.
Mr. Chairman, to me it makes a lot of sense to go with the 50 basis point cut, one that is large enough to have a noticeable effect.
My main concern about this large cut is that it might send the message that the economy is weaker than we currently think.
But by adopting a risk assessment that is balanced I believe we mitigate that possibility.
So I think in combination it’s the right choice.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Stern.
MR.
STERN.
Mr. Chairman, I support the 50 basis point reduction in the funds rate target.
I think there’s a good chance that it’s the right thing to do.
<START>But even if it’s not, as you already suggested, the risks of taking this action seem low basically because of the situation in which we could find ourselves with regard to productivity and current and prospective inflation.<END>
As far as the balance of risks is concerned, despite the nature of the disappointing news coming in, I suspect the risks aren’t all that unbalanced to begin with.
<START>So I have no problem with moving to a balanced risk statement.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Poole.
MR.
POOLE.
Mr. Chairman, I support the recommendation to cut the funds rate by 50 basis points.
I agree with the argument that 25 basis points would lead to market expectations that another 25 is coming, and I think it’s much better to act decisively.
<START>Yes, it’s probably true that some people will say in reaction to 50, “Oh my God, the Fed thinks the economy is really November 6, 200292 of 122very weak.” That may well be the interpretation of some.<END>
But I think the reaction of others
— that we are acting decisively as we have in the past
—will overwhelm that concern.
There are always risks.
We’ve talked a lot about the downside risks and what a pickle we would be in if they were to accumulate.
<START>On the upside risks, I think it would be absolutely delightful to deal with upside strength, [laughter] but we’re not discussing that situation.<END>
There is no question that we would be able to increase rates in time.
<START>We have a lot invested in inflation credibility, and this is the time to take some return on that capital.<END>
I just don’t think there’s any issue on that whatsoever.
I would not myself go for the balanced risk statement.
<START>I believe the market interpretation of the balanced risk statement would probably have two pieces to it.<END>
First, that we’re making a statement that we’re finished reducing rates.
As I see it, that would minimize the chance that the reduction would carry into longer-term rates.
Second, it may appear awkward if incoming data remain weak over the next few weeks, which I don’t think is beyond the realm of possibility at all.
The balanced risk statement would then raise questions as to our judgment about the outlook because I think it would be interpreted in the light of the data we see in coming weeks.
So in my view the best course would be to retain the tilt toward weakness.
<START>To introduce something new that appears to cut in the opposite direction of the 50 basis point cut would be more confusing than helpful to the market.<END>
So I’d simply leave that part of the statement alone.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Moskow.
MR.
MOSKOW.
Mr. Chairman, I agree with both parts of your recommendation.
<START>I believe it is a good insurance policy against downside risks.<END>
<START>On the risk statement, it’s a close call, but on balance I think it is better to go the way you suggested in order to reduce the unintended negative consequences if we were to keep the tilt toward weaker economic growth.<END>
I November 6, 200293 of 122agree with Bill McDonough in that I don’t think this precludes us in any way from doing anything in the future if we had to.
I certainly agree with that.
I do want to pick up on one point that Bill Poole talked about, and that is the issue you raised that this economy may turn around more quickly than we might anticipate.
We all certainly hope it does.
What that means is that we do have to be careful because, if the economy does turn around quickly, we have to be willing to raise rates at the appropriate time.
We all know it’s a lot easier to cut rates than to raise them.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Santomero.
MR.
SANTOMERO.
I support your recommendation.
I see the two parts of the recommendation as essentially and necessarily together.
<START>I’d feel a little less comfortable with the notion of 50 basis points and the risks toward weakness because I think the market would respond as several people have suggested.<END>
The alternative of a slightly more positive touch with 25 basis points and a tilt toward weakness had some appeal to me, and I struggled with that.
President McDonough suggested that favoring that would describe me as a wimp.
I would prefer to think of it as being relatively conservative and deliberate.
[Laughter] VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
There’s a difference?
[Laughter.] MR. SANTOMERO.
In any case, I think it clearly is necessary that we respond to the economic forces as we see them.
So I can indeed support the recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Guynn.
MR.
GUYNN.
Mr. Chairman, I can support the recommendation.
I would be more than a little uncomfortable with 50 basis points and the continuation of an asymmetric risk assessment.
<START>I hope we can use the press statement to suggest that we know how to look beyond the next couple of data releases and that we see a better economy down the road.<END>
<START>I wish I were a November 6, 200294 of 122little surer and more comfortable with exactly how a policy change of this kind works its way through to both long-term rates and to the shorter-term consumer spending that is interest insensitive.<END>
It’s not quite as clear to me as it seems to be to others that that will work.
I have always hated to disappoint my kids at Christmas time.
I suspect there is a Santa Claus, but he may not be able to deliver quite as many presents or as big a package this year.
<START>So I have some doubts that monetary policy really works its way through the various sectors quite as cleanly as some people suggest.<END>
But I can support the recommendation, and I understand the arguments that have been made.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Bies.
MS.
BIES.
Mr. Chairman, I support the recommendation to go down 50 basis points on the funds rate.
I think we need to show that we are ahead at this point in the economy.
I find it a little harder on the balance of risks statement.
One of the reasons
—using some of the words that Vincent put in his handout
—is that we talk about the foreseeable future.
<START>As a group we have come to the conclusion that the economy is at sort of an inflection point where we think there is weakness in the very short term but going out further in our forecast period we see more strength.<END>
<START>I can support the balanced risk statement, but I think it’s important to indicate that the “foreseeable future” is beyond the next meeting because some people tend to look at the risk statement as a signal about our likely policy stance at the next meeting.<END>
So if we can talk past the short run in the press release, I think that would be helpful.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Olson.
MR.
OLSON.
When I began reviewing the Greenbook information, I had a reaction to it that I didn’t expect.
<START>As I was reading through it, I heard the theme that the current news is disappointing, but the economy was still seen as poised for accelerating growth at some point in November 6, 200295 of 122the future.<END>
And it struck me that I had been reading that same thing time after time after time.
<START>As I thought about that, it seemed to me that it was not a reflection of our ability to model nor a reflection of our ability to understand the data.<END>
I think we are reading the data accurately.
But in every other environment I’ve ever experienced in my life, that sequence just screams “do something!” Now, this is the first time I’ve been in a monetary policy environment, so I came into the meeting trying to get an understanding of what the downside risks would be of an aggressive move.
<START>And I think I’m persuaded that the downside risks of moving the funds rate down are fairly well mitigated.<END>
<START>Also, a balanced risk statement seems to me to suggest what we’ve been saying all along, that the fundamentals are still in place for a turnaround.<END>
So I support both parts of the recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Bernanke.
MR.
BERNANKE.
Mr. Chairman, I also support both parts of the recommendation.
I think 50 basis points is just right.
I would be less concerned about retaining the bias toward weakness on the grounds that the market survey data suggest that there’s essentially a universal expectation that we will retain that bias even when people anticipate a 50 basis point decline.
So I don’t think that we would create a shock.
Nevertheless, I defer to those who have been in markets and understand their deep psychology.
So I do concur with the recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President McTeer.
MR.
MCTEER.
I agree enthusiastically with your recommendation of 50 basis points.
I think the way the bias is usually interpreted the more honest thing to do is to keep the bias in a downward direction.
<START>But I agree with Governor Bies that, if we could make it clear that we’re looking some distance out in the future, then it would be okay to go to a balanced risk statement.<END>
November 6, 200296 of 122And I do want to make it balanced because of the considerations that Bill McDonough mentioned.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Okay.
Would the Secretary read the language?
MR.
BERNARD.
This language is on page 12 of the Bluebook:
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.
<START>To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with reducing the federal funds rate to an average of around 1¼ percent.” With regard to the balance of risks sentence for the press statement:<END>
<START>“Against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and sustainable economic growth and of the information currently available, the Committee believes that the risks are balanced with respect to prospects for both goals in the foreseeable future.” CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.<END>
Call the roll.
MR.
BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan Yes Vice Chairman McDonough Yes Governor Bernanke Yes Governor Bies Yes Governor Ferguson Yes Governor Gramlich Yes President Jordan Yes Governor Kohn Yes President McTeer Yes Governor Olson Yes President Santomero Yes President Stern Yes CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I’d like to take a short recess and ask the members of the Board of Governors to gather in my office to act on the requests on the discount rate.
In the interim we can distribute the draft press statement and ask everybody to take a look at it.
November 6, 200297 of 122[Recess] CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
The Board members need some time to read the statement.
Questions?
President Jordan.
MR.
JORDAN.
The first paragraph mentions the discount rate action but without identifying the Reserve Banks whose pending actions have been approved.
Is that going to be added?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
That will be added.
There are two Banks requesting a 50 basis point reduction, New York and Dallas.
The standard procedure, as you all know, is that others come in later in the day or the following day.
There is a question, in fact, given the introduction of our new procedures early next year, as to whether we should be doing anything differently now.
I think the general consensus is that it’s far better to stay with exactly what we’ve been doing.
And then on January 9, we will make the actual change when we move to the new Lombard rate discount facility.
<START>If there are no further comments, I’ll assume this draft statement is adequate for our purposes.<END>
Now, let me ask Vincent what his view is as to the time needed for the next agenda item.
MR.
REINHART.
Well, it might be more efficient to have this discussion over lunch.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Yes, that strikes me as a far better approach than to continue without lunch.
MR.
REINHART.
That will be an FOMC discussion, however.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
So we don’t close the meeting.
MR.
REINHART.
We don’t close the meeting.
[Brief recess] CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Dino.
November 6, 200298 of 122MR. KOS.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Recently, Vincent Reinhart and I sent a memo to the Committee on the SOMA alternative assets study.
Before we turn to the main part of today’s discussion, let me just remind you that in March we sought guidance from the Committee on prioritizing resources for the continuation of our work on this issue.
At that time the Committee instructed the staff to focus first on the possibility of buying Ginnie Maes outright for the portfolio and second on the possibility of accepting foreign sovereign debt as collateral on repos.
But Committee members indicated that to the extent there was a resource conflict
—and there was
— the staff was to finish contingency planning for tri-party repos at our third site.
So from the time of that meeting through about the August-September time frame we were focusing almost exclusively on finishing the work on contingency planning, and only recently have we begun to look at the issues of how Ginnie Maes might fit into our outright portfolio.
Given that limited amount of time, most of our work has been in the area of preparatory planning
<START>—thinking about how long certain tasks might take, especially some of the settlement accounting, front office work, risk management, and very critically the systems changes that might need to be made.<END>
Each of these issues is surmountable, but the work involved is time consuming.
And if the Committee were to approve expanding the allowable assets in the System Open Market Account to include Ginnie Mae securities, the time before we actually would begin buying them would be measured not in weeks but more likely in months and quarters.
It probably would take at least eighteen months or so before we could make all the necessary arrangements and begin to implement such a decision.
In the interim, another element of the work that the FOMC had commissioned is ready for the Committee’s review, and that is the study the staff has finished on the auction credit facility.
Rick Lang led that work, so let me turn the floor over to him to describe the paper on that issue, which you also received recently.
MR.
LANG.
Thank you.
The report distributed to the Committee on October 8 follows up on the January 2001 SOMA study to explore several issues.
These include the structure of auctions of term discount window advances and their coordination with Desk operations;
the perspective of bank supervisors on the risks posed by an auction credit facility (ACF);
the methods proposed to control credit risk to the Reserve Banks;
and the effect of ACF advances on Federal Home Loan Bank advances.
In addition, at the request of the Crisis Management Steering Committee, the report considers whether an ACF could be used in a contingency as a substitute for the Desk’s open market operations.
The structure of ACF auctions could be quite simple or more elaborate, and there is in fact a fair amount of detail in the report about that.
A simple structure would be preferable when first introducing an ACF.
The report concludes that auctions of term advances could be easily coordinated with Desk operations and could be effective in supporting the secular growth of currency on the Fed’s balance sheet and handling seasonal swings in the demand for currency and reserves.
<START>November 6, 200299 of 122In consulting the supervisors about the issue of risk, those supervisors on the working group expressed concern that, if banks were permitted to borrow very large amounts from the ACF without any constraints, that could pose liquidity risks to banks that might create a “too big to get downgraded” issue.<END>
That is, examiners might become reluctant to downgrade a large bank’s CAMELS rating if that risked making the bank ineligible to roll over its ACF funding.
Supervisors also noted that the Fed would shift from being an occasional lender of last resort to having an ongoing lending relationship with banks under an ACF.
This might pose a potential conflict between using an ACF in the implementation of monetary policy and rating banks independently of monetary policy objectives.
<START>Supervisors stressed that such concerns could be substantially reduced, though perhaps not entirely eliminated, by keeping an ACF relatively small and by establishing the same set of risk controls that would be applied to reduce the Fed’s exposure to credit risk.<END>
Bank risk-taking, risk to the FDIC, and credit risk to the Fed could be limited by establishing a variety of controls that are described in the report.
Those controls include restricting eligibility to financially strong depository institutions and imposing limits on how much each institution could borrow.
Even with these risk control measures, however, the report notes that extending ACF advances to a number of depository institutions would increase the likelihood that the Fed would at some point have to deal with an institution whose condition deteriorates so rapidly that FDICIA guidelines apply.
Therefore, the report suggests that the Fed would want to consider developing special procedures for dealing with such an event.
A contingency auction credit facility or what we call a CACF would share many features of an ACF, but differences in the purposes of the two facilities and in the circumstances surrounding their use would require some different features as well.
Those, too, are discussed in detail in the report.
Compared with backup facilities that duplicate the Desk’s open market operations, a CACF
—like other discount window facilities
—would broaden the range of counterparties in an emergency as compared with simply the number of primary dealers.
In addition, a CACF would not be limited to dealing only in narrow classes of collateral, which could also be important in an emergency.
The report considers two emergency scenarios.
In the first, in which financing markets are functioning but the Desk and its contingency facilities are not, a CACF could be an effective backup to the Desk in providing a predetermined aggregate supply of reserves to the banking system.
<START>A CACF could be similarly effective in the later stages of a more widespread crisis if many participants in financial markets were able to return to normal operations but recovery of the Desk’s operations were delayed.<END>
<START>In the second scenario, in which financing markets are severely dysfunctional at the same time the Desk’s ability to operate is impaired, a CACF would more likely be used to elastically supply funds to depository institutions at a fixed interest rate.<END>
In such a scenario, the emergency primary credit facility would November 6, 2002100 of 122likely be as effective as or easier to use than a CACF.
<START>The main appeal of the CACF over other types of discount window lending in that type of scenario would come from its ability to visibly provide Fed credit earlier in the day, which might have a more positive effect on bank and market behavior during an emergency.<END>
The report identifies several open issues that would have to be resolved if these facilities were to be implemented, and I will not go through all of those.
In concluding, I want to acknowledge the efforts of the people who helped prepare this report.
The group included Jim Clouse, Bill Nelson, Michael Martinson, and David Wright of the Board;
Spence Hilton, who drafted a large part of the report, Sandy Krieger, and Bill Walsh of the New York Fed;
Lois Berthaume from Atlanta;
Chris Moore from Cleveland;
Bob Hankins from Dallas;
and Steve Meyer, who also drafted a large section of the report, from Philadelphia.
My thanks to all of them for their work.
That concludes my remarks.
MR.
REINHART.
Let me conclude the staff portion of these remarks by explaining what Dino and I hope to get from the Committee this afternoon.
Basically, we’d like your advice on what portions of five different items you want us to continue to work on and what time frame, if you do want us to work on them, you think would be reasonable.
Specifically, we’re asking whether you want additional study on (1) purchasing outright mortgage-backed securities underwritten by Ginnie Mae;
(2) acquiring foreign sovereign securities as collateral for temporary dollar transactions;
(3) developing an auction credit facility to complement Desk operations;
<START>and (4) using an auction credit facility to substitute for Desk operations in an emergency.<END>
The fifth item concerns the publication of the materials that the staff presented to the Committee in January 2001.
As you recall, at that time there was a desire to get those materials into the public domain to inform both the academic and the investment communities about the options the Committee was looking at.
In addition, it seemed desirable to have those in academia and the markets think harder about the issues the System should consider in determining what to put on the books of the System Open Market Account.
So the fifth item we’re asking for is approval to publish this staff study in the upcoming intermeeting period once final edits are completed.
We’re not seeking a vote, as this study is not an official document of the Federal Open Market Committee, the Federal Reserve Board, or Federal Reserve Banks.
We intend to include a foreword to the document that will make that explicit.
The foreword will also include an explanation that the study is a historical document that represents what we understood in January 2001 and has not been updated.
That needs to be said in part because of
—and the Committee hasn’t discussed them
—some procedural changes that have evolved since then, including importantly the adoption of the Lombard facility.
If you have any particular advice about what else should be in that foreword, we’d appreciate having it.
In summary, those are the issues on which Dino and I would like to get your views today.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Parry.
November 6, 2002101 of 122MR. PARRY.
Mr. Chairman, starting out with the fifth point, it seems to me that it is a very good staff study, and I hope that it will be released at some point for public comment and discussion.
As for the options suggested for additional study, I favor consideration of the purchase of Ginnie Mae securities.
<START>Where such fully federally guaranteed debt is available, there is a presumption, I believe, that it should be included in our portfolio.<END>
And if I remember correctly, at our previous meeting there was considerable support for looking at that alternative.
I also like the proposal for the ACF.
It seems to me that the experience we would get from the ACF would be useful for creating a contingency ACF if that were needed.
Given current projections for the federal budget, however, we are not pressed for time on these alternatives.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
You say that with a smile?
For the official record, we will indicate that he smiled.
[Laughter] MR. PARRY.
It may be useful to initiate small Ginnie Mae and ACF pilot programs in order to gain some experience.
You asked also about the timing.
I would suggest, somewhat arbitrarily, six to twelve months of further study of those two options and a subsequent update to the Committee.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Before we proceed, could I just ask a question?
I, too, think that it is worthwhile publishing the study.
Does anyone have any objections to that?
SEVERAL.
No. CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Can I assume that it’s the Committee’s judgment that we do so?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
The Committee’s informal judgment.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Yes, informal judgment.
It’s the separate judgment of individual members of the Committee.
Is that correct?
November 6, 2002102 of 122VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Yes.
MS.
BIES.
Mr. Chairman?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Bies.
MS.
BIES.
Vincent mentioned that when this study goes out to the public it would have a cover memo or foreword.
I think it would be helpful to note that we are changing the way a lot of our facilities can work, requiring perhaps different types of facilities.
We might note why this would involve removing the stigma from borrowing.
The banks would be posting collateral and might be looking to manage that differently.
I think we at least ought to acknowledge that the Lombard facility is going to be introduced.
I wasn’t around for the Committee discussion of these papers, and I’m not sure if the Lombard facility was anticipated.
But just a few comments in the cover memo about how that study relates to where we’re moving on the Lombard might be helpful in order to make that current.
MR.
REINHART.
Right.
We can include that in the foreword and also in the first footnote to the ACF discussion in the study itself.
MR.
LANG.
Governor, if I might comment?
We didn’t know at the time that the System was going to proceed with the Lombard facility.
But within the ACF or discount window alternatives portion of the study, there was a comment that the ACF could work with either an adjustment credit or with a Lombard style facility.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
My Chairman, not unrelated to the fact that a lot of the work done on these studies is done by people at the New York Reserve Bank, I would suggest that we ask the staff to concentrate on the Ginnie Mae study and get that done at some reasonable pace.
After that is brought back to the Committee to look at, then we could decide November 6, 2002103 of 122whether there is a need to move on the other studies.
Otherwise, I think we’re overloading the staff unnecessarily.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
There’s also the interesting question as to the relationship between the Ginnie Mae study and the reasons for the study.
Remember, we started off with a presumption that we’d have a shortage of Treasury securities.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Yes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
We had a worthwhile discussion because there was a probability that such a shortage could happen.
That probability is now gone for the foreseeable future.
But the issue of whether Ginnie Maes should be part of the SOMA portfolio is a separate issue.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Exactly.
That’s why I think that is worth pursuing.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Kohn.
MR.
KOHN.
I agree with the Vice Chairman’s recommendation.
It seems to me that acquiring Ginnie Maes is a very natural extension of what we’re doing now.
We already buy full faith and credit paper;
it’s not obvious why we’re not buying this other full faith and credit paper.
<START>I think it also may be a useful pilot project for learning how to outsource some of our functions, dealing with more-complex securities, and dealing with other intermediaries.<END>
So I think we’ll learn a lot by studying this that might be useful sometime down the line.
I also think the ACF work is terrific, and an ACF has a lot of appeal.
But we’ve put into place some other emergency facilities, including the emergency primary credit facility associated with the new Lombard facility and backup for the Desk.
So I don’t feel that we need to develop an ACF in order to get a CACF the way I thought we did a year or two ago.
We have other November 6, 2002104 of 122backups now.
So the ACF is a more radical proposal in a sense.
It has more problems associated with it, though I like the proposal if we have to go that way.
And I certainly thank Rick and his people for the incredible amount of work they did on this paper.
We can keep it on the shelf and come back to it and see whether we think it’s a good idea once we deal with the Ginnie Mae issue.
So, I agree with the Vice Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
Mr. Chairman, I’m on board with the Ginnie Maes.
I think it makes sense.
I said that when we met in early 2001.
I’m interested in a little more study on the ACF issue.
Looking at the federal debt projections, the need for that kind of facility has been pushed off, so I certainly recognize that we’re not in a rush.
But I think it also is something we ought to give more thought to and establish a time frame for further study.
Maybe, as Bob Parry said, twelve months or so is appropriate.
In any event, it would be very helpful in my view to work out some of the details should we come to a point where we want to look at the ACF alternative more seriously.
You asked about the foreign sovereign debt issue, and I don’t know that anyone has commented on it.
I thought the inclination last time was not to go in that direction, partly for political reasons and especially if Ginnie Maes proved workable or if we decided to keep the ACF as an alternative.
So I would put the foreign sovereign debt contingency on hold as well.
And I would like to add my kudos to the quality of the paper on the ACF.
It was really great.
In terms of addressing the technical questions that are outlined in that memo, which I recognize are important, the staff wouldn’t have to come necessarily back to the Committee for discussion.
But if you want our comments, we could send them to you MR. LANG.
Certainly that would be helpful.
November 6, 2002105 of 122CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Broaddus.
MR.
BROADDUS.
Mr. Chairman, I still think the best substitute for Treasury securities is no substitute, but I’ll leave it at that because of the reaction I got the last time I tried to push that view.
I agree with others who support the further study of Ginnie Maes.
That certainly seems to be a natural thing to do.
They’re essentially equivalent to Treasury securities.
<START>Personally, I have strong reservations about the auction credit facility either as a complement to Desk operations in normal times or as a substitute in an emergency.<END>
This is in no way a comment on the staff study.
I thought the study was very helpful, Rick, in our efforts to think through these issues.
Clearly, this kind of facility would have an advantage if we were in a situation where we had to add a lot of reserves to the system, given the limitations on the volume of Ginnie Maes available for purchase.
The ACF would be an alternative;
I recognize that.
But there are at least a couple of very significant problems and, obviously, they were cited in the study.
First and foremost for me, I think an ACF could seriously compromise the ability of our supervisory staff to downgrade a larger institution when that might result in its loss of access to an ACF facility.
<START>I think, in practice, it would be very, very difficult to keep adverse information on a banking institution confidential.<END>
So by establishing an ACF we would be creating potentially a “too big to downgrade” problem, which is a situation I don’t think we want to get into.
To me, this is a serious enough problem that I would not want to pursue this course further.
<START>Frankly, with the reemergence of federal deficits, I don’t think anyone expects a lack of Treasury debt to be a problem any time in the foreseeable future.<END>
And if the facility were available, I think it would be tempting to use it for other purposes.
<START>In particular, we might be tempted to use it if the economy weakened sharply and we were either at or near the zero bound November 6, 2002106 of 122and needed to add a substantial quantity of reserves in such a situation.<END>
But it would be precisely in that kind of environment where significant danger would arise if we were reluctant to downgrade problem banks.
With particular reference to the proposal about a contingency ACF for emergency situations, at this point I don’t see any great advantage in that if I understand it correctly.
We have this new Lombard facility coming in with a provision that would allow the Reserve Banks to drop the discount rate to the funds rate in an emergency situation.
So I guess I don’t see what this facility would add to what we would have in place once the new Lombard facility is introduced.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Santomero.
MR.
SANTOMERO.
I’m close to where President Hoenig is.
The Ginnie Maes make sense to me, and I think we should continue to pursue how that might happen.
And I believe it would be useful to look at the ACF alternative in direct comparison with Ginnie Maes to see why we would need the ACF if we had Ginnie Maes.
<START>On the question of whether or not we need a CACF as a contingency arrangement I think we should turn to Governor Ferguson and say, “Do we have enough contingency arrangements?” If his crisis management group wants to take the CACF off the table because it’s no longer perceived as necessary, that’s fine.<END>
We should remember that, with the Treasury’s auctioning of TT&L balances, we actually have had a lot more experience over the last fifteen months than we had before about how such a system would work.
In many respects the ACF could be viewed as that kind of structure.
So, my preference would be for the staff to continue with the Ginnie Maes, which are a logical extension of our current practices, and to do a little more homework on the ACF.
I’d have the staff come back to the Committee and say, “Here are the costs and benefits of each of these, how November 6, 2002107 of 122do you wish to proceed?” And in that sense my view comes closer to President Parry’s in terms of looking at both of them for a while and then figuring out where we want to end up.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Moskow.
MR.
MOSKOW.
I tend to think we should focus on the Ginnie Maes.
I’d have the staff do that study and bring it back to this Committee and then we can decide whether that’s sufficient to address the problem or not.
I have some questions about whether we need an ACF.
Given resource constraints
—and since we have plenty of time here as we all know
—my preference would be to start with the Ginnie Maes, get that done and assess that, and then decide whether any further work is necessary.
Also, let me note that our Bank does have some technical comments on the ACF, which we can send in, just to put a marker down for future use.
And on the contingency ACF, I have some questions, too, as to whether we really need it at this point, given everything else we’ve done.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Ferguson.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Thank you.
I think I’m generally with President Moskow and others.
I would put much more emphasis on Ginnie Maes since we understand the legal ramifications there in that they are public securities.
They’re a step away from Treasuries but not that big a step.
I would be cautious about an ACF, and I am very concerned, as all of you know, about resource utilization.
Therefore, I would tend to downplay that alternative
<START>—not that it’s unimportant and not that we don’t already have a lot of good staff work done.<END>
But I’m worried about all the other competing resource requirements.
So I would agree with the suggestion of President Moskow and others to postpone further consideration of the ACF.
November 6, 2002108 of 122With respect to the contingency ACF, I think two of you have asked the relevant question.
Governor Kohn and others have already suggested an answer, which is that given the general amount of work that has already gone into developing backup facilities, the CACF is not likely to reach a high priority in our thinking.
The contingency planning group has made a large investment, both physically and intellectually, in a number of other approaches, including the Lombard facility.
So given my general responsibility for contingency work, I would be very comfortable taking the CACF off the table at this stage.
Again, good work has been done on this;
our understanding of it has moved beyond where we were when we put that idea on the table.
So in conclusion, I think Ginnie Maes should be where most of the staff work is directed.
All the other alternatives I would say can now be delayed for some time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
I’m in favor of what Governor Ferguson, Governor Kohn, and President Moskow said.
I’d do the work on the Ginnie Maes first and learn from our ACF effort but put it on the shelf.
If people have comments on it, fine, submit them.
Also, when we put the staff studies out, they do mention an ACF type facility, though nowhere near 137 pages are devoted to it as in the paper we received recently!
[Laughter] It is mentioned, so perhaps we’ll get some response from those in academia or others on how they see some of those facilities.
I think that might be instructive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Anybody else?
MR.
GUYNN.
Mr. Chairman, I too would agree that the Ginnie Maes should be our first priority.
<START>It seems to me that foreign debt has a whole host of risks associated with it<END>
—political, credit, and exchange risks.
I like the way that Don Kohn and Al Broaddus particularly talked about the ACF and the CACF.
I think we could come back to them after we have some November 6, 2002109 of 122experience with the new Lombard facility and perhaps make that facility even more usable in an emergency situation.
<START>So I agree that we should put both aside for the moment and come back to then later if we decide we don’t have adequate coverage.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Anybody else?
Do you have an adequate response on this?
MR.
REINHART.
We have more than sufficient direction, Mr. Chairman.
[Laughter] VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
A wee bit more than adequate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I hesitate to try to summarize this.
<START>I’ve always wanted to be in the position of the Congress, when they pass an ambiguous law and then just say to others, “You solve it.” MR. REINHART.<END>
I would suggest that Dino and I go back and look at the transcript of this discussion [laughter] and solve that problem.
One thing that’s clear is that Dino will be studying the options associated with acquiring Ginnie Maes and then we’ll get back to the Committee to
— CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I do think that the issue of limited resources is not a minor question.
<START>When we began examining this, there was a 1 in 10 chance that those budget surpluses really would arrive and that we would find ourselves in a very difficult position with regard to SOMA.<END>
So we had no choice but to look at the options.
The likelihood of surpluses has dissipated, and the rest of the work now is largely discretionary.
The question is, Is a particular issue sufficiently worthwhile in the broad aspect of Federal Reserve operations to use the resources?
And that’s a judgment that I suspect the two of you could make far better than any of us.
November 6, 2002110 of 122VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
I think some guidance we might add is that the staff ought to pursue this as they can
—not by hiring new people or by working overtime, but they ought to take it seriously.
If it takes you six months or twelve months, that’s not going to endanger the republic.
MS.
MINEHAN.
On the Ginnie Maes, you mean?
MR.
FERGUSON.
Let me make one other point.
I agree with what others have said about leaving some of the tough judgments to the staff to make.
On the contingency issue, however, we have invested a lot in contingency planning, and I don’t think there’s any reason to spend another minute on it at this stage.
While I would leave it to the staff to figure out how to proceed on the ACF and other issues, I definitely want the CACF
—and I think it is the sense of the Committee as well
—to be taken off the table.
MR.
REINHART.
From what I heard, and I hope Dino agrees, the Committee has taken off the table accepting foreign sovereign debt as collateral at this time;
and has also taken off the table a contingency ACF.
The first order of priority, in terms of staff study, is acquiring Ginnie Maes outright in the portfolio.
And you’re deferring to our judgment the issue of when resources are available for further study of an ACF.
The sequence may very well be that we will come back to the Committee with a document about Ginnie Maes and ask at that time what you would like to hear about an ACF.
MR.
KOS.
What I would propose then is that at some point over the next few months, at a meeting next year, we come back to the Committee with a proposal for what a Ginnie Mae program would look like.
That is, we’d try to give you some concrete sense of the size of the program that we would envision and how we would buy the Ginnie Maes.
With the front office there are some accounting issues that we might be able to resolve by then.
We would try to November 6, 2002111 of 122assess the implications in terms of costs so that you have a sense of what it would cost the System or the New York Fed to do this.
So the next document would be more concrete than the general approach that we have taken to date when we’ve been looking at alternative approaches.
That would be my suggestion for some time early next year.
MR.
SANTOMERO.
I agree completely.
I would urge you to make sure that the cost issues are indeed on the table.
We may find out that the shadow price of our involvement in that market is sufficiently high that we want to look at alternatives.
Or we may want to conclude that it’s not worth the money.
<START>I’m not suggesting you would do that, but if we have that sort of information in front of us rather explicitly, it will give us a better sense of what is really involved.<END>
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Dino has already been told that he has no room for expanding the budget for this
—not two sous more than what he already has in the budget.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Okay, this terminates the official FOMC meeting.
END OF MEETING
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 47
