
But I have to say it gets my attention and it worries me a little.
And my final June 25-26, 200288 of 179point on the District economy is that our state governments have the same kinds of budgetary issues as many other states around the country.
On the national outlook, the Greenbook projection hasn’t changed a lot from last time.
The staff revised its second-quarter GDP projection down a bit, but I gather, given what Dave said this morning, that the latest data might offset that.
So we have pretty much the same kind of forecast.
<START>One might argue, I guess, that a bigger downward revision might be merited in view of all of the pessimism that we hear around the country from a wide range of contacts.<END>
But as the Greenbook points out and as a number of people underlined this morning, there continues to be a substantial amount of policy stimulus in play.
So I think the staff forecast is still a reasonable forecast.
There are obviously risks to the forecast, as always.
And I must say that I’m having more difficulty than usual trying to get a sense of where those risks might be balanced or in which direction they might be tilted, if they are tilted.
Maybe that has a bit to do with what Jerry Jordan was just saying.
The recovery depends in large part on continued growth in consumer spending, since the resumption of business investment is probably at least still some distance away.
In that regard, I think job market conditions are going to be the key because consumer confidence will hinge importantly on job and wage prospects.
And as I see it, job and wage prospects in turn depend to a significant degree at this point on what I would describe as a horse race between structural productivity growth and the growth of demand in the near and intermediate term.
In a balanced economic expansion, over the long run demand grows at the trend rate of productivity growth.
So in that situation the horses in a sense are running at the same pace.
And, of course, an increase in trend productivity growth is always a positive development from that longer-term perspective.
<START>But in the short run, if the productivity horse for a time outpaces the demand horse, June 25-26, 200289 of 179unemployment could rise, wages and unit labor costs could fall, and we could see further near-term disinflation.<END>
That could happen in coming quarters.
In the worst case scenario, that sequence
—if it were pronounced enough
—could conceivably abort the recovery.
<START>Alternatively, if the demand horse gets ahead, labor markets could tighten, wages and unit labor costs could rise, and inflation could come back.<END>
And I think the comments by Tony, Tom, and others that we ought not to ignore that possibility are certainly valid.
Currently, as I see it, the two horses seem to be running about neck-and-neck in the sense that total hours worked are about steady.
I see a little disinflation pressure in labor markets, but inflation is still broadly stable.
So in my view it makes sense to maintain our current policy stance today.
But as the Belmont Stakes reminded us very dramatically not too long ago, any horse can win in a horse race.
So I think it’s important that we watch this situation with particular care in the near term.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I hope the odds are not 70 to 1!
[Laughter] MR. BROADDUS.
But my point is that we can’t rule it out.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Yes, even at 70 to 1, I guess one can’t rule it out.
It happens once in seventy times.
MR.
BROADDUS.
Twice in 140 times!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Stern.
MR.
STERN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Beginning with the District economy, we have under way a gradual but what I think is by now a broadly based improvement in economic activity.
Residential construction and sales, which have been a continuous bright spot, remain a distinct bright spot pretty much throughout the District.
Consumer spending continues to hold up reasonably well.
And tourism in the District seems to be enjoying a good spring and early June 25-26, 200290 of 179summer so far.
Bankers report that consumer credit quality is in good shape.
Their reports on business credit quality are a little more mixed, but as far as the consumer is concerned, the bankers seem fairly comfortable.
We are seeing improvements in manufacturing activity and along with that some general improvement
—though I don’t want to make this too broad a statement
—in business attitudes.
I have been, if anything, a little pleasantly surprised recently by reports from business people that they are seeing some pickup in activity.
I’d say that there has been no significant change in labor market conditions for at least several months now.
Commercial construction remains probably the principal area of weakness in our region.
There has been some improvement in mining and energy sectors in the District.
As far as the national economy is concerned, for the most part I think the economic fundamentals are positive.
So I find the case for continued expansion convincing, especially, as other people have mentioned, with the policy stimulus in place and with signs of improvement in many foreign economies at least for the moment.
For the near term anyway, I do believe inflation will remain subdued.
And the productivity situation continues to look quite positive to me.
As others have commented
—and I may lean even a little further on this side
<START>—the expansion going forward is likely to be modest, which we recognize to a large extent is due to the fact that the recession was modest.<END>
We would not have been better off if we had had a deeper recession just so we could have a sharper snapback.
<START>Finally, though I don’t want to overstate this, I do think that the current accounting issues are potentially a very big deal because I believe they could have an extremely adverse effect on confidence.<END>
We used to be able to take the accuracy of accounting for granted.
<START>We assumed that these kinds of problems, to the extent they existed, were characteristic of developing economies or at least of economies other than our own.<END>
That is June 25-26, 200291 of 179proving to be less and less true.
<START>And I’m afraid that there is real potential for that to adversely affect the economy, and not just in the short run.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
First Vice President Barron.
MR.
BARRON.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Economic conditions in the Southeast have remained subdued since the last FOMC meeting.
Although we are witnessing some improvement in manufacturing and especially in the tourism and textile sectors, consumer spending has actually slackened off somewhat.
With respect to tourism, Florida seems to be rebounding strongly.
Cruise ships have been fully booked without the need to resort to the heavy discounting that we had seen over the last several quarters.
Single-family housing remains healthy, but multifamily construction seems to be clearly overbuilt.
Conditions in the commercial construction sector, especially in Atlanta, are even worse.
Office vacancy rates are at 20 percent, and we’ve been told that it may take until 2004 to absorb the current capacity.
But even that would require a return to high levels of growth and employment.
This weakness in the commercial market is showing through in lease renegotiations.
One large deal was recently completed for a twelve-year office lease with two years completely rent-free.
Not surprisingly, new speculative construction activity is virtually nonexistent.
In our discussions with our directors this month, we focused on profits, investment, inventories, and labor market related issues.
Profits are still being maintained mainly by continued cost cutting and not by productivity-increasing investments or increased revenue.
<START>Further, the majority of our directors reported that their contacts, which consist mainly of smaller companies, were largely unaware of the changes in the tax law designed to stimulate investment.<END>
And in those few cases where firms were aware of the changes, the incentives reportedly were having no effect on decisions to invest.
As for large companies, our contact at UPS indicated June 25-26, 200292 of 179that the tax changes were having virtually no effect on its investment decisions.
This was due in part to the fact that most of its major investments were tied to longer-term contracts and also because the window for taking advantage of the changes was so long.
Clearly, the persistence of uncertainty and the effects it is having on inventory decisions are quite telling.
Many retailers and manufacturers indicated they were in a wait-and-see mode at least until after the Fourth of July.
<START>Organizations are simply more willing to run the risk of incurring the added cost of just-in-time additions to inventory from domestic sources rather than risk placing large orders with lower cost sources abroad, based on highly uncertain sales projections.<END>
Finally, on the hiring side, one bright note came from our contact in the growing Southeast auto industry.
He indicated that auto producers had been generating 20 percent of their production output from overtime for the past four months.
If production is maintained at the current pace for a couple more months
—and he saw no reason why it should not be
—he said that they would likely begin hiring again.
We did not find much of a strategic story with regard to how temp workers are being used at this point.
Temps are being hired, but only in conjunction with increased production and primarily as a hedge against the risk of further weakness.
<START>In short, these anecdotal stories suggest that growth in economic activity over coming months is more likely to be moderate than robust and that investment spending is likely to be restrained because of the perception of high risk and uncertainty.<END>
On the national front, we share the view of the Board staff that growth will be slightly below potential, at least through much of the rest of this year.
Our reading of the data since the last meeting suggests that there has been no material change in the baseline economic outlook.
As a result, the same questions we have had about the likely path for the recovery remain in June 25-26, 200293 of 179place.
Inventories continue to be liquidated, and there are few signals that an upturn in inventory investment is imminent.
The prospects for robust and rising corporate profits or investment activity have not improved.
<START>The factors that contribute to this mixed economic picture are also helping to keep inflation at bay.<END>
Mediocre growth rates for final demand and low rates of capacity utilization will help to moderate price pressures over the short run.
A period of extended low interest rates is not unprecedented.
We experienced such a period in the 1990-91 recession and into the subsequent recovery.
Interestingly, a rereading of the minutes from that period suggests that the Committee, prior to its initial move to tighten policy, had clear indications that the economy had turned the corner and was in fact expanding strongly.
The Committee moved aggressively in 1994 once the decision was made to combat any signs of a rising inflation outlook.
However, there were unusual factors that were restraining both inflation and the economy to a large degree
—beyond those that are present today.
<START>As a result, although we may have some time to monitor the economic outlook for the signs of strength and a durable expansion, inflation risks may not remain as dormant this time around.<END>
We would note some important differences between the economy during this slowdown and the 1990-91 period.
For example, unemployment is currently much lower than it was during 1990 and 1991.
The level of economic activity is clearly much higher than it was then, and the falloff in economic activity from the pre-slowdown period has not only been much less but is virtually nonexistent in either consumption or housing.
Productivity growth remains much stronger and has not exhibited the usual slowdown typically associated with an economic contraction.
<START>The point of this is not to suggest that now may be the time to act but only to point out that it is not difficult to perceive a circumstance in which the economy could pick up quickly June 25-26, 200294 of 179and thus force more-aggressive policy moves.<END>
For now, though, it would simply be nice to see growth return to levels near potential.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President McTeer.
MR.
MCTEER.
Since our last meeting, we have more evidence that the Eleventh District is still in recovery mode, but data and anecdotes to date point to a disappointingly weak and lackluster rebound.
<START>Job growth from February through May has been close to zero, and the Texas unemployment rate has inched up to just over 6 percent.<END>
<START>Initial jobless claims were up again in May and, given robust labor force growth in the state so far this year, I expect that the Texas unemployment rate will continue to rise over the next few months.<END>
Al’s productivity horse is outrunning the demand horse.
This has not been a typical business cycle for Texas in that the region’s performance has tracked the nation’s so closely.
As you know, in the past Texas typically experienced bigger booms and bigger busts than the nation as a whole.
That is not the case this time.
This is likely the outcome of greater diversification, with reduced dependence on energy and the fact that this most recent recession was not oil-price driven or at least not exclusively oil-price driven.
Currently, our older-economy cities like Houston have overtaken our newer-economy metros, such as Austin and Dallas/Fort Worth, in what is likely a temporary but nevertheless striking reversal of our experience over the past decade.
Houston has been particularly buoyant in the last two months as a result of a stronger energy picture, particularly in natural gas.
Although gas prices have come down somewhat in recent weeks, futures prices still imply prices closer to $4 by the end of the year.
Another positive development for us has been the beginning of recovery in Mexico.
We’ve done quite a bit of work to adjust the Mexican data for this year’s early Easter.
<START>So in contrast to the official Mexican statistics, our numbers suggest that Mexico June 25-26, 200295 of 179was out of recession in the first quarter, with GDP growth of positive 1.4 percent and with Mexican exports, imports, and industrial production all increasing steadily since the beginning of the year.<END>
The big question marks in our District are the high-tech and telecom industries.
We’ve had some positive developments outside of telecom, such as increased exports of computers and electronics to Asia.
In the telecom sector, however, it seems that bad news is followed by more bad news.
As a result we’ve had no job growth and rising unemployment in both Austin and Dallas.
Commercial real estate markets in these cities have deteriorated quickly
—another consequence of the high-tech bust.
As I look at the national economy, I don’t see much in the monthly numbers to suggest an acceleration in demand.
But the continued positive results may have boosted business confidence in the sustainability of the recovery.
The weakness of the recovery is only partly due to the mildness of the recession that preceded it.
The declines in industrial production and capacity utilization that we saw during 2000 and 2001 were not small at all by historical standards, yet the rebound we’ve seen in these series since December has been exceptionally modest.
Consumers have certainly been doing their part, but it still seems that, going forward, they can’t continue to carry the whole load.
If we’re to avoid a 1991-style jobless recovery, firms are going to have to resume their capital spending.
Fortunately, the preconditions for that to occur seem to be falling into place.
And we are seeing increases in capacity utilization, however weak.
<START>Corporate cash flow has begun to improve, and the stunning productivity gains of recent quarters are holding down unit labor costs relative to prices.<END>
All in all, I think we’re more likely to see a replay of 1971 than of 1991.
Instead of an unemployment rate that rises a full percentage point after the recovery begins, as happened a June 25-26, 200296 of 179decade ago, the unemployment rate may waffle between 5½ and 6 percent for an extended period of time.
If that is the case, then we’re not likely to see any acceleration in inflation worth worrying about anytime soon.
Tightening at this juncture would, in my opinion, be premature.
We have met some of the preconditions for a pickup in capital investment, but we have no hard evidence yet that the pickup has begun.
Job growth has only just turned positive, and increases in jobs keep getting revised away.
The recovery is still very weak and very tentative.
As confidence that the economy is on a healthy growth path increases, rates will have to rise, but that time has not come yet.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Poole.
MR.
POOLE.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The contacts that I talk to emphasize over and over again that the picture has not changed very much from the time of our last meeting.
In fact, as I reflect on the situation, I can’t remember an intermeeting period in which less has changed in terms of the overall outlook for the real economy, though obviously there have been developments in the financial world that really are newsworthy.
To reinforce a point that some others have made, we, too, hear frequent comments about the weak condition of state and local budgets.
I think that probably will be a factor depressing spending by state and local governments for quite some time.
My contacts at UPS, FedEx, and Wal-Mart all stressed a noticeable change in the labor market in terms of a lower turnover rate or increased retention rate.
<START>Full-time employees are not leaving as frequently as they were in the past, and as a consequence, these companies are reducing the use of part-time help because they have more full-time employees.<END>
All of these contacts pointed to that as being a marked change in the situation over the last year.
My UPS and FedEx contacts both said that they see some real signs of recovery in Asia and Europe, with outbound traffic from those areas clearly picking up.
The volume of shipments from the United States to Europe and Asia, however, is not picking up.
My Wal-Mart contact had an interesting observation about Argentina.
He said that Wal-Mart has about eighteen stores in Argentina, and with the banking system closed, they have problems paying employees.
They are sending armored trucks directly to the stores and paying wages in cash.
June 25-26, 200297 of 179So, my Wal-Mart contact said that things were going fairly well in Argentina except for the financial and banking sides.
The level of activity, measured in terms of the volume in their stores, looked okay.
I think that’s about all I want to say in the way of a review of current conditions.
I would like to offer the observation that clearly the economy is working through a number of adjustments, especially on the financial side, in light of all the uncertainties about the accounting problems.
<START>We continue to get distressing stories along that line There has been a significant decline in longer-term interest rates.<END>
There is a self-equilibrating process going on.
That decline in long rates is certainly going to help to bolster housing and probably consumption through the traditional channels
—or what have become the traditional channels of refinancing and other means of extracting cash from increased home values.
That will no doubt provide some support for business fixed investment;
it will encourage that to come along.
When the environment improves and becomes more buoyant, we will start to see rates on longer maturity instruments go in the other direction.
That will be part of a self-stabilizing or self-equilibrating process as well.
And it’s exactly that process that makes it, I June 25-26, 200298 of 179think, easy and fully appropriate for us just to sit here and let the market do as much of that as possible.
I believe there’s no compelling reason for us to change policy until the underlying situation changes quite a bit.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Bies.
MS.
BIES.
<START>The discussion that we’ve been hearing today is consistent with the Beige Book summary that characterizes economic growth as modest and uneven<END>
—or schizophrenic, as we said earlier.
From late 2001 until the last FOMC meeting, most forecasters had been revising growth estimates upward.
Since the last meeting, we’re seeing more forecasts for the remainder of 2002 being revised down.
Consumers have slowed their pace of spending.
Business fixed investment still does not show signs of sustained recovery.
Employment and average weekly hours worked have stabilized.
<START>But I echo the concerns that have been expressed many times already today that issues about the integrity of corporate earnings are continuing to overhang markets and consumer expectations.<END>
On the positive side, I look at the increase in labor force participation and the continued inventory liquidation and sustained final sales of businesses, which have brought inventory-sales ratios to historic low levels.
Production has grown for five months but at a pace below that necessary to maintain even the low current level of inventories.
Housing continues to be a bright spot in economic activity, and fiscal policy continues to be stimulative.
Inflation remains at extremely low levels, and CEOs continue to lament their limited ability to increase prices.
The slow pace of employment activity and the pressure on profits continue to drive productivity to strong levels.
The sustained lower value of the dollar, however, increase inflation pressures to some degree.
<START>will Thus, the modest pace of economic activity and the low level of inflation warrant no change in economic policy today.<END>
June 25-26, 200299 of 179CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Second District’s economic performance has been mixed, as we’ve been hearing is the case in most parts of the country.
There are some signs of increased price pressures in manufacturing and real estate;
but aside from shelter costs, finished goods inflation has remained stable and low.
Retail sales bounced back in June after a weak performance in May.
Consumer confidence has been rather mixed, and labor market conditions are as well, but overall both are fairly steady.
The housing markets in the District have been restrained, with prices continuing to rise but modestly.
Office markets in and around New York City remain weak but have stabilized, and the hotels have reported further increases in occupancy and room rates.
Our surveys of manufacturers and purchasing managers suggest a mixed performance in the manufacturing sector in May.
And bankers in the District report some softening in consumer loan demand but a pickup in demand from commercial borrowers, tighter lending standards, and steady to lower delinquency rates.
On the national level, our quibbles with the staff forecast are so minor as to not require any discussion.
I’d like to comment on some of the views around the table that somehow we have to prepare the market for what seems like an inevitable tightening of monetary policy.
I’m not sure who it is that we think we need to convince of what.
If the world outside really questioned the inflation-fighting skills and the willingness of this Committee to combat inflation, then I guess we’d have to go out and try to convince the world of that.
But with the exception of a few loonies who write rather silly columns
—such as one in the Wall Street Journal today
—in order to make a living, nobody questions the ability and the willingness of this Committee to fight inflation when it needs to be fought.
It’s rather like Babe Ruth running around and saying, June 25-26, 2002100 of 179“I’m a great hitter,” or Lefty Grove saying “I’m a great pitcher.” Nobody questioned their abilities.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I’m not sure everybody around here would know who Lefty Grove is!
[Laughter] VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
He’s the greatest left-handed pitcher in baseball history.
Thirty-one wins and six losses in his best year, with a lifetime earned-run average of about 2.53?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Is that a question mark at the end of that statement?
[Laughter] VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
He was a very good pitcher.
The point I wish to make is that we would be ill advised now to be preparing the market for something that I don’t think the market needs to be prepared for.
Our balance of risks statement says that we think the risks are balanced.
<START>If we were to say that we think there is a greater risk of inflation, people would wonder on which planet we had taken up residence!<END>
<START>We certainly don’t need to posture ourselves as virtuous inflation fighters;<END>
<START>that would seem to place in doubt whether we consider ourselves to be good inflation fighters when necessary.<END>
Otherwise, why would we be talking about that?
I have a position in the world’s financial center that provides me with about a zillion international contacts.
<START>If anybody were seriously worried about our willingness to take on inflation, I would surely be inundated by such comments.<END>
I don’t get any.
So I would suggest that we not get involved in a fight that nobody thinks we need to engage in.
There are some very, very serious problems out there, and we don’t need to contribute to them by placing our own skills in question.
<START>June 25-26, 2002101 of 179The markets continue to be pounded by what appears to be an expanding scandal in corporate America, leading a growing number of our fellow citizens<END>
—and even more foreign investors
—to fear equity investments in this market.
<START>A month ago I think one could have said that the corporate scandals were relatively isolated and that there weren’t too many Enrons.<END>
Just too many are coming to light for people to be able to say that now.
<START>And the willingness, despite all these developments, of the final four accounting firms to spend their considerable skills on the Hill trying to ensure that no legislation is passed that calls for oversight of them<END>
—no oversight at all
—indicates a lack of common sense that is really quite dangerous.
The probability of an international financial crisis would be difficult to exaggerate, I think.
Argentina is as we have described it in recent meetings.
Brazil, in my view, is an ever-growing danger.
The question is not whether Lula da Silva would be elected President of Brazil.
Rather, it is whether the financial markets in the country, and especially the citizens of the country, are going to sit around and wait to see what happens.
If his lead in the polls continues, I think we have to stand by for a very high probability of massive capital flight as we get closer to the election.
There is nothing the IMF or anybody else can do about that.
If the Brazilian people decide that they’re going to vote with their money, the rest of the world will have to watch.
But if that happens, the likelihood of a very serious contagion effect on the world economy is great indeed.
For a while we could say that there was almost no contagion effect coming out of Argentina.
That is no longer true.
<START>It may not be coming out of Argentina, but there is a fear in the emerging-market area that is getting considerably greater.<END>
If we have an international financial crisis, we are not in very good shape to deal with it.
<START>We, the people of the United States, are very solidly in support of our President in the war against terrorism.<END>
<START>But if you were to spend as much time as I do dealing with the international June 25-26, 2002102 of 179community, you would know that the support of our traditional allies for our position is weak at best.<END>
Their attitude that the United States is being unilateral, which I think is a bum rap, is spreading, and it takes on a reality of its own.
<START>If we have an international financial crisis, the world is going to say that the present economic leadership team in the United States has never been through such a crisis.<END>
<START>Anytime that a group has not been through the handling of a crisis, there will be questions about how good it will be at it.<END>
<START>I hope and expect that this team would handle such a crisis very well indeed.<END>
<START>But I think the world would expect the central bank of the United States to take on the leadership role if needed, as we did in the fall of 1998 particularly.<END>
And because of what I see as a very murky and rather dangerous international environment
—and it could get quite bad indeed
—I think it is particularly important for us to conduct ourselves in a way that indicates our self-confidence.
<START>We need to show that we are sure of ourselves and confident in our own abilities to manage domestic monetary policy well and to manage our role in promoting financial stability as brilliantly<END>
—a word well selected, I think
—as we have in recent years.
<START>It is not the time to go around preparing the market for something for which it doesn’t need to be prepared and in the process to place in doubt our confidence in ourselves.<END>
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Gramlich.
MR.
GRAMLICH.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The latest J.P. Morgan newsletter starts off:
“Global equity markets continue to slide this week, government bond yields are falling, and the spread on emerging-market debt is widening.
Such changes often signal that an economic slowdown lies ahead.
However, economic indicators still point upward.
A wave of recent reports suggests that housing activity, along with retail spending and manufacturing output, is re­accelerating as midyear approaches.
This news is accompanied by continued strength globally in June 25-26, 2002103 of 179trade flows and manufacturing output.” This quote captures what others have called the schizophrenic situation facing the economy.
Many indicators suggest that we are on track for a gradual recovery.
We are slowly working off excess inventories and fixed investment is gradually coming back.
Consumption and housing remain strong.
Both the Greenbook and Blue Chip forecasters look for a gradual recovery.
<START>And gradual is good because it reduces the expected amplitude of future investment accelerator cycles.<END>
Looking further into the future, the so-called “perfect foresight” path for the funds rate in the Bluebook is not far from the scenario that I imagine most of us poor souls without perfect foresight would have in mind.
And this path does lead to very low levels of inflation and unemployment.
There are imbalances, but even these are not too alarming, at least in the central Greenbook forecast.
Both the dollar and the stock market had been overvalued according to conventional notions of equilibrium, but both are readjusting.
Given all this
—the gradual recovery of the real economy, stable prices without much inflation threat, and the readjustment of financial prices that are out of line
—what’s the problem?
Why don’t we feel better about the outlook?
There are several sources of concern, which is bad enough.
<START>What is worse is that, compared with the good news, these disconcerting factors could be fundamental, are often unprecedented, and are very hard to analyze.<END>
I have five items on my list.
One, of course, is future terrorism risk.
We’ve talked enough about that here.
Second is the risk that gradual price movements will become rapid price movements.
The stock market may not be too far out of equilibrium now.
Forward earnings-price ratios have returned to a decent margin over real interest rates.
And the household wealth-income ratio is now much closer to its historical average.
But the market could well overshoot, as it often has in June 25-26, 2002104 of 179the past.
The dollar, on the other hand, is miles away from its equilibrium value
—the one that equates imports with exports.
A rapid change there could have quite dramatic implications, largely along the lines of those just mentioned by Bill McDonough.
Third is a long-run erosion of national saving.
The budget situation is bad and getting awful.
The deficit is rising rapidly;
political discipline is gone;
nobody will make a vote in the public interest.
<START>As long-run national saving declines, either investment will decline, or our foreign financing needs will increase.<END>
And both are bad for quite different reasons.
Fourth is what the Greenbook has euphemistically called accounting irregularities, which other people are calling scandals.
If these irregularities were in fact irregular or abnormal, that would one thing.
But they are looking rather pervasive to a lot of us.
The fifth is interactions.
All of these risks involve potential interactions.
If accounting firms are successful in enabling businesses and households to avoid taxes, won’t this further erode the budget and national savings?
<START>Will the accounting irregularities lead to further and sharper falls in the stock market, the dollar, investment and/or consumption?<END>
Will declines in investment demand, if any, reduce a capital-deepening productivity change
—still our best piece of economic news
—and then further affect the dollar or the stock market or both?
Will the threat of terrorism interact with any of these or all of these?
So while we have an economy that is in some sense well positioned for a gradual recovery and while we could be on track for an outcome with lower unemployment and low inflation, there are mysterious forces out there.
<START>And those forces are difficult to analyze and could be quite ominous and quite powerful.<END>
Schizophrenia rules!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Ferguson.
June 25-26, 2002105 of 179MR. FERGUSON.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My view of the near-term indicators is that they do indeed, as others have already indicated, paint an economy that is stable
—certainly not contracting
—but not yet growing at trend.
For example, the initial claims data have come down from their recent artificially elevated level, but they remain historically high
—at around the 400,000 level that has prevailed since early 2001.
Certainly the most recent retail sales data were weaker than expected
—flat in May
—and are pointing to a possible slowing in the pace of increase in personal consumption expenditures.
And finally, the data for orders and shipments, as we’ve just seen this morning, are clearly stabilizing and perhaps turning up some but certainly are not returning to the pace of the late 1990s.
This picture is frustrating, I think, for those who had hoped for or bet on a sharp turnaround.
But this Committee should be mindful, as many have already said, that the gradual growth of the current quarter was anticipated in our earlier meetings.
Two of the three previous Greenbooks this year forecast growth in this quarter within a range of 2 to 2½ percent, and growth at such a pace still seems to be the case.
While expected, however, this slow growth does leave one wondering what will be the impetus for an upturn or return to trend.
If the second half of 2002 is going to be stronger than the second quarter and lead to a stronger 2003, as forecast by both the staff and the consensus of external forecasters, we must soon start to see a pattern of more rapidly improving incoming data.
While that pattern of data is not yet in hand, both housing and autos are continuing to play the important stabilizing roles that they’ve played thus far for the cyclical episode.
Additionally, as other have said, impetus will most assuredly come from monetary policy, which is accommodative;
fiscal policy, which is likely to continue to provide a positive impulse;
and a weaker dollar, which will allow foreign demand to take up some of the slack not June 25-26, 2002106 of 179provided by domestic demand.
<START>On the other hand, eroding equity prices, declining consumer and investor confidence due to a range of factors that Governor Gramlich has identified, and an uncertain profit outlook in the business community are admittedly creating and likely to continue to create some drag on both household and business expenditures.<END>
<START>All of these forces taken together lead me to believe that the risks to the baseline forecast are, if you will, uncomfortably balanced.<END>
<START>Now, if contrary to most expectations the negative forces weighing on the economy grow stronger, become more persistent, and undermine recovery, then obviously we’ll have to react to that.<END>
Similarly, on the other hand, if the turnaround proves stronger than forecast, we’ll need to move rates upward more quickly than currently built into the assumptions underlying the Greenbook or the perfect foresight outlook in the Bluebook.
Whether such moves will surprise the market is really uncertain.
Just as the markets have adjusted in the intermeeting period to the incoming data by modifying their expectations with respect to policy in a downward direction, presumably incoming data would get the markets to adjust their policy expectations up if indeed that were the appropriate response.
Let me comment briefly on the issue that Vice Chairman McDonough discussed and perhaps take a slightly different tack.
I think the issue of preparing the markets is one that is rather challenging for this Committee.
<START>We have the benefit of having the confidence of the markets that we will attempt to avoid surprising them if we can.<END>
That may not always be possible, but we will try not to surprise them.
We don’t want to lose that unwritten but rather well understood pact between this Committee and the markets.
On the other hand, we don’t want a desire to prepare the markets to lead inadvertently to instability in the markets, which perhaps was what Vice Chairman McDonough was suggesting.
That does leave us in a bit of a June 25-26, 2002107 of 179challenging position here.
But for now I’d say it’s better just to have a steady hand on the tiller.
<START>These are indeed uncertain times, and we don’t want to add to that uncertainty.<END>
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Olson.
MR.
OLSON.
We’ve had a couple of comments regarding the impact of public policy, and I think Governor Gramlich summarized it pretty well.
In the course of this past year we have had a stimulative tax and spending policy offset
—and significantly, I think
—by a loss of fiscal discipline, which was an issue we discussed at the last FOMC meeting.
President Jordan described monetary policy as likely to be event-driven and reactive.
I would say that, from a pubic policy perspective, the efforts for the rest of the year will be targeted and cautious.
The election year in America really begins after Labor Day.
In Washington, D.C., which is different from America, [laughter] it begins in midspring.
The control of the Senate is now perceived to be in the hands of five states, three of which are agriculture states
—South Dakota, Minnesota, and Iowa.
<START>And it’s not surprising that we have in the Congress a farm policy bill that is targeted toward those states and, in turn, to achieving control of the Senate.<END>
It seems to me that the one public policy decision that has been made
—and this addresses what Vice Chairman McDonough said regarding the corporate governance issue
—is that the accounting industry has lost its right to self-governance.
There will be an oversight board, in one form or another, that is largely out of their control.
And that I would consider a cautious decision because it reflects what I believe is a consensus position.
<START>I think the best example of public policy action in this time frame is the inability of the legislature to pass a debt-ceiling bill.<END>
The government is going to run out of money this Friday.
The Senate has passed the bill.
The Republicans in the House are looking very hard at ways to June 25-26, 2002108 of 179avoid addressing the issue directly.
To me what that suggests is that, in the area of public policy, the decisions will not contribute to the solution but will no longer be part of the problem.
So perhaps that, too, reflects where we are now, that a policy of no change or a steady-as-you-go course ought to be the one we follow.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Thank you very much.
I think we can break for coffee now.
[Coffee break] CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Mr. Kohn.
MR.
KOHN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
<START>The Committee has noted in its last few announcements that the current stance of policy is accommodative, in large part to signal that it appreciated that the current level of the federal funds rate is likely to be inconsistent over time with its long-term goals for price stability and maximum sustainable growth.<END>
This policy stance was adopted to counteract the effects of some very powerful restraints on aggregate demand
<START>—most notably the collapse of capital spending and the decline in equity prices associated with a re-evaluation of the demand for, and profitability of, capital goods.<END>
<START>Working through the imbalances that built up in the second half of the 1990s has depressed output and resource utilization enough to put downward pressure on an already fairly modest core inflation rate.<END>
<START>As the economy began to stabilize late last year and to expand in recent months, the key policy question has been whether the adjustment in the capital goods sector and in expected profits has proceeded sufficiently, or other countervailing stimulative forces have come into play, so that monetary policy should begin to move toward a more neutral setting to forestall an eventual rise in inflation.<END>
In many respects, the news since your last meeting has supported an assessment that the adjustment process has been progressing largely as expected.
The staff anticipated a slowdown in GDP growth along the lines experienced, as the boost from the slower runoff in inventory waned and as growth in final sales moderated after a surge in consumption and government spending in the fourth and first quarters.
Economic activity has continued to advance, with industrial output increasing and labor markets stabilizing.
Importantly, as highlighted by the data this morning, investment spending does look as if it has begun to recover, suggesting that the correction of imbalances in the capital goods sector is well along.
Core inflation has continued to moderate this year, though by a little less than anticipated by the staff in the last Greenbook.
And longer-term inflation expectations remain relatively low;
indeed, over the intermeeting period, the spread between nominal and indexed debt reversed a considerable part of its previous run-up.
June 25-26, 2002109 of 179More unexpected in recent weeks have been developments in financial markets.
Through the close of business yesterday, the dollar had fallen around 4 percent against other major currencies over the intermeeting period, the broadest stock price index was down more than 7 percent, and most long-term interest rates had fallen around ¼ percentage point.
To a considerable extent, these asset price adjustments have reflected a response to economic news in line with the staff’s outlook for activity and earnings, but short of the outsized expectations of market participants.
<START>It is important to emphasize that, taken together, the net changes in asset prices over the intermeeting period should have very little overall effect on the path of economic activity and inflation going forward, at least when viewed from the perspective of the staff model.<END>
This results because the restraint on aggregate demand from the drop in stock market wealth is projected to be about offset over time by the boost to spending and production from the lower dollar and interest rates.
But it seems evident that financial markets are reacting as well to perceptions of heightened risk and uncertainty that have the potential to damp spending in ways that had not been anticipated or built into the model.
To some extent, these perceptions reflect the persistence and possible intensification of foreign conflicts and of turmoil in key Latin America economies, which are seen as posing a greater risk of spilling over to the domestic economy.
The added uncertainty also represents another lingering hangover from the late 1990s boom.
The exposure of questionable practices at an increasing number of U.S.
corporations has raised questions about governance and transparency at firms more generally, reducing the confidence with which investors can interpret recent history and anticipate the future.
Greater uncertainty and skittishness have been manifest in a marked increase in actual and expected volatility in a number of financial markets.
Moreover, credit risk premiums have jumped in certain market segments and for the lower-rated borrowers who are perceived to be most prone to corporate irregularities and most vulnerable to more-worried lenders.
Clearly, such market responses would tend to damp spending by the businesses that now find the financial markets less hospitable.
<START>But heightened anxiety about the future and about the cost and availability of finance could have much broader effects by making both households and businesses more cautious, less confident, and less willing to take risks in spending and investing.<END>
So long as the increase in uncertainty does not feed upon itself, the fundamentals remain in place for a strengthening of demand over coming quarters for the reasons presented in the chart show yesterday.
With inventory-sales ratios quite low, inventory investment should continue to contribute to increases in production
— though not by as much as in the first quarter.
<START>Growth in final demand should be bolstered by expansive monetary policy, which is keeping real short-term and long-term interest rates low<END>
—at least for more creditworthy borrowers
—supporting household spending on homes and durable goods and enabling corporations to strengthen balance sheets, leaving them better positioned to pursue profitable investment opportunities.
Stimulus to final demand from fiscal policy is reflected in boosts to disposable income from tax cuts, in large increases in government spending, and in greater incentives to purchase capital equipment that should begin to have June 25-26, 2002110 of 179significant effects over the next several quarters.
As depreciation of the existing capital stock and expanding sales continue to eat into any remaining capital overhang, the normal accelerator process will begin to boost business spending, reinforcing the special incentives to deepen capital given by tax law and the opportunities from technological innovation.
The resulting productivity gains will continue to bolster labor income and spending over time.
In the staff forecast, nonetheless, the forces restraining spending lift only gradually.
Not until next year does the economy expand at a rate fast enough to begin to make significant inroads into excess resources.
<START>In effect, high margins of excess production capacity, lower equity prices, cautious lenders and spenders, and moderate expansion in our trading partners mute the economy’s response to stimulative monetary and fiscal policy.<END>
<START>As a consequence, in both the staff forecast and the perfect foresight exercise in the Bluebook, holding the current accommodative stance of policy for a time and raising the federal funds rate gradually thereafter is consistent with maintaining inflation near its current relatively low level.<END>
<START>Keeping policy unchanged might have particular appeal when there is so little historical precedent to judge the likely path for spending as the economy works through the effects of the previous imbalances in capital goods and equity markets.<END>
<START>With financial markets skittish, core inflation still edging lower, and inflation expectations well anchored, the Committee might see little to be lost by waiting to get a better fix on how demand is likely to evolve.<END>
The Committee’s perception of the balance of risks to the outlook at an unchanged policy stance might depend on how you weighed the various types of information you received over the intermeeting period.
<START>The passage of time, together with the economic data consistent with expectations that investment was turning around, imply that the odds on economic expansion falling short had declined and that inflation risks had drawn closer<END>
could—perhaps to the point where the latter now were the more important threat to meeting your longer-term objectives.
The belief that the foreign exchange value of the dollar was likely to be trending substantially lower over a considerable period would reinforce such a judgment.
<START>In contrast, should concerns continue to mount about global political and economic developments and about the true state of finances of U.S.<END>
corporations, the resulting caution could cut into spending.
Indeed, a few observers have read recent financial market developments as raising the odds that your next action is more likely to be an easing than a tightening, suggesting the possibility that the balance of risks had tilted toward economic weakness.
And in fact, financial markets this morning have built in some odds of an easing in the October-November time frame.
In the staff forecast, these greater uncertainties have not undermined the judgment that fundamental forces will be strengthening the expansion and that policy will need to tighten at some point, but they have pushed off the date at which inflation risks will require firming to begin.
If the Committee shares the assessment of the staff that heightened inflation pressures are no closer now than they were in May, presumably June 25-26, 2002111 of 179it would retain its assessment that the risks to its objectives are balanced.
This is what the markets expect, and the announcement of an unchanged policy along with balanced risks should have little effect on asset prices.
The heightened degree of unsettlement in financial markets most recently, including this morning, might strengthen the argument for not surprising market participants at this meeting unless the Committee saw policy expectations now embedded in asset prices as seriously misguided and potentially destabilizing.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Thank you.
Questions for Don?
President Parry.
MR.
PARRY.
First of all, I think the perfect foresight exercises, both in the Bluebook and also in the memo by Bob Tetlow were very helpful.
I have a couple of questions with regard to those exercises.
Page 7 of the Bluebook, about the seventh or eighth line down, talks about the objective function as minimizing the squared deviations of output from its potential.
Is that correct?
I ask because I think Tetlow minimizes squared deviations of the unemployment rate from the NAIRU and that makes a difference.
In this latest recession, of course, the deviation of output from its potential really didn’t become very great, but the deviation of the unemployment rate relative to the NAIRU was quite large.
So, is there a difference?
MR.
KOHN.
I think they were about the same, but maybe Vince can give you a more detailed explanation.
MR.
REINHART.
You are right;
Bob’s memo highlighted that it was unemployment relative to the natural rate.
MR.
PARRY.
So did you run a different model simulation?
MR.
REINHART.
No, actually we ran the same one.
MR.
PARRY.
Oh, okay.
MR.
REINHART.
However, going forward in the forecast, Okun’s law relates the two, so it doesn’t make a difference.
June 25-26, 2002112 of 179MR. PARRY.
But the relationship
—I think we ought to talk about that.
In other words, you didn’t put it in the right terms.
This should be
— MR. REINHART.
Unemployment relative to the natural rate.
MR.
PARRY.
That’s what I thought the answer was.
Thank you.
MR.
KOHN.
I do think that in the staff’s assessment there isn’t much difference going forward because in the staff forecast the NAIRU is 5¼ percent.
MR.
PARRY.
Right, but in the most recent period it’s different.
My second point is that you talk about the small penalty associated with changes in the funds rate.
In Tetlow’s work I thought it had almost an equal weight.
And that’s pretty important in terms of the objective function.
<START>Unless you used a different penalty, I don’t see how you could characterize it as a small penalty.<END>
MR.
REINHART.
No, the Bluebook simulation is exactly the same as the one Bob presented.
MR.
PARRY.
<START>So it gives a heavy weight to smoothing changes in the funds rate;<END>
that’s the way he characterized it.
MR.
REINHART.
The penalty is our dirty little secret.
MR.
PARRY.
You got it!
MR.
REINHART.
It isn’t obvious why in a perfect foresight simulation we would necessarily impose that the Committee cared about gradualism in setting rates.
MR.
PARRY.
Right.
MR.
REINHART.
We do it for a couple of reasons.
One is the characterization of uncertainty.
Second, the model has a property that it gives us a small contemporaneous effect of monetary policy.
That is, if you change the funds rate this quarter, it will actually influence June 25-26, 2002113 of 179output in this quarter.
That doesn’t seem credible.
So gradualism has the effect of taking that out.
Whether that is small, medium, or large, it was chosen so that we would get the historical funds rate volatility.
MR.
PARRY.
It’s all relative to the other.
MR.
REINHART.
Right.
MR.
PARRY.
One final question.
You referred to the growth rate of potential as 3¼ percent after 2003.
Tetlow used 3½ percent, and in fact it builds to above 3½ percent after that.
Did you use a different simulation there?
MR.
REINHART.
We were using the same simulations.
Now, Bob’s memo was written a week before the Greenbook was finalized.
So, it must reflect either a change between the times the two exercises were done or a different rounding convention.
MR.
PARRY.
Okay, thanks.
MR.
STOCKTON.
I don’t think there were any changes in the model itself.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Poole.
MR.
POOLE.
I have a comment on page 14 of the Bluebook
—the box that discusses the market reaction to policy surprises.
I think there’s a lot more that could be done in that exercise.
In particular, I think there’s a better way of doing table 1 versus table 2.
Instead of partitioning the data by date, I’d use the size of the policy surprise as measured by the change in the federal funds futures market.
A change of 5 basis points or less really is no surprise, but a change of 5 basis points or more would be.
That would be a better way of presenting this analysis.
MR.
REINHART.
In fact, I think we did something similar to that with a different range.
This analysis is basically a work in progress.
I would say that we were influenced by the reaction to the January 3, 2001, action, which was certainly not in the 5 basis points or less cell.
June 25-26, 2002114 of 179MR. POOLE.
That’s absolutely right.
That’s why I’m suggesting that you partition these observations.
I used 5 basis points because our research indicates that that’s about the ambient noise in the federal funds futures market.
MR.
REINHART.
We have ongoing research that involves looking at the different measures of expectations.
And it does turn out, whether you use the federal funds futures, the Eurodollar, or a term structure that you can tweak these numbers a little bit.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Further questions?
If not, let me get started.
<START>I’ve been particularly impressed, and others have as well, by how this economy has withstood the extraordinary impact of the dual shocks of a major collapse in equity asset values and the tragic events of September 11.<END>
I think it’s important, however, not to perceive the economy’s resilience as an either/or issue.
In other words, the economy either deflects these shocks, or it doesn’t.
If a person has a flu bug that puts him or her to bed for a week, that person is seriously ill.
The alternative as it applies to the economy in the current context is that it is suffering, but it is not in bed.
And I think it is going to take a while, maybe many months, before the lingering effects of what the economy has essentially deflected actually wear off.
As I see it, a goodly part of the restraint on economic activity that we see pretty much across the board is the after-effect of these shocks.
<START>They have been very substantial shocks.<END>
In this context, the big rise in GDP in the first quarter as a consequence of the sharp slowing in inventory liquidation is merely an arithmetical inevitability;
it is not something that gives us any really great insight into ongoing economic processes.
What characterizes this period in my view is that globalization is beginning to have a general effect on the competitive structure of the world’s economies.
It essentially has opened up the world market to a lot of local areas with excess capacity.
When there are local areas that June 25-26, 2002115 of 179cannot trade with one another, a higher level of aggregate capacity is needed to accommodate rising demand.
The consequence of homogenizing the world economy, which is effectively what globalization does, has very clearly been to exert a marked deflationary force on the pricing structure of the world.
Merely looking at the rate of inflation as it gradually came down through the 1990s is telling us that we are seeing a very broad force that is exerting its economic effects relatively slowly.
I’d like to think that in some way the monetary authorities of the world were extraordinarily clever and that we calibrated this process precisely in the way it happened.
I don’t believe that for five seconds.
I think we have been very fortunate in having essentially recognized the process as it was occurring and having calibrated our actions to profoundly important events.
And the reason they are profoundly important, even today, is that this is a different kind of recovery from those we have seen before.
To a very large extent, it’s characterized by the loss of pricing power.
What that essentially means is that we are not seeing the recovery characteristics that we have observed in the past in which inflation got down to a low rate of, say, 3 percent and then started to move back up.
This recovery is different.
It’s different largely because the business community deals with nominal values.
<START>Business firms are facing consolidated corporate revenues that are basically flat in nominal terms, and even if the price level is falling or the rate of inflation is coming down, business executives who are in charge of capital investments remain skeptical about indications of an emerging upturn.<END>
We clearly are getting a very different pattern of real GDP as a consequence.
The fact is that we have gotten some firming in the orders series despite the pervasive gloom in the business community.
Cathy Minehan reflected on the extent to which her business contacts talk about this gloomy sentiment.
<START>We are all seeing it, and given its pervasiveness, it is difficult to imagine why any investment is taking place.<END>
But business firms are in fact investing.
June 25-26, 2002116 of 179If the chart in front of us covered more years, we would find that the current orders figures are higher than they were in any recent period except for the years 1997 through 2000.
<START>They have come down very sharply, but we have to remember how far they had gone up, so the current level relative to where they were in the past is really quite high.<END>
The question is how that squares with the gloom that permeates much of the business community.
The reason they are spending is that they perceive they need to.
The only people who are making any capital investments, if you listen to what business executives are saying, are those who have no choice.
It appears from the data that there’s an awful lot of nonchoice out there!
<START>There is no doubt that the numbers on investment outlays look better than what business executives are saying, and I think that’s important.<END>
I think it’s also important to reflect on why this period differs from, say, the 1950s and 1960s, which also was a period of low price inflation.
Back then, the population was growing at about twice the rate it is today, and nominal values also were growing faster than they are today.
We usually don’t consider population growth to be an issue, but it’s relevant in this case.
I recall that capital investment was doing reasonably well in the 1950s and 1960s.
Profits were doing reasonably well.
Sales were doing reasonably well.
With the population and the labor force growing much faster than they are now, housing starts began a long-term uptrend from the beginning of the post–World War II period.
The impetus for rising housing activity usually focuses on household formation, and that’s not what we’re getting today.
I’ll come back to that shortly because it has considerable relevance to what is going on currently.
There is no question that the issue of corporate governance and accounting practices has eroded the level of confidence, and more so than I expected it would.
One cannot escape the conclusion that some of what has gone on within a number of large corporations probably has June 25-26, 2002117 of 179involved some felonies and that inevitably somebody is going to jail.
Even so, it’s hard to say that corporate efficiency, which is really the ultimate measure of the effectiveness of corporate governance, is weakened.
On the contrary, all the evidence we have from the productivity data indicates precisely the opposite.
What it also is saying is that the fear in the marketplace about the quality of earnings is a short-term fear.
The reason is that there are certain fundamental numbers in our system that, if we believe them and I think that we do, mean that underlying productivity is indeed rising.
One cannot spin the productivity data that we are working with.
Indeed, David Stockton provided alternate and independent estimates of what is happening, and they all show the same thing
—that it is very difficult to deny that output per hour has accelerated.
It’s also very difficult to deny that unit labor costs have either leveled out or fallen.
<START>One may argue that prices are going down in the corporate sector, and in part that may be correct, but severe deflation is evident in none of the data.<END>
As a consequence, profit margins, as reflected in the NIPA, have been recovering.
<START>It’s important to keep in mind that the NIPA profits numbers are not capable of being spun under GAAP and they are not capable of being misrepresented by off-balance-sheet analysis.<END>
When I ask myself whether there is any way in which one can spin the national income and product account profit figures, the answer is “yes”
— in part.
<START>The “in part” relates to the fact that the underlying source data used by the BEA may very well be questionable to a degree.<END>
But there are quite significant limits to how far that can go.
At the end of the day, the NIPA profits figures are based on the tax returns that corporations put out.
There is no evidence of which I’m aware that corporate tax return reporting is deficient or suspect.
There is no evidence that I’m aware of that the IRS has found huge accounting misreporting for tax evasion and tax avoidance purposes.
<START>The truth of the matter is that the amount of avoidance that a business firm can engage in is limited.<END>
That means that the NIPA June 25-26, 2002118 of 179data in general are probably quite reflective of what is going on, and those data show a lot higher profits growth than do the recent shareholder reports.
Part of the reason for that, as I have argued in the past, is that the non-expensing of stock options, which was a major factor in the widened spread between shareholder S&P 500 earnings and the NIPA earnings from 1997 through 2000, is now reversing.
And it’s reversing in the sense that, with the fall in the stock market, the willingness of employees to take stock option grants in lieu of cash has gone into very significant retrenchment.
<START>That means that cash, which is expensed, is taking the place of stock option grants, and that’s depressing S&P 500 earnings relative to those in the NIPA data.<END>
The latter, of course, already have a form of expensing in them as is required under the tax code.
My suspicion is that if the numbers we’re looking at are reasonable and if the GDP data that David Stockton was talking about this morning are going to be revised as he suggests, we are looking at a productivity number of around 2¾ percent at an annual rate for the second quarter.
<START>By itself, that is not hugely remarkable, but it is hugely remarkable in the sense that it would follow annual rates of 7 percent averaged over the two previous quarters.<END>
<START>One would have expected a negative second quarter merely because it’s just not credible that those 7 percent numbers can be representative of the trend in the real world.<END>
The fact of the matter is that there appears to be something very real going on.
<START>And if it is and if compensation of employees is not picking up all of the gains in productivity, as clearly it is not, then of necessity the productivity gains have to flow over into profit margins unless we see serious evidence of accelerated deflation or actual price declines in the corporate sector.<END>
There is little of that because the reasonably good data that we have for manufacturing prices do not show very much deflation, except for the high-tech sector.
The latter, of course, has been characterized by persistently June 25-26, 2002119 of 179falling prices.
Indeed, that’s one of the reasons why in the present environment we have very slowly moving nominal GDP that is associated with reasonably good real GDP.
<START>In my view, the problem with profits is going to cure itself.<END>
I nonetheless think that a lot more shoes probably will fall in the disclosure area.
The WorldCom episode is bizarre, including the huge loan that the company made to Bernie Ebbers.
I served on a lot of boards of directors before I arrived here.
The notion that we directors would authorize huge loans to the chief executive officer is so far from anything that I even remotely encountered at that time as to indicate that something in the area of corporate governance clearly has broken apart.
It’s not that human greed has somehow inexplicably and suddenly escalated after standing at a fairly pronounced positive but measurable level for millennia.
<START>What has happened is that the exploitable opportunities for greed have gone up very substantially with the huge bonanza in market capitalization sitting out there as a potential free lunch with no apparent offsetting liabilities.<END>
Some of the practices that business firms are engaged in are utterly bizarre.
So there are bound to be further revelations relating to such practices, and I don’t know how long this problem will last.
I see evidence that the capital goods markets are reflecting slightly improved profitability.
<START>I’m a little dubious about the reports that the legislation providing for accelerated depreciation is having no effect.<END>
<START>It is true that if one surveys corporate executives, many will say that they never heard of it in terms of their firms’ investment decisions.<END>
But that’s not where the investment decision is made.
It’s made at the plant level.
If a plant manager has a potential project to be presented to the capital facilities planning committee of the company, that depreciation change will be included in the calculation of the projected rate of return.
It will influence the total amount of the capital expenditure even if the chief executive officer thinks it June 25-26, 2002120 of 179has zero effect.
He just doesn’t know, and the reason he doesn’t know is that it seldom surfaces at the executive committee level or at the board level.
That’s not the way depreciation changes and replacement demand get generated within a corporation.
To be sure, company executives and the boards of directors do vote on the overall capital appropriations, but they do not and cannot know what is in the detail in any meaningful respect.
As I see it, the outlook for capital goods spending is probably okay.
The depression among business executives is so great that capital spending presumably can only go higher from what is currently a relatively elevated level “gloom-adjusted,” if I may put it that way.
Personal consumption expenditures were weak in May.
Obviously, the data we have through June are mixed, but the month as a whole still looks to be reasonably positive.
Chain store sales, of course, have been quite impressive.
<START>The only problem I have with such sales information is that, even though we have the reports on a weekly basis, their actual usefulness in forecasting total personal consumption expenditures is dubious.<END>
We clearly are getting some increase, as Mike Moskow mentioned, in motor vehicle sales in June.
The Redbook chain store estimates and forecasts are less grim than those of the Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi, but neither one of them is as useful as the motor vehicles data.
The latter include all car sales and are almost exactly what shows up in the PCE and the PDE for these key sectors.
These motor vehicle statistics are therefore of crucial importance in gauging overall consumer spending.
<START>To be sure, the growth of consumer spending will be a good deal weaker in the second quarter than it was in the first quarter.<END>
I believe that equity extractions from homes will continue to be a source of positive growth in personal consumption expenditures.
If we disaggregate the model that we use, we find that little more than 80 percent of personal consumption expenditures is financed out of income June 25-26, 2002121 of 179in the short run.
The implication is that a big chunk, nearly 20 percent of outlays, is driven by the stock of overall wealth, of which housing is a very important part.
In this regard, I think we are all aware of the fact that, despite the weakness in the economy, homebuilding has been remarkably well maintained.
A clear reason for that in my view is immigration, which currently accounts for a third of U.S.
population growth and a third of the rise in household formations.
<START>The demand for housing is pressing up against land shortages and the like, and we are getting fairly dramatic increases in a lot of areas in the market value of homes and hence in the total housing equity, from which there has been a consistent degree of extractions.<END>
One source of the extractions is the very high level of existing home sales.
The sellers pay off significantly less mortgage debt than the buyers take on, and the net change in those two mortgage numbers equals the extraction of equity from the sale of existing homes.
The funds made available from home sales plus the funds obtained from the very large increase in home equity lending, which stems from “unrealized gains” that are not the consequence of a sale of a home, are being employed to a significant extent for consumer expenditures.
Of course, a further source of such funds comes from cash-outs from home refinancings, which as I recall are an increasing proportion of the aggregate amounts being refinanced.
The impact of the very substantial extraction of home equity funds is to lower the level of measured personal savings.
But that is not the true measure of the saving rate because we are dealing with a structural difference in personal consumption expenditures as a consequence of a secular rise in home equity values.
I don’t know where I saw the recent chart showing changes in the real value of homes over the past couple of decades
— was that in your presentation?
MR.
OLINER.
We had a panel on that.
June 25-26, 2002122 of 179CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
It’s fairly evident that there is a secular increase in the value of homes relative to the value of other assets.
The consequence is that the extraction of funds from home equity values is a much more important source of consumption expenditures than earlier.
<START>Previously, consumers were not able to extract cash easily out of the rising value of their homes, but they can now, and that source of funds has been a strong sustaining force for spending through the recession.<END>
Unless immigration slows down as a consequence of September 11, it’s hard to imagine that anything really major is going to change in this regard.
<START>And unless we get a significant decline in home prices, and that’s a very questionable prospect at this stage, it’s hard to imagine that there will not be very considerable ongoing support for consumption expenditures coming out of the housing equity markets.<END>
<START>A real concern lurking in the background, which we have great difficulty evaluating, is the potential implication of changes in the foreign exchange rate.<END>
I know that everyone has a firm belief regarding exactly which way the dollar is going to go.
All I can tell you is that the history of exchange rate forecasts indicates a greater degree of confidence in forecasting such rates than there has been success.
[Laughter] Exchange rate traders will tell you that they make money only in marketmaking
—in their bid-asked spreads.
I remember that month after month when I was on the J.P. Morgan board I would see a line in their report indicating foreign exchange capital gains.
And I kept asking myself how in the world they managed to do that.
I knew how difficult it was.
Finally, they all “fessed up.” They admitted that they forecasted badly.
They hadn’t a clue.
But they were marketmakers, and their spreads were very effective in producing what was in essence service income for facilitating foreign exchange transactions.
In fact, the vast majority of commercial transactions involve a loss largely because of transaction costs.
Stock prices tend to trend higher over time because of inflation plus the capital gains that June 25-26, 2002123 of 179result from the accumulation of undistributed profits;
but that trend does not exist for the exchange rate, which is trendless by definition.
The general view that everybody knows exactly where the exchange rate is going, I think, is an illusion.
I don’t deny, as Ned Gramlich says, that the dollar is very severely out of sync with the international trade accounts.
But it’s the portfolio accounts that are crucial, and the issue here is whether we really know that the dollar is out of sync.
I don’t think so.
Are we going to forecast that it is going to depreciate?
Yes.
Why are we going to do that?
Because the current account deficit is very large and the recent trend has been a depreciation!
And I can tell you that you will get very strong agreement on that outlook.
If one goes back historically and reviews exchange rate forecasts, one will find that the forecasting of exchange rates is as close to a random process as forecasting any economic variable that I know.
So I’m not of the school here that is bemoaning what may happen to the dollar because I really know that I don’t know.
It’s very hard for me to hold that conviction, but I’m working on it!
[Laughter] I do think that the problems in Latin America, which Bill McDonough mentioned, are a sleeper here.
It’s not only Argentina and Brazil that are in serious shape;
clearly Venezuela is as well.
Their difficulties all involve political problems.
They have nothing to do with economics.
I would add Colombia for the same reason.
These are big countries in South America.
Now the question is whether there will be contagion.
I’m not sure.
In fact, I don’t know what contagion basically means in this particular situation.
Does political contagion spread?
It may, but I’m not sure in which direction.
For example, I don’t know what will happen if people see that Brazil is brought to its knees because of a populist campaign.
Fortunately, I gather
—especially after listening to Bob McTeer
—that Mexico seems to be doing well.
If that is indeed the case, that is good.
But Mexico is still a third world country.
It may belong to the OECD or whatever, but June 25-26, 2002124 of 179they still have political problems.
The latter are not as severe as they used to be, and their severity appears to be diminishing.
Hopefully, their economy won’t get pulled down by developments in the rest of Latin America.
But I gather, Bob, that there are no signs of that at this stage.
Is that right?
MR.
MCTEER.
Right.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
In sum, there are serious problems out there.
We don’t know how to evaluate them.
We’re still waiting for the next terrorist attack, which at some point is inevitable.
We have no idea where it will come or what the consequences will be, but that something will happen somehow has to be factored into our forecasts.
It’s an operational risk, as we like to say in banking.
But we don’t have a clue what it is.
It has to be having some effect on the economy, and indeed I’m sure it does.
In any event, I think we’re going through a very extraordinary period.
Precedents help, but not a great deal.
I think we are fortunately positioned so far as monetary policy is concerned at the moment.
I don’t envisage a need for us to make a significant move either way for the period immediately ahead.
And since we can call an FOMC meeting with twenty minutes of lead time, we really don’t have to commit very far in advance to doing things.
On the issue of trying to alert the financial markets that we may be firming, I don’t think that’s necessary, if for no other reason than that they’ll be well ahead of us in that regard.
If we begin to get the type of data that would incline us to move, it’s already going to be reflected in the federal funds futures markets.
That’s the way these markets work.
They are very sophisticated.
There have been exceptions.
Obviously back in January we tried to persuade the markets, which had us moving up the funds rate very rapidly, to take another look.
That was a rare event.
I don’t think that’s going to be happening this time.
If anything, we may again find June 25-26, 2002125 of 179that the very low level of the nominal funds rate is going to trigger another increase in the forward markets as soon as the economy turns around.
I don’t think there’s going to be very much of a job for us in any effort to convince them that we’re going to move.
And indeed we will move because clearly the pall that’s still hanging over the economy from the stock market decline will dissipate at some point.
At this point it is not over.
At least it doesn’t quite look like it’s over, although the economy displays many of the characteristics of a climax bottom.
The trouble is there are more climax bottoms than there are bottoms!
So it’s a very unusual outlook.
I guess one can say that they all are, but I would say we are fortunate in that we are positioned, plus and minus, for it.
Certainly at this meeting I think we can afford to stay where we’ve been.
<START>And I would say the risks are balanced, and I would recommend that we stay there.<END>
I do not deny that events can change quite quickly.
That includes a likelihood that the economy may weaken further, but there’s also a likelihood that we may be surprised by a lot faster recovery than we are forecasting.
I think we have to be prepared for either case.
My own impression is that it will take a lot to make us move the funds rate still lower.
It won’t take a huge amount to make us move in the other direction.
Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I concur with your recommendation fully.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Ferguson.
MR.
FERGUSON.
I also concur with your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Poole.
MR.
POOLE.
I support the recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Moskow.
MR.
MOSKOW.
I support the recommendation, Mr. Chairman.
June 25-26, 2002126 of 179CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Stern.
MR.
STERN.
I also support the recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Parry.
MR.
PARRY.
I support it as well.
MR.
MCTEER.
I do, too.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Bies.
MS.
BIES.
I support it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I don’t want to inhibit anybody from talking.
We have plenty of time.
President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
I support the recommendation as well.
I must say I was drawn to the way Roger Ferguson described the situation
—as an “uncomfortable balance of risks.” I feel very much that way also.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I think that’s an accurate way to characterize it, clearly.
President Broaddus.
MR.
BROADDUS.
I support your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Santomero.
MR.
SANTOMERO.
I support the recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
I support your recommendation.
I do want to make one comment.
I agree with you that we have a lot of credibility in the market.
But I think a good part of that credibility has been achieved because we have been open with the market.
<START>And what you’re saying today is that we would have a balanced risk statement but we’re not quite sure the risks are as balanced as the statement is going to say.<END>
June 25-26, 2002127 of 179CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Well, I think they are balanced at a 1¾ percent federal funds rate.
MR.
HOENIG.
My concern is, given where we are, that we’re sending the message that the economy is going to grow and yet we’re holding the funds rate down at a very low level.
I think that deserves some explanation.
That’s my point going forward.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I would just say that I think globalization has altered the situation to an extent.
It does not eliminate the fact that we will have to move.
<START>If protectionism really starts to become a problem here, it could turn the globalization issue to our disadvantage.<END>
My point is that we don’t have to be anxiously moving ahead of the curve because I think the markets will be right along with us
—at least they have been to a great extent.
First Vice President Barron.
MR.
BARRON.
I support the recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Jordan.
MR.
JORDAN.
I support the recommendation.
<START>I don’t have any trouble saying that the risks are balanced, but I won’t say that the uncertainties are balanced because that would be an oxymoron.<END>
And in my view we do have to think about that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Good point.
Governor Gramlich.
MR.
GRAMLICH.
I support the recommendation.
I’d like to clarify one point.
I was not bucking for a job on the Fed’s foreign exchange trading desk.
Perhaps I was speaking as a converted sinner, at least in the Jimmy Carter sense.
[Laughter] I actually went through a phase over the intermeeting period where I was questioning our conventional notion of what is equilibrium in the international accounts, and Karen and others have persuaded me that their notion is correct.
By that standard the dollar is, as I said, miles away from equilibrium.
When June 25-26, 2002128 of 179any price is that far from equilibrium, I would have to say that there is more risk to the situation than would otherwise be the case.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I would agree with that.
We’ve heard from everybody?
MR.
BERNARD.
Yes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Okay, would you read the directive?
MR.
BERNARD.
The directive wording is on page 15 of the Bluebook:
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.
To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with maintaining the federal funds rate at an average of around 1¾ percent.” For the press statement:
<START>“Against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and sustainable economic growth and of the information currently available, the Committee believes that the risks continue to be balanced with respect to prospects for both goals in the foreseeable future.” CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.<END>
Call the roll.
MR.
BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan Yes Vice Chairman McDonough Yes Governor Bies YesGovernor Ferguson YesGovernor Gramlich YesPresident Jordan YesPresident McTeer YesGovernor Olson YesPresident Santomero YesPresident Stern YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I’d like to confirm that the date of the next meeting is August 13.
And unless there is further business, we are adjourned.
SEVERAL.
The statement?
June 25-26, 2002129 of 179CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
What’s wrong with me!
MR.
PARRY.
Aha!
Trying to pull a fast one!
[Laughter] VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
While the statement is being distributed, I will make this correction regarding my observation on Lefty Grove’s lifetime ERA.
I was right on his record in his best season.
His lifetime ERA was 3.06.
<START>He won 300 games while losing 141.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
That’s not bad.
Did you see him pitch?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
No. CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I did!
[Laughter] VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
That’s the advantage of the eight years you have on me.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I will grant you I was rather young at the time.
Let me say on the statement that we tried to make minimal changes on the grounds that the less we say that is new, the better off we will be.
MR.
FERGUSON.
It looks good.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Silence means consent.
MR.
FERGUSON.
I agree.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Does anyone have any concerns at all on this?
If not, then we will publish it as is.
Now we can go to lunch.
END OF MEETING
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 95
