Passage number 1.
FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEECONFERENCE CALLJune 5, 1980PRESENT:Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. GramleyMr. MorrisMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. RoosMr. SchultzMr. SolomonMs. TeetersMr. WallichMr. WinnMessrs. Balles and Baughman, Alternate Members of the Federal OpenMarket CommitteeMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMr. Petersen, General CounselMr. Oltman, Deputy General CounselMr. Axilrod, EconomistMessrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, Ettin, Henry, Keir, Kichline,Truman, and Zeisel, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System Open Market AccountMr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations, System Open Market AccountMr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board ofGovernorsMr. Prell, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics,Board of GovernorsMrs. Steele, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Doyle, Gainor, Monhollon, and Smoot, First Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of Chicago, Minneapolis, Richmond, and Philadelphiarespectively-2-Messrs. Corrigan, Fousek, Kantnor, Keran, Parthemos, and T. Davis, Senior VicePresidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York, New York, Atlanta, SanFrancisco, Richmond, and Kansas City respectivelyMr. Meek, Monetary Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkMessrs. Broaddus, Cacy, Cox, Mullineaux, and Ms. Nichols, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Kansas City, Atlanta, Philadelphia,and Chicago respectivelyMr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply lists the individuals present at the Federal Open Market Committee conference call.


Passage number 2.
 Miller, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of MinneapolisTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call ofJune 5, 1980CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't seem to have all the Banks on theline but why don't we proceed. I think we can have a rather briefmeeting. I wanted to touch base before I go off to China and also wecertainly are running into our checkpoint constraint [for the federalfunds rate] if not the other constraint. Perhaps Mr. Axilrod can justfill you in on the situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing an update on the situation and scheduling a brief meeting.


Passage number 3.
MR. AXILROD. Well, Mr. Chairman, the latest deposit numberswe have that we'll be publishing tomorrow--and of course these canrevise even in the next 24 hours--indicate a drop in M1 for the weekof May 28th. Whereas on the basis of preliminary numbers we had beenexpecting an increase of $1.2 billion, the drop in M1 in the week ofthe 28th could be on the order of $600 million. And the early data wehave for June suggest that M1 is at a lower level than we had beenexpecting when we built the path. Thus we have a situation where atthe moment our best estimate for M-1A growth in May is around 3percent and for M-1B growth it's closer to 1 percent. M2 is stillholding up rather strongly because of the great strength in moneymarket funds and we have its growth in May at 8-1/2 percent. Ourestimates for June are all for more rapid growth rates based on ourcontinued expecations of a rebound. But the two months together wouldbe at a slower growth rate than the minimum growth that the Committeewas contemplating at the last Committee meeting.That means in effect, without going into the details of thepath, that in the current week and in the next week--taking thoseweeks as the remaining part of an initial four-week period--borrowingwould probably drop to zero. While it should need to be around zero,that is virtually unattainable because someone is bound to borrow fromus. And in adhering to the original nonborrowed path, excess reserveswould probably move up above the $250 million minimum to between $250and $275 million. So under those conditions we would be confrontedprobably with a drop in the funds rate from recent trading levels.The only other point I might add, Mr. Chairman, is that the roughestimates we have for May for bank credit show continued substantialweakness in that measure, with probably a further negative in totalloans and investments. So in those categories, total loans andbusiness loans, the outstanding amounts also would be dropping.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply presenting data and estimates.


Passage number 4.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we have a general picture[of weakness]. Contrary to the weekly estimates we seem to get earlyevery week continued weakness in the M1 categories and in bank credit.M2 and M3 look more like they're returning to target but largelybecause of money market funds rather than any really rapid growth ineither deposits at the thrift institutions or the time deposits ofbanks. Although they should be improving they have not improveddramatically in the latest figures we have, despite the [market] ratedeclines. Everything that Steve says points to a drop in the federalfunds rate, but in fact the federal funds rate so far has been more orless comfortably, in terms of our checkpoint, above the 9-1/2 percentlevel. But it surely looks as if it will go through that. I don'tknow whether at this stage our account managers in New York haveanything to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their observations and analysis of the current state of the M1 categories, bank credit, M2 and M3, and the federal funds rate. They mention different data points but do not express any disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 5.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I didn't hear your question, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they did not hear the question.


Passage number 6.
6/5/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What do you have to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is a simple request for someone to share their thoughts or opinions. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this statement.


Passage number 7.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I agree with Steve that on the path heoutlined we are likely to be encountering that lower bound of thefunds rate. I think it has been somewhat fortuitous that in thelatest week the average rate moved up to about 10-3/4 percent from the9-1/2 percent of the previous week. In meeting this week's reserveneed I think we are likely to find that 9-1/2 percent checkpointconstraining. And it could inhibit our meeting the Committee'sreserve path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Sternlight is expressing agreement and providing further support for Steve's outlined path.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 8.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What does our foreign manager have to say.Our foreign manager isn't there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.
Explanation: There is a disagreement or contention in the passage because the first sentence asks for the opinion or statement of the foreign manager, while the second sentence states that the foreign manager is not present. This contradiction creates a disagreement.


Passage number 9.
MR. PARDEE. I'm here. There was some pressure on the dollarjust after the last FOMC meeting and we did have to intervene, and inbigger amounts than we had before. But the market has quieted downsince then, given some good coordination between us and the Bundesbankin our intervention. And the firming of the domestic rates andEuromarket rates particularly helped. The market is currently quietbut very, very uneasy. I think we've been lucky that there's a lot ofselling of U.S. dollars out there but money is going into the Swiss[franc], the Japanese yen, and the pound sterling rather than into themark. So people have not been interpreting it as a general weaknessfor the dollar. However, we do have an ominous rise in the goldprice--it touched $600 this afternoon in the [Comex] and the silvermarket prices are still creeping up. Whether or not we're gettingmore speculative influence creeping in the markets, I don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and observations about the market without expressing any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 10.
MS. TEETERS. What is the reason, do you think, that the goldprice is going up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply asking for the reason behind the increase in the gold price.


Passage number 11.
MR. PARDEE. I haven't found a satisfactory answer fromanybody. It broke out of a trading range. People are worried aboutthe oil price that will come out of the OPEC meeting. There are anumber of things in the Middle East that are bothering people as wellas these general fears of inflation that still haven't been killedcompletely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses a series of concerns and worries people have about the oil price, the OPEC meeting, and issues in the Middle East.


Passage number 12.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When is the OPEC meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply asks a question about the timing of the OPEC meeting and does not express any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 13.
MR. TRUMAN. Monday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions the name "Mr. Truman" and the day "Monday." There is no clear contention or disagreement being expressed in these two words.


Passage number 14.
MR. PARDEE. It's supposed to be next week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact or a statement made by Mr. Pardee.


Passage number 15.
 I don't know ifthe date--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Monday, Mr. Truman says. Well, I suspectwe are in a difficult area in the exchange markets, [with a]psychological reflection of the same factors in the gold market andelsewhere. Ordinarily I would think that we wouldn't necessarily needthis consultation today, but I'm not going to be here [for a period oftime] and all the present indications point in the direction ofslippage, at least in the M1 targets, from where we were. Bank creditis weak, as Steve said, and all the paths certainly look like theywill threaten and conflict with a 9-1/2 percent funds rate, ourcheckpoint. This doesn't take any vote, but I would suggest that wetake this as that checkpoint and pass [through] it if the marketdevelops that way.-3-6/5/80I would not propose at this stage that we anticipate the needfor dealing with the 8-1/2 percent [lower bound on the funds raterange]. We've been a fair amount away from that. I would visualizethat that could well become a constraint before too long and it willhave to be dealt with one way or another when it does. But I see noreason to prejudge that this afternoon. I would let it happen and myguess would be, unless we get a radical change here, that it's goingto happen before very long. But we can bump up against it for a fewdays anyway. I don't interpret these contraints as saying we have toavoid the rate falling below [the lower limit] on a particular day.The general understanding has been a weekly average kind of[constraint] and it has to be judged in part ex post rather thanconsidering the limits as an absolute constraint on day-to-dayoperations. So that would be my proposal. If anybody would like tocomment, I think it is timely to do so at the moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their analysis and suggestion in a straightforward manner.


Passage number 16.
MR. BALLES. I would certainly concur, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing agreement with the chairman's statement.


Passage number 17.
MR. MORRIS. I would, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statement or indication of disagreement or contention. It is simply a response expressing agreement with an unspecified subject previously discussed.


Passage number 18.
MR. WINN. I join the group.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they are joining a group, indicating agreement or unity with the group.


Passage number 19.
MR. ROOS. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no direct mention of contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is simply a response stating "Yes" to an unknown question.


Passage number 20.
MR. MONHOLLAN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: There is contention or disagreement in the passage indicated by the use of the word "Yes." However, without the rest of the passage, it is not possible to determine the specific context or subject of the disagreement.


Passage number 21.
MR. DOYLE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any conflicting viewpoints or disagreement between individuals.


Passage number 22.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: 
Without actually having the passage to analyze, it is impossible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in it. Therefore, the answer cannot be provided.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 23.
MR. GAINOR. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the use of the word "Yes," which often indicates disagreement or contradiction in a conversation.


Passage number 24.
MR. BAUGHMAN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation:

There is contention or disagreement in the passage because Mr. Baughman responds with the word "Yes", indicating that there is indeed contention or disagreement.


Passage number 25.
MR. SMOOT. Philadelphia agrees.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not include any statement of disagreement or contention. It simply states that Philadelphia agrees with something without providing additional information or context.


Passage number 26.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Has everybody outside of Washington beenheard from. I have a silent, surly looking group in Washington.Strike that adjective. It's not true. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is questioning whether everyone outside of Washington has been heard from, then corrects themselves by stating that their previous adjective describing a group in Washington is not true. Governor Wallich's statement is not included in the given passage.


Passage number 27.
MR. WALLICH. I would like to postpone the time when we dropbelow our checkpoints as long as possible. I know that MiltonFriedman is tremendously excited about our failing to hit our targets,but I just can't follow him.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that there is a difference of opinion between Mr. Wallich and Milton Friedman, but it does not indicate any contention or disagreement beyond that. Mr. Wallich simply states that he does not agree with Friedman's views.


Passage number 28.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What does postponing as long as possiblemean practically. We really haven't hit it yet, Henry. You're sayingdo what we would normally do except that if we run into the 9-1/2percent, let it stick there for a few days anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing the practical implications of postponing and there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 29.
MR. WALLICH. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Wallich responded with "Yes," without any additional context.


Passage number 30.
MR. PARTEE. I don't agree with that. I think we ought tolet [the rate] fall. I didn't care much for the checkpoint in thefirst place, as you know. In fact I didn't care for the 8-1/2 percentlower limit either. So it's obvious that I feel we ought to continueto operate in a way to find a market level at which some borrowingoccurs again and at which there is some expansion in the narrow-4-6/5/80monetary aggregates. I'm not at all certain that we've seen anythinglike the total configuration of the decline in business that's inprocess. I haven't heard anything as yet of any stopping of thedecline, of any comeback in consumer spending, or of anything otherthan further cutbacks in production. Tomorrow morning we get anunemployment figure and employment figures in the BLS series. It willbe very interesting to see what they show. But I wouldn't expectimprovement in either employment or in the unemployment rate comparedwith last month's number. So I think we still ought to try to findthat level, which means going right through 9-1/2 percent if providingthe reserves would take us through 9-1/2 percent. I agree with Paulvery much that there's no need to make any decision on the 8-1/2percent at this point. We'll have to wait and see whether it's testedor not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and thoughts without directly contradicting or disagreeing with anyone.


Passage number 31.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. While I think of it, if anybody out thereat the other end of the telephone has any particular insight they wantto offer as to what's going on in the economy generally or whether yousee any revival of home building or anything of that sort, you may aswell take this opportunity to report it. I don't want to interruptwhat comments the Board members may want to make on this particularproposal at the moment, so let me ask who else wants to comment here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is offering an opportunity for others to provide their insights and comments on the economy and home building without interrupting the comments of the Board members.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 32.
MS. TEETERS. I basically only have a question for Steve. Iscommercial paper [issuance] still rising. Are the corporationsturning to that market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is a question raised by Ms. Teeters regarding whether commercial paper issuance is still increasing and if corporations are increasingly using that market.


Passage number 33.
MR. AXILROD. I don't have up-to-date figures with me, but ithas been rising. And of course corporate bond issues have beenextremely strong. So it [accounts for] a large part, but I don'tthink all, of the weakness in the business loan component of bankcredit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion based on the information they have.


Passage number 34.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm informed that it has gone up $3billion since the 2nd of April.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement simply presents information about the increase of $3 billion since April 2nd without expressing any disagreement or contention. It is a neutral statement of fact.


Passage number 35.
MR. AXILROD. Well, a large part, but not all of the weaknessin business loans probably represents refunding of short-term debtinto long-term debt and also continued use of the paper market wherethe rates are considerably lower than the prime rate. But I would sayan additional part of it represents the underlying weakness in theeconomy, the weakness in credit demands. And that's particularlyevident in the real estate area and probably the consumer area as wellas the business area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an explanation for the weakness in business loans, stating that it is a result of refunding short-term debt into long-term debt and the use of the paper market. They also mention that underlying weaknesses in the economy, credit demands, and specific sectors like real estate and consumer areas could be contributing factors.


Passage number 36.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What happened to this loan demand that wassupposed to result from a decline in consumer spending leading to abuild-up in inventories which would lead to a temporary increase inborrowing. In other words, what is happening to inventories. Mr.Axilrod is looking at Mr. Kichline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is posing a question and seeking an explanation for what happened to loan demand and inventories. It mentions individuals Mr. Axilrod and Mr. Kichline without indicating any disagreement or contentious exchange between them.


Passage number 37.
MR. AXILROD. Desperately.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Axilrod is desperate about something, without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments present.


Passage number 38.
MR. KICHLINE. Inventories seem to be rising, on the basis ofthe manufacturing data we have for April. I would only say that it'svery difficult to track [inventory] developments in one month withbusiness borrowing at banks in a given month. We do know thatbusiness borrowing in the first quarter substantially exceeded6/5/80external financing demands, so presumably some of the financing of thecorporate sector is being done internally with [the proceeds from] theheavy borrowing they had undertaken in the first quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement providing information and observations about inventories and business borrowing.


Passage number 39.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They're living off their fat in part, butyou said you think inventories are going up. Can you quantify theorder of [magnitude] of the rise compared to what we were getting. Isit very much faster or about the same rate of speed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is just seeking clarification and more specific information.


Passage number 40.
MR. KICHLINE. It's a bit faster [than earlier] in book valueterms. The latest data we have is just for manufacturing in the monthof April. And manufacturers' book value inventories rose at about a$49 billion annual rate compared to a $40 to $41 billion average inthe first quarter. I might note that production dropped substantiallyin the month of April. And the limited but significant information wenow have available for the month of May suggests at least as large adecline, if not larger, in industrial output in that month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating information and there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 41.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am concluding, rightly or wrongly fromwhat you say--concluding is too strong a word--that there may be someinventory buildup but it's not very great because production isdeclining very rapidly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It presents an analysis or interpretation of a situation based on the information provided. The author acknowledges that their conclusion may not be entirely accurate, but there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 42.
MR. KICHLINE. That's correct. We have a faster pace ofaccumulation in our forecast but not a substantial pace and we wouldnot expect--given all the other borrowing, the first quarterperformance, etcetera--to see from the inventory side a substantialincrease in demand for business loans at banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their forecast and expectations without contradicting or challenging any other statements or opinions.


Passage number 43.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's return to the specificsubject. What other comments do we have. Any other comments on theWashington end.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply asking for additional comments on the specific subject. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 44.
MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, I would associate myself withHenry Wallich. I think we are looking at a very steeply decliningeconomy. I don't think, however, that a further drop in interestrates is likely to be very helpful in turning the economy around. Ithink what we need is mainly a consolidation of declines in interestrates on things like mortgages and the prime rate to catch up withwhat has already happened to short-term market interest rates. And Iwould prefer not to be overly impressed with this drop in M1. Iremember that Steve in his presentation at the FOMC meeting indicatedthat some of that drop might well be a consequence of another downwardshift in the money demand function. So I would rather hang on to the9-1/2 percent consultation level for as long as we can.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Gramley agrees with Henry Wallich and expresses his own opinions and preferences, but there is no argument or disagreement between them.


Passage number 45.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's get a little more precise aboutwhere the aggregates are. I'm not talking so much about M1, which Iknow is way below the target, but it is correct that M2 and M3 havecome up into the target range in our present June estimates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indications of contention or disagreement. It is merely providing information about the current estimates of the aggregates.


Passage number 46.
MR. AXILROD. Yes. I don't have the precise number, but withthe June estimates for M2 the December-to-June growth rate would beabove 6-3/4 percent, probably on the order of 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 47.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's almost in the middle of the range,or a little below the middle of the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply providing a description of the given position within a range.


Passage number 48.
-6-6/5/80MR. AXILROD. It's coming up into the target [range]. On M3we would have a December-to-June growth rate, if our projections areright, on the order of probably between 7 and 7-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a projection or estimate for a growth rate.


Passage number 49.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The M3 growth is less than M2. No, I'msorry, it's [a little] higher. Now, both of those figures allow forquite a big increase in June as I recall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply corrects themselves and provides additional information.


Passage number 50.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, though not so much for M3. Well, it is9.3 percent against our current estimate for May of 8.7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact or providing information about a specific topic.


Passage number 51.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And M2 was over 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the statement "And M2 was over 10 percent." It is a straightforward statement of fact without any conflicting viewpoints or contradictory information.


Passage number 52.
MR. AXILROD. For M2 we had an 11-1/2 percent estimate forJune, tracking the very high estimates for M-1A and M-1B also.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating a fact or information about the estimates for M2, M-1A, and M-1B in June.


Passage number 53.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What other comment do we have here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage based solely on the given information. The provided question is incomplete and does not provide any context or text to analyze.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 54.
MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, I would think that whether we gothrough the 9-1/2 percent depends on what happens over the next twoweeks. If we continue to get very low rates of growth and we don'trealize these June money targets, then it seems to me we should slidethrough the 9-1/2 percent and down to the 8-1/2 percent. On the otherhand, these numbers have been so unbelievably volatile between thefirst estimate and the second estimate that I think this is one ofthose cases where we need to feel our way along. If the numberscontinue to come in weak, then we go through the 9-1/2; if the levelsprojected for June begin to be realized, then we more or less keep[the funds rate] in the 9-1/2 percent area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting two different possibilities - sliding down to 8-1/2 percent or keeping the funds rate in the 9-1/2 percent area - depending on the future economic indicators. This suggests that there is not a consensus on the appropriate course of action.


Passage number 55.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are you basically joining Henry and Lyle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: One cannot determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the given passage without more context. The provided sentence does not contain enough information to establish a clear argument or conflicting viewpoints between Henry and Lyle.


Passage number 56.
MS. TEETERS. Well, I think I'm halfway in between.Depending on how things develop, we go through the 9-1/2 percent. Andif it looks as if the economy is turning down as rapidly as we thinkit is, we'll reach [the 8-1/2 percent lower limit].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their position and indicating that they may adjust their stance depending on how the economy develops.


Passage number 57.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In any case, we're not saying in ourinitial comments that we aim below 9-1/2 percent; we're just assumingthat the path will bring us there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It states that they have not mentioned a specific percentage and are instead assuming that the path will lead them to a percentage below 9-1/2 percent.


Passage number 58.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I think both Mr. Sternlight and Ihave the feeling that if an effort is made to provide the reserves tohit this literal nonborrowed reserve number, the funds rate will droprather soon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Both Mr. Axilrod and Mr. Sternlight seem to agree that if an effort is made to provide the reserves to hit a specific nonborrowed reserve number, the funds rate will drop quickly.


Passage number 59.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I think we want to be clear on thatpoint though. We're just dealing with a contingency here which Mr.Axilrod and Mr. Sternlight think is a highly probable contingency.But nobody is arguing--at least the question was not posed this way--that we deliberately aim below 9-1/2 percent. It was just a matter ofa fallout from the other operating procedures. The opposing view isthat if that contingency arises, the checkpoint is held for a few daysor longer. Governor Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is clarifying a point and explaining different perspectives, but there is no actual disagreement or argument presented.


Passage number 60.
MR. RICE. Well, my views were well expressed by GovernorPartee. I don't believe that we should become excessively alarmed ifthe funds rate, in the normal course of events, falls below the 9-1/26/5/80percent level. But I also agree with others that we don't need todecide anything today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that their views align with Governor Partee's and agrees with others that there is no immediate need for a decision.


Passage number 61.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did you say something, Governor Schultz.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 62.
MR. SCHULTZ. No, and I don't have anything special to say.I think we're talking about contingencies and we'll move down through9-1/2 percent if we have to. If things are very weak and we begin tobump against the 8-1/2 percent, we'll look at it on a weekly basis.But we will not push it down; we'll just respond and do what we haveto do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their position on the topic and their plan of action.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 63.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm just wondering where this leaves us.We do have some voices of caution and I'm wondering how best toincorporate perhaps a little more caution than was implied in what Imay have stated initially.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that there is some disagreement or contention. The speaker acknowledges that there are voices of caution that need to be taken into consideration, implying that there may be differing opinions or concerns.


Passage number 64.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The market has seen the Desk enterearlier at 8-3/4 percent. It has seen the Desk enter at 9 percent. Ithink there's a general impression in the market that that's the areaof our floor but it's an impression of a fairly wide range in terms ofthe floor. It seems to me, even though I've been rather strong in myarguments against precipitous declines, that it's perfectlycomfortable to let the floor stay in an area that would be somewherein the present range. I think the 9-1/2 percent would be interpreted--if the market were to see us entering at that rate in a consistentway--as being somewhat higher actually than it believes [the floor] tobe. So I don't have that much difficulty living with your earlierproposal that if necessary we come down to the 8-1/2 percent level.But if there is more support for a more cautious approach among othermembers of the Committee than there has been in the past, then wemight suggest to the Desk that it continue basically operating in thisrange around 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their own thoughts and impressions about the market and the floor rate, but there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 65.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information about contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the name "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" without any context or additional details.


Passage number 66.
 Well, I think the substance of thisproblem--MR. ROOS. I feel strongly that our greatest danger currentlywould lie in draining reserves at a time when the aggregates arealready on the weak side. If anything were done to drain reservesfurther, I think we would merely be accentuating the recessionaryinfluences that exist. I thought we agreed a few minutes ago--and Ithought we agreed in our last call--that we were going to set 8-1/2percent as the bottom limit. To equivocate and not to let the fedfunds rate fall through the 9-1/2 or 9 percent level, if it wouldnormally do that, I think merely creates additional problems for us.Fundamentally, if we're going to be hanged, I think we're going to behanged for letting the aggregates weaken as a result of our efforts todrain reserves when we started seeing interest rates and the federalfunds rate dropping. I think that's the fundamental issue. And Ifeel very strongly that we should stay with our 8-1/2 percent flooruntil rates get there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses their opinion and emphasizes their belief in maintaining the 8-1/2 percent floor until rates reach that level. There is no direct contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 67.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Larry, are you aware of the fact thatwe are hitting our reserve path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Larry is being informed about a fact, but there is no indication of any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 68.
MR. ROOS. I'm not really clear on the reserve path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MR. ROOS is expressing uncertainty or confusion, but there is no opposing viewpoint or conflict present.


Passage number 69.
 I don'thave the--6/5/80VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We have been hitting our reservepath. But the economy is somewhat weaker and the monetary aggregatesare not performing in relation to that reserve path as we had assumed[they would] at the last Open Market Committee meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 70.
MR. ROOS. Well, maybe the reserve path is the wrong reservepath. From all I hear the aggregates are undershooting our targets.The problem is even a little perverse as we see it now. And if we endup not achieving our objectives in terms of the aggregates, I think avery good case can be made that the Federal Reserve has exacerbatedthe present recession, as it has many times in the past, by trying toinhibit the normal movement of the fed funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests that the Federal Reserve's actions have exacerbated the recession, while implying that the normal movement of the fed funds rate should not be inhibited. This contradicts the actions and approach of the Federal Reserve.


Passage number 71.
MR. MONHOLLAN. We would like to echo the sentiments of Mr.Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they agree with the sentiments expressed by Mr. Roos.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 72.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the substantive problem we havehere is that nobody much cares about what happens to interest rates ifthat didn't affect some other things--like the exchange markets orinflationary sentiment--and cast doubts about our intentions and allthe rest. If I were sitting here alone--it's a little more difficultwhen you're in a committee--I would say this: We've got an 8-1/2percent floor and if we begin approaching that in the midst of greatconcern in the exchange market and the declining dollar, I'd be alittle more cautious under those conditions than if we approached itwithout that. Now, I don't know how to translate that [into preciseoperating instructions]. We don't have to write a directive here, butI'm perfectly willing to be left with a basic decision that 9-1/2percent is not the floor we have in the sense of a floor. We do havean 8-1/2 percent floor in the interpretation that we gave earlier.There is a certain cautious note that a number of people have struckwhich should be reinforced tactically depending upon what was going on[elsewhere], let's say in the exchange market. In other words, if wecan get by with it, I'd go right to 8-1/2 percent--we're talkingpurely about contingencies here--if that's where the path brought us.I might be a little more cautious in precisely when I time myoperations if it were a bad day in the exchange markets or whatever.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they would be more cautious about approaching the 8-1/2 percent floor if there is concern in the exchange market and a declining dollar, while others have struck a cautious note. This indicates a difference in opinions or perspectives on how to approach the situation.


Passage number 73.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think that's a fair statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given statement. It expresses agreement and fairness.


Passage number 74.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe we can leave it that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The phrase "Maybe we can leave it that way" suggests that there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It implies that the matter being discussed can be accepted or agreed upon as it is.


Passage number 75.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think it's a good idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses their personal opinion and states that they believe the idea is good. There is no conflicting viewpoint or opposing argument mentioned.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 76.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there's some kind of understanding,which leaves some discretion with the Manager, I think that's broadlyconsistent with what I said initially. His day-to-day tactics may beaffected. We give him some room for [judgment in] day-to-day tacticsif disturbances are arising or imminent elsewhere that [ouroperations] could perhaps calm down. And that could benefit us in thelong run, given that there is some concern on the Committee about [thedeline in rates] being too precipitous--in going below 9-1/2 percentanyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests a disagreement or contention because it mentions that there is concern on the Committee about the decline in rates being too precipitous. This suggests that there is disagreement among the committee members about the appropriate rate decrease.


Passage number 77.
MR. MORRIS. Paul, were you thinking of just a generalslippage as a constraint or are you thinking of a really disorderlymassive move in the markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question asking for clarification or elaboration on a previous statement or idea.


Passage number 78.
6/5/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I'm not thinking of massive disorder.If we really had massive disorder, we would have to reconsider this.I'm thinking of a pronounced movement that seems to be requiring a lotof intervention--that we have an atmosphere in the market that seemsto be cumulating or threatens to cumulate. On the other hand, if thedollar is strong, who cares if the rate goes to 8-1/2 percent. I'mjust talking about this as a day-to-day tactical [consideration] butnot a floor--specifically removing the floor at 9-1/2 percent to theextent that there is a floor there now. But if we had a day, assometimes happens early in the week--if it happened on a Wednesday itwouldn't be bothersome--when the federal funds rate seemed to besettling at 8-1/2 percent or below, and as I said earlier we'retalking about weekly averages, I think maybe I'd step in on that dayif the exchange market happened to be weak on that same day. I woulddo that so as not to give rise to an impression in the market that thefederal funds rate could go to a wholly new level on that particularday. That requires a little fine-tuning if the exchange markets arein fact under pressure. If they are not under pressure, it doesn'trequire any. I see some nodding of heads in Washington and I thinkthis is broadly consistent, but somewhat more cautious in at least onecontingency, than the flat proposal I made earlier. If that issatisfactory, I think we can stop for today. We may need anotherconsultation in a week or so depending upon how this develops. We mayeven need a decision. We won't need a decision unless we're at 8-1/2percent, but if we are that question will arise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker seems to be discussing different scenarios and potential actions without expressing any disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 79.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We here in New York feel that thatkind of strategy makes a lot of sense. If you have nodding heads onthe Washington side, I think we ought to go with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states their own opinion and suggests that if there is agreement from the people in Washington, they should proceed with the mentioned strategy.


Passage number 80.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if I don't hear widespread objectionwe will leave it at that. We have consulted.Before you get away, does anybody have anything useful to sayon the business scene or on anything they're picking up in theirDistricts. I'm not interested in doing a mechanical go-around, but ifanybody has some insight that they would like to offer, please do so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a request for input or insights from the participants, indicating a desire for additional information or perspectives.


Passage number 81.
MR. WINN. Paul, the steel industry is very much in a stateof panic. They are really hitting an air pocket in their business.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is making a statement about the steel industry being in a state of panic, which is presented as a fact rather than a point of contention.


Passage number 82.
MR. BAUGHMAN. I don't know how useful the observations fromdown here are, but I do hear reports that houses are moving again andI think the references are primarily about used houses. Ourdepartment store sales figures are showing increases over a year ago,after running several weeks with no change from a year ago. We havequestioned the banks on loan demands, and they continue very weak.SPEAKER(.). Texas is not useful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Mr. Baughman and the speaker are expressing their own opinions and observations without directly contradicting each other.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 83.
MR. BALLES. On the West Coast the housing industry is stillvery much in the doldrums. Some possible revival remains a hope andan expectation rather than a fact because mortgage rates haven't comedown enough yet to really do the job.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: There is contention or disagreement in the passage because it presents the idea that there is a division of opinions on the state of the housing industry on the West Coast. While some may hold the hope and expectation of a possible revival, others might disagree and argue that the mortgage rates have not decreased enough to have a significant impact.


Passage number 84.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where would you say mortgage rates are nowin California.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is simply asking for information about mortgage rates in California. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 85.
-10-6/5/80MR. BALLES. Probably at the 12 percent level, or 12-1/4.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information about a certain percentage level.


Passage number 86.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Nobody wants to borrow at 12 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the statement. It represents a general consensus that nobody wants to borrow at an interest rate of 12 percent, as it is considered high and unfavorable for borrowers.


Passage number 87.
MR. BALLES. Not very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Balles simply makes a statement indicating that there is not much of something.


Passage number 88.
MR. WINN. Not when your neighbors are out of work, Paul.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement made by Mr. Winn does not indicate any conflicting views or opposition.


Passage number 89.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's in Ohio, not in California, Willis.Anything else.SPEAKER(.). The discount rate is still pretty badly out ofline with the federal funds rate. Our Bank for one has sent in arecommendation on that today and it's for moving down another point.I think we're going to have to come to grips with that problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 90.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that will be a continuing problem, Isuspect. If we do a point [change], it will still be out of line, sowe've got lots of room. If there are no other comments, I thank you.SPEAKER(.). Have a good trip, Paul.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any signs of contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of statements expressing potential problems and gratitude towards someone named Paul.


