Passage number 1.
 Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on  November 3–4, 2009  November 3, 2009—Afternoon Session  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good afternoon, everybody.  As has been our custom recently, this is a joint Board–FOMC meeting.  Can I get a motion to close the meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply stating the format of the meeting and requesting a motion to close it.


Passage number 2.
 MR. KOHN. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "So moved" indicates agreement or approval with the previous statement or motion.


Passage number 3.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. We would like to welcome to the table President Kocherlakota from Minneapolis.  Narayana is a very distinguished scholar.  Everyone who is familiar with modern economics would know his name and his work.  He is new to the FOMC but not to the Fed. You have been a staff member and a research consultant in Minneapolis for more than a decade.  So we look very much forward to working with you and getting the benefit of your insight. Welcome.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a welcoming message and does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 4.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thanks a lot.  I am honored to be here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses gratitude and states that they are honored to be present.


Passage number 5.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The given phrase "CHAIRMAN BERNANKE" does not contain any information or context that can indicate contention or disagreement. It simply states the position or title of someone.


Passage number 6.
 The first item on our agenda is financial developments, open market operations, and [laughter]— MR. PLOSSER. Actually, Ben, this is for you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 7.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Let the record show that President Plosser is wearing a Phillies hat. [Laughter] We don’t take sides here in Washington.  All right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a fact, followed by a humorous remark about not taking sides.


Passage number 8.
 MR. PLOSSER. I thought we have all Red Sox fans and all Mets fans with us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their assumption that everyone in the group is either a Red Sox fan or a Mets fan without any disagreement or contention being expressed.


Passage number 9.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Let me turn to Brian Sack for a report on financial developments, open market operations, and System credit facilities.  Brian.1 The materials used by Mr. Sack are appended to this transcript (appendix 1).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward introduction to Brian Sack's report on financial developments and credit facilities.


Passage number 10.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Questions for Brian.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude and a request for some questions for Brian.


Passage number 11.
 MR. FISHER. Brian, there has been an enormous amount of chatter and some articles written about the carry trade, and I wonder from a Desk perspective, being more market-oriented, and less from a theoretical standpoint, if you could give us your views on the arguments put forward by Roubini and others.  Is this a problem, or is it a non-issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for the opinion of Brian regarding the arguments put forward by Roubini and others.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 12.
 MR. SACK. There is a lot of talk about the carry trade, and I think when we talk about the carry trade we need to be careful to distinguish whether we are talking about a fundamental story that we would expect to take place or whether we are talking about something beyond that. The fundamental story would be that low financing rates in the United States should make it attractive to borrow and to go long other assets. And you should evaluate the return on those other assets relative to the return that investors could get on a risk-free asset, which is quite low.  To the degree that the carry trade reflects that activity, I think it is perfectly reasonable and desirable. The question is, “Do we see so much activity that it goes beyond that, where the low financing rates are causing asset prices to go up too far because there is too much leverage and too much risk-taking.”That is what I tried to focus on, in the context of U.S. assets, in exhibit 1.  I think the only way to answer that question is to turn to the models and try to make an assessment of fair value.  And for U.S. assets, we do not see a problem at this point because, as I said, we think they are fairly priced.  I do think there are greater concerns regarding assets outside the United States, in particular emerging market assets.  We don’t look at those in detail, so I don’t have as detailed an answer, but we have certainly heard quite a bit of concern being expressed about the prices on those assets being pushed up too far.  So I think it is a concern, or it is a risk to be aware of, but I would think at this point it is directed toward emerging-market asset prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Sack, acknowledges that there is a fundamental story behind the carry trade, which he considers reasonable and desirable. However, he expresses concern about whether there is too much leverage and risk-taking resulting from low financing rates, causing asset prices to go up too far. He specifically mentions that he is more concerned about assets outside the United States, particularly emerging-market assets. This suggests that there is disagreement or differing opinions on the extent of the risk associated with the carry trade and its impact on asset prices.


Passage number 13.
   MR. FISHER. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, is expressing gratitude.


Passage number 14.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any other questions.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that there are no further questions and addresses President Bullard.


Passage number 15.
 MR. BULLARD. Yes. I’m looking at exhibits 17 and 18, which show the effects of large-scale asset purchases. And we have some pretty substantial effects here, which I can see and I agree with. But there are no measures of uncertainty around these.  So I wonder if you could comment on how much confidence you would put in these estimates because they are probably very difficult to estimate.  Now, the one on the left maybe looks as though some statistical significance is there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is simply asking for additional information and expressing his curiosity about the uncertainty and reliability of the estimates.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 16.
 MR. SACK. The short answer is that there is a lot of uncertainty about calibrating the effects.  Absolutely.  And the uncertainty in these two panels comes from different sources in some way.  In the one on the left, like any model of fair value, the results have only a certain degree of statistical significance and can depend on the type of model that you write down.  This model actually includes a supply variable directly, which it does find is statistically significant, and then we can use that to back out, in the context of the model, what it thinks the effects of the  LSAPs would be.  The point estimate is something around 50 basis points, but it has a confidence interval that certainly spans easily from 20 to 80 or so. The uncertainty on the right is a bit different, but equally important.  The advantage of the event-study exercise is to zoom in on the LSAP events, so that we can be sure we are isolating the effect of the LSAPs. Of course, the downside of event-studies is that they give you no perspective on whether those effects persist and what the dynamics are thereafter.  If you have an efficient-markets hypothesis, you might expect them to persist.  I mean, it would be odd, in the context of efficient markets, if they predictably reversed in a timely way.  We have some confidence that some of this effect persists, but I guess I wouldn’t want to hang my hat on saying absolutely that this entire effect persists.  So that is the source of uncertainty there.  I take this evidence together to suggest that the LSAPs have worked.  There has been some effect, but it is very difficult to quantify, no doubt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests some disagreement or uncertainty regarding the effects and persistence of the LSAPs (Large Scale Asset Purchases). Different models and methodologies are discussed, and the speaker acknowledges the difficulty in quantifying the effects.


Passage number 17.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Governor Tarullo and does not provide any information about any contention or disagreement involving him.


Passage number 18.
 MR. TARULLO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, in panel 19, you have plotted a possible path for the tapering down of the MBS purchases.  If that is the path that you indeed follow, do you have some, even intuitive, sense of a point along that path at which you would begin to feel relatively more confident that you weren’t going to see a significant effect on the markets from the tapering off of our purchases.  I know that is tied up with the degree to which this is a flow effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking a question and seeking clarification.


Passage number 19.
 MR. SACK. I think it is useful, regarding that question, just to relate what we hear from the market participants who come through our door and talk to us about this.  Almost everyone thinks that MBS spreads are too low and are too low because of Fed purchases.  There is disagreement about the size of those effects, but if you ask me to give you a range, I would say that the range we hear is 25 to 100 basis points.  My own view is that it is going to be much closer to the lower end of that, but certainly that is hard to pin down. The logical next question is to ask, “Well, if you think that, why aren’t you shorting this and trying to take advantage of that.”  And the answer almost as uniformly is, “We are going to, but we are just afraid to get into it yet, while the Fed is still so sizable.” So it is a very strange situation from a market perspective, especially from those of us who think about the efficiency of markets.  Everyone is kind of waiting for this adjustment to take place and kind of waiting to jump in to try to take advantage of it.  There is just a sense that it is too early. My guess is that we are not talking about waiting until the end.  There will be some arbitrage that, if there is a flow effect, is going to bring it forward.  It would be a wild guess, but I would say that it wouldn’t be surprising to see something start to develop within the next two months, as we get closer to that exit.  I think when people assess their risks, we haven’t heard anyone come and express the view that mortgages are cheap and that the spread is likely to go down. So that kind of leaves you with this one-sided opportunity that I think can’t persist for that long.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 20.
 MR. TARULLO. Okay. Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 21.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions. Okay.  Seeing none, we have three staff presentations on our liquidity programs and reserve-management tools, and I will turn to Bill Nelson to lead off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that there are no other questions and then the speaker transitions to a different topic.


Passage number 22.
 MR. NELSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will briefly update the Committee  on the TAF, primary credit, and the TALF.  The staff is not seeking views at this  time, but we would be happy to answer the Committee’s questions.  Credit extended under the term auction facility peaked near $500 billion in March  and has declined steadily since. Over the intermeeting period, TAF credit declined  further to just under $140 billion.  Of that amount, about three-quarters is extended to  branches and agencies of foreign banks.  On September 24, the Board announced a phase-down schedule for TAF amounts through January, and it also indicated that auctions of credit with maturities longer than 28 days would be phased out.  In yesterday’s auction of 70-day TAF funds, the amount auctioned was cut to $25 billion, half the October amount.  Only $13.2 billion was requested even though $43 billion is maturing.  By January 11, 2010, only $75 billion of 28-day credit will be offered. We do not expect to ask the Board to make any decision about the TAF in the near term.  Later this year or perhaps early next year, the Board will be asked to consider whether to further reduce the amount provided in TAF auctions, perhaps to zero. Reducing TAF auction amounts to zero in the intermediate term would be consistent with the ongoing gradual normalization of Federal Reserve liquidity operations, would ensure that no bank currently using the facility remained reliant on TAF funding, and would help reduce reserve balances during a period in which the FOMC might be tightening policy.  If auction amounts were reduced to zero, the staff would work to preserve operational readiness by periodically conducting simulated auctions. I’d emphasize that reducing TAF credit to zero for a period would not imply that TAF credit would necessarily be zero in the future steady state.  The options that policymakers might consider for a permanent TAF currently seem likely to include using TAF only as a tool for contingencies with no credit outstanding in normal times or conducting monthly auctions of relatively small amounts of credit to preserve readiness. Whether to have a permanent TAF and, if so, in what form is an issue we expect to raise once the financial crisis has fully subsided. Turning to primary credit, prior to the financial crisis, the primary credit rate had been consistently set at a level 100 basis points over the target federal funds rate, and the maximum available term of primary credit was overnight except for the smallest institutions, which could borrow for up to one month.  Over the past two years, the Federal Reserve narrowed the primary credit rate spread to 25 basis points and lengthened the maximum maturity to 90 days.  The total amount of primary credit outstanding peaked near $115 billion in October 2008.  It has since fallen to $23 billion, of which more than 90 percent is to branches and agencies of foreign banks and two-thirds is extended to a single foreign bank that is prohibited from term borrowing and is rolling overnight credit. About $4.5 billion in primary credit had an initial maturity greater than 28 days, and nearly all of that is to another foreign bank. Later this week, the Board will be asked to consider whether the maximum maturity on primary credit loans should be reduced to 28 days in January 2010.  In this way, the terms on primary credit would not be tightened until after year-end, but then the maximum maturity of primary credit would be aligned with the maturity of TAF loans. The Board and Reserve Banks could evaluate early next year the appropriate time to adjust the spread of the primary credit rate over the target rate and possibly to reduce further the maximum maturity on primary credit loans.  If Reserve Bank Presidents have comments on the proposal to reduce the maximum maturity of primary credit loans to 28 days, please convey them directly to the Board staff or to a member of the Board in the next few days.  Lastly, I will provide a brief update on the TALF.  On October 5, the Board announced two changes to the procedures for evaluating asset-backed securities pledged to the TALF. First, the Board requested public comment on a rule that would establish criteria for determining the credit rating agencies whose ratings on ABS would be accepted at the facility. The proposed criteria will most likely result in ratings from one additional agency being accepted starting with the January subscription. Second, starting with the November subscription, which takes place today, the New York Fed is conducting a formal risk assessment of all ABS pledged to the facility. The new risk-assessment process has gone smoothly, and eight ABS with a total value of about $6 billion will be issued in conjunction with the November subscription. In recent months, spreads on most triple-A auto and credit card ABS have fallen well below the 100 basis point TALF spread, and ABS are increasingly being funded by non-TALF sources. Whereas in May through August, TALF lending equaled about two-thirds of ABS issuance, in September it fell to one-third and in October to one-quarter. The proportion appears likely to fall further in November, with less than $1 billion in TALF loans for ABS expected today.  Investors have now repaid over 20 percent of TALF loans backed by ABS, contributing to a 10 percent decline in outstanding TALF credit over the intermeeting period. Conditions in the market for commercial mortgage-backed securities are more mixed.  Spreads on CMBS in secondary markets have narrowed significantly but are still somewhat elevated, and TALF lending to finance purchases of legacy CMBS continues each month at fairly low levels.  The new-issue CMBS market remains closed, but it now appears likely that a security, which will be eligible for TALF financing, will be brought to market later this month.  Nathan will now continue the staff presentation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage provides information about the TAF, primary credit, and the TALF without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 23.
 MR. CLOUSE. Thanks Chris. I will be discussing progress on the term deposit facility, or TDF, under which the Federal Reserve would have the capability to offer term deposits to depository institutions as a means of reducing the quantity of reserves in the banking system. Work on the TDF has been proceeding along three important dimensions—further developing systems and preparing for implementation; drafting key documents, including a Federal Register notice and a legal agreement for term deposits; and evaluating alternative designs for the TDF.  I’ll briefly summarize progress in each of these three areas in turn and conclude with a discussion of next steps. The implementation workgroup—which includes Reserve Bank representatives from various System communities including legal, reserves, accounting, credit-risk, and customer support—has been overseeing the steps necessary to position the System to implement the TDF in the first quarter of next year.  Last weekend, the automation development team—after months of hard work—deployed a web-based application that allows depositories to submit bids or subscription orders for term deposits via a secure Internet connection.  The application supports both posted rate offerings and auction offerings.  In coming months, the implementation team will be coordinating work across the System on the remaining steps necessary to implement a term deposit facility, such as formulating procedures for issuing electronic credentials to access the TDF and developing a communications plan.  The staff has also made substantial progress in developing two key documents that will be necessary before a term deposit facility can be implemented.  A system legal group has produced a draft agreement for term deposits that would be signed by participating institutions. In addition, the staff has developed a draft Federal Register notice that provides background on the proposed TDF and seeks comment from the  public on a number of key design features.  The Federal Register notice could be published this month if desired. The design workgroup has developed some basic structures for a term deposit  facility.  The core design issues involve the type of deposit to be offered—fixed rate  versus floating rate—and the mechanism by which deposits would be offered—  through an auction or simply by posting a rate or rates.  Beyond these key design  parameters, there are a number of related technical questions, such as the appropriate  maturities of term of deposits; whether to allow an early withdrawal option and, if so,  at what penalty; and whether deposits can be pledged as collateral at the discount  window. At present, the staff’s sense is that term deposits would have relatively short  maturities, likely ranging between two weeks and three months.  Our current thinking  is that early withdrawal would not be allowed, given that the objective of a TDF is to  drain reserves. On the other hand, it seems appropriate that banks should be able  pledge term deposits as collateral at the window, especially if early withdrawal is not  allowed, and the staff is working to ensure that such pledging can be done in an  automated fashion.  The proposed Federal Register notice would seek public  comment on all of these basic design questions.  The staff anticipates that it will propose going out for public comment on the term  deposit facility with a 30-day comment period.  The results from the public comments  would then inform decisions about the final structure for a term deposit facility.  On a  parallel track, the implementation group will be coordinating work with Reserve  Banks and various System groups to be in position to implement any of several  potentially desirable structures for the TDF in the first quarter of next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing an update on the progress of the term deposit facility and discussing the next steps.


Passage number 24.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. We are open for questions from the Committee.  Please hold your comments and input just for a few more minutes, and we will have a chance for that as well.  But any questions for the staff.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, the speaker is simply thanking the audience and inviting them to ask questions. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 25.
  MR. LACKER. I was going to ask Mr. Sheets about the rough magnitude of the dollar reserves held by the four central banks that you are proposing we establish swap lines with.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a straightforward question without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 26.
 MR. SHEETS. We don’t have a precise number, given some reporting issues for the euro system, which would include all of the NCBs plus the ECB, but those dollar reserves are somewhere on the order of about $150 billion to $160 billion.  For the BOJ, it’s a bit over $800 billion. They were very, very substantial holders of dollar reserves.  For the Bank ofEngland, it’s roughly on the order of $15 billion, and for the Swiss National Bank it’s around $23 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating the dollar reserves held by different central banks without any conflicting information or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 27.
 MR. LACKER. Okay. Is a lot of that held with CBIAS in New York, or do they have their own arrangements for buying assets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple question asking for clarification about the ownership arrangements of assets in New York.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 28.
 MR. SHEETS. I’m not quite sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is potential disagreement or contention in this passage. It is implied by the speaker saying "I'm not quite sure." This suggests that there may be a difference of opinion or uncertainty between the speaker and another person.


Passage number 29.
   MS. MOSSER. Most central banks have accounts with us.  Very few central banks hold all of their reserves—for very few central banks, we are the custodian for all of their reserves.  They almost all have additional custody relationships in addition to CBIAS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information about central banks and their custody relationships with CBIAS.


Passage number 30.
 MR. LACKER. So, operationally, how would a foreign central bank selling dollar reserves in order to lend dollars to one of their banks compare with the operational requirements of obtaining dollars through one of these swap lines and lending them on.  For operational convenience, how would those two compare.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It appears to be a straightforward question seeking a comparison between two scenarios.


Passage number 31.
 MR. SHEETS. It seems to me that the major difference is that, in the one case, they would have to sell off their holdings of government securities, which if you are thinking that this might occur during a period of stress could be unsettling to the government securities market.  What these swap lines do is allow these foreign central banks to have access to dollar liquidity without actually asking them to liquefy their reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply presenting their perception and explanation of the major difference between two cases.


Passage number 32.
 MR. LACKER. And these are dollar reserves.  So if they are selling off government assets, these are probably Treasuries.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about dollar reserves and the probable assets being sold off.


Passage number 33.
 MR. SHEETS. These are probably Treasuries.  That’s what I was referring to.  It may be that during a period of stress you don’t want them to be selling off their Treasuries.  That could be disruptive to the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing his opinion on the potential disruptions in the market if there is selling off of Treasuries during a period of stress. However, there is no opposing viewpoint presented in the passage.


Passage number 34.
 MR. LACKER. Don’t Treasury security prices usually go up during times of stress.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, is making a statement about Treasury security prices during times of stress.


Passage number 35.
 MR. SHEETS. That has been our experience over the last crisis, absolutely.  But do you want to bet that in every state of nature that’s the way it’s going to be.  You know, there are risks, and we don’t know which way foreign preferences will go toward Treasuries at some future time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 36.
 MR. LACKER. We heard earlier that a huge amount of the primary credit facility borrowers are foreign banks. Does the borrowing through these swap lines occur by banks that don’t have access to our primary credit facility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: The passage presents a question about the borrowing process through swap lines by banks that don't have access to the primary credit facility. This suggests that there may be differing opinions or uncertainty about this particular aspect.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 37.
 MR. SHEETS. My understanding is that it’s some of both.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The phrase "some of both" implies that there is a combination of agreement and disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 38.
 MR. LACKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any context or information about "MR. LACKER."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 39.
 So there are some institutions that could borrow from us directly, and they borrow either instead or also through— MR. SHEETS. Through the swap lines. Given the pricing structure of the swap lines, getting funds through the swap lines has been relatively expensive.  So if they have had a choice, they haven’t gone to the swap lines.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that some institutions could borrow directly or through swap lines, but states that borrowing through swap lines has been relatively expensive. The statement suggests that institutions, if given the choice, would prefer not to borrow through swap lines.


Passage number 40.
 MR. LACKER. So one of these banks that is borrowing directly from us could lend it on to one of these others banks, couldn’t they.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question.


Passage number 41.
 MR. SHEETS. Through the interbank market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage provided does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the term "interbank market" without further context.


Passage number 42.
 MR. LACKER. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage presents a straightforward statement without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 43.
 MR. SHEETS. I would assume so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Sheets is making an assumption, but his statement is not being challenged or disputed.


Passage number 44.
 MS. MOSSER. I don’t believe that, certainly during the crisis, that was actually what happened in practice. What I think is particularly true of European institutions is that they were borrowing in the United States and then moving the cash to their homes.  The U.S. subsidiary was sending it basically to the parent, and they were not lending it on to other institutions in Europe. They were using it in their own parent institutions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their own opinion and explaining their understanding of the situation.


Passage number 45.
 MR. LACKER. I see. One final question. When you refer to funding pressures, you are not talking about the overall supply and demand of reserves.  You are talking about individual institutions that have to pay up in the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response provided by Mr. Lacker is a clarification question seeking further information or confirmation.


Passage number 46.
 MR. SHEETS. That’s right. Their capacity to be able to go into the market and access reserves. Obviously, there is a price component to that.  But as we saw through the last crisis, as the interbank market came under stress, the volume of transactions also dried up.  So I think that, in addition to a price component, there was a rationing going on in the market as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining that during the previous financial crisis, there was a decrease in both the availability and volume of transactions in the interbank market. They mention that in addition to a price component, there was also rationing happening in the market. This is a straightforward statement of what happened during the crisis, without any conflicting viewpoints or disagreements.


Passage number 47.
 MR. LACKER. But I guess my point was that this doesn’t do anything for the overall supply of reserves in the market that discount window lending or open market operations wouldn’t do. It just facilitates channeling those reserves to particular institutions that would otherwise face high counterparty credit-risk premiums.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 48.
 MR. SHEETS. Right. And in particular, maybe some institutions that may not have access to our domestic facilities.  Nevertheless, as you recall early on in the crisis, these guys were coming into the money markets in New York and creating volatility through their demands for dollar funding. In particular, early in the day they were demanding huge quantities of liquidity and driving up the rate, and then the rate would crash at the end of the day.  But it was making Vice Chairman Dudley’s job extremely difficult.  So there are important spillover effects for us, and we point to this as one of the major reasons that it is important to maintain the capacity to provide dollar liquidity to foreign markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 49.
 MR. SACK. Another dimension, from the perspective of policymakers, is that, even though some firms can substitute between getting dollar funding here through our facilities and getting it abroad, by providing a dollar swap and allowing the foreign central bank to provide the dollar liquidity, they rather than the Fed are bearing the credit risk of the facility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining that some firms have the option to obtain dollar funding either through the Fed or from foreign central banks, and that in the latter case, the foreign central bank assumes the credit risk of the facility.


Passage number 50.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the term "Vice Chairman" as it simply refers to a specific position or role within an organization.


Passage number 51.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. That is what I was going to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement expressing agreement or similarity of opinion.


Passage number 52.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the word "All right". It is a simple agreement or acknowledgement phrase.


Passage number 53.
 MS. MOSSER. One final comment—I also think about the realities of collateral.  The fact is that large global financial institutions have collateral at almost all the large central banks.  Moving that collateral on short notice, particularly in the midst of a crisis, from one central bank to another in order to make sure that you have collateral and you can borrow in the right currency is very time-consuming.  It does not happen quickly.  There is work afoot to make that movement of collateral around the world smoother, but it isn’t there yet.  And the swap arrangements, like the comparison of moving collateral around, basically put the counterparty risk, as Brian noted, frankly, where it belongs, and also allowed the collateral to be used at the central bank that is actually bearing the counterparty risk and not moved around and needing to be reevaluated by another central bank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and explaining the challenges of moving collateral between central banks.


Passage number 54.
 MR. LACKER. Just one more little follow-up:  Do we know whether the difference between rates paid last fall in the early part of the day by foreign banks and rates paid after they ceased participating in the market, which were lower, reflected market segmentation across the day or higher credit-risk premiums if they were paid.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The question asked by Mr. Lacker is seeking clarification on the reason behind the difference in rates paid by foreign banks.


Passage number 55.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman, do you want to answer that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The Vice Chairman is simply being asked if they want to respond to something.


Passage number 56.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I think our feeling at the time, President Lacker, was that it was due to the fact that there was a structural dollar shortage in Europe.  So there was a strong time-of-day effect.  It wasn’t just a counterparty-risk issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion or belief about the reason for a specific situation without any conflicting viewpoints mentioned.


Passage number 57.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lockhart, you were next.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. The sentence simply states that President Lockhart is next in line to speak, without any opposing or conflicting viewpoints mentioned.


Passage number 58.
 MR. LOCKHART. This is not on this particular question, but to—is it Chris Burke.  Did I hear that correctly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the name "Chris Burke" and asks for confirmation of hearing it correctly.


Passage number 59.
 MR. BURKE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no explicit contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states the response of Mr. Burke as "Yes."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 60.
 MR. LOCKHART. Help me with connecting the dots at a high level here.  I took your overall discussion of the reverse repo market to be sort of discouraging on net—near term at least—that we have obstacles, various technical challenges that are building up, and that it is far from certain that this is going to be a large-capacity drainer of excess reserves.  Then I look at the market’s view of this question in exhibit 26, and it appears that they are ranking the reverse repos as the largest possible drainer of reserves.  Are we building here to a disconnect between the reality of this tool and what the market thinks this tool can do and, therefore, a schism between public views of our ability to drain and what we can really accomplish.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lockhart, appears to be questioning or expressing doubt about the effectiveness of the reverse repo market in draining excess reserves. On the other hand, the market seems to have a more positive view, ranking reverse repos as the largest drainer of reserves. This suggests a disconnect or a difference in opinion between the speaker and the market regarding the potential of the tool.


Passage number 61.
 MR. BURKE. I think it is a sense of timing.  We have collateral.  We have the ability to reverse out our Treasury and agency collateral today.  Even without agency MBS, we could have a program of $800 billion from a collateral perspective.  The primary dealers, though, as noted, are limited to something maybe more in the $200 billion range.  But that does mean that today we have $200 billion in capacity, and I think it’s going to depend on the Committee’s answer to the counterparty discussion. If we can deal with a small number of large firms, in very short order I think we can bring the capacity of this tool to at least match the level of collateral that we have to reverse out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and making a logical argument based on that information.


Passage number 62.
 MR. LOCKHART. If we gave you an answer today, how long do you think it would take you to be in a position to do a large-scale program that approaches that collateral level of $800 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question asking about the timeline for a large-scale program.


Passage number 63.
MR. BURKE. A very preliminary guess might be somewhere in the year-end time frame.  We have the legal infrastructure in place.  We have the authority to deal with the counterparties. So it’s a question of logistically arranging—doing the vetting of the individual counterparties I think would be the biggest chunk of work there.  We can already identify a super-large, well-known money fund as having a lot of cash to invest.  They already deal with triparty. We can already work in triparty.  We have the authority to deal with that firm, so it is getting in and doing the credit review, the regulatory review, and saying, “Okay. We are good to go.” And then we can be investing or taking money from them in reverse repo transactions.  So I think in fairly short order. If we have to cast a wider net for counterparties, though, it’s going to be a very different ballgame.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply discussing the timeline and logistics of arranging reverse repo transactions.


Passage number 64.
   MR. LOCKHART. This may not be a question for Chris, but is this coming to a question soon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question being asked to Mr. Lockhart.


Passage number 65.
 MR. BURKE. Well, I think the intent in my presentation, at least at my level, was to put the question on the table.  I am not sure of the formalities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Burke is expressing his own thoughts and uncertainty about the formalities without any opposition or contradiction from others involved in the conversation.


Passage number 66.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We will make a list of what input is desired, and then we will ask everyone. President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement presents a logical plan of action without any indication of opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 67.
 MR. PLOSSER. I just had a follow-up to the answer that Nathan gave on the intraday volatility that you referred to in terms of reserves.  To what degree was that also the creation of our own operating procedures—that we were going into the market only once a day and we were reluctant to be players on a continuous basis.  Could we have solved some of that problem by our own operating procedures and being in the market more continuously.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser suggests that the intraday volatility and problem could have been partially caused by the Fed's operating procedures of going into the market only once a day and being reluctant to be consistent players. He implies that if the Fed had been in the market more continuously, they could have potentially solved some of the problems.


Passage number 68.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Part of the problem is that we never have had knowledge of how much reserves we actually did need to add during the day because we don’t have a realsense of whether the banking system has the appropriate amount of reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a problem and explains the lack of knowledge regarding the appropriate amount of reserves needed in the banking system.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 69.
 So you could respond multiple times during the day but end up adding way too many reserves or adding— MR. PLOSSER. Is that because we were targeting quantities rather than prices.  Once again, could we have been closer had we been more frequent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests disagreement or contention as Mr. Plosser questions the approach of targeting quantities instead of prices, indicating a potential alternative strategy.


Passage number 70.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. There was also an operational issue—late in the day, the market gets much thinner.  So there is also a timing issue in that, the later you go in the day, the less—you know, the money market business is a morning business.  But, yes, you could have conceivably tried to do more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage is stating two related points - that there is an operational issue with the market thinning out late in the day, and that the money market business is predominantly a morning business. There is no contention or disagreement presented in this passage.


Passage number 71.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I was just reacting to your saying that was one of the major reasons we want to have this.  In some ways, we could have done some things on our own to help mitigate some of that, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Plosser is simply reacting to a statement and expressing his thoughts on the matter.


Passage number 72.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think our feeling at the time was that we were not confident that multiple interventions during the day would have actually helped us hit the target better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion or belief about a past event.


Passage number 73.
 MR. LACKER. A two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It only mentions the name "Mr. Lacker" and the term "two-hander," which is not enough information to indicate any conflict.


Passage number 74.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without knowing the specific passage or context in which President Lacker is mentioned, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 75.
 MR. LACKER.  These observations are from pre-IOER.  The operation he is talking about is soaking up reserves late in the day, which is exactly what the interest rate on reserves has done.  It is not clear that this would be a big problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact and then expressing uncertainty about the potential consequences of the situation.


Passage number 76.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage based on the given information "President Fisher," as there is no specific context or content provided.


Passage number 77.
 MR. FISHER.  On the TALF, as we go through more auctions, more subscriptions, is there any incidence of refinancing previous TALF loans.  And if so, how much and what does it tell us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply poses a question about the TALF program and refinancing previous loans.


Passage number 78.
  MR. NELSON. We do extend some TALF loans for seasoned ABS.  I guess it’s conceivable that those ABS had previously been borrowed against and then resold into the market or they were issued as TALF-eligible and not taken up in the first round.  However, off the top of my head, I do not know the amount that is being extended against seasoned ABS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Nelson about the extension of TALF loans for seasoned ABS, where he speculates about the potential sources of those ABS.


Passage number 79.
 MR. FISHER.  Do you think it is significant.  Can we find out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question followed by a request for further information.


Passage number 80.
 MR. NELSON.  Certainly. Yes, I’ll get that to you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees to provide something to the person they are talking to.


Passage number 81.
 MR. FISHER.  It may just be that rates are increasingly attractive.  I don’t know, but I would be curious as to how much recycling is taking place.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 82.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chair.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without actually being provided with the passage.


Passage number 83.
 MR. KOHN. I thought the trend was that people were actually paying back the TALF loans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker, Mr. Kohn, expresses his thoughts on the trend of people paying back the TALF loans. There is no opposing viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 84.
 MR. FISHER.  No, that’s true in the aggregate.  So I’m just asking the question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fisher is agreeing with a statement by saying "No, that's true in the aggregate." He then clarifies that he is simply asking a question.


Passage number 85.
 MR. KOHN. Rather than refinancing them, they’re actually paying them back and doing better in the market than they can do at the Federal Reserve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker is simply stating that instead of refinancing, the entity mentioned is paying back their loans and making greater profits in the market compared to what they would earn at the Federal Reserve.


Passage number 86.
 MR. FISHER.  That’s true in the aggregate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a fact without any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 87.
 MR. NELSON.  They’re not refinancing their loans, but they’re paying them back.  That collateral is freeing up and conceivably could come back into the facility, which is what I thought you were asking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Nelson is simply providing clarification and addressing a potential misunderstanding.


Passage number 88.
 MR. FISHER.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statement or indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 89.
   MR. NELSON. But the overall amount of lending is just dropping very rapidly.  This month it’s going to be between $600 million and $1 billion, I think.  So there just is not a lot of scope for very much activity along those lines, given how quickly activity under the facility has quieted down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement about the rapid decrease in lending activity under the facility.


Passage number 90.
MR. FISHER.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements that indicate contention or disagreement. It simply consists of a statement expressing gratitude ("Thanks") from Mr. Fisher.


Passage number 91.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unfortunately, there is not enough context provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 92.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This is a question about swap lines.  I like the memo, and I like the approach.  The policy of discontinuing the swap lines with certain central banks—I’m not quite sure where that leaves us because it seems as though now that, when we get into another crisis, the presumption would be that we would reestablish those lines with those banks since we did so this time around.  So I’m not quite sure how to place your description of what we are doing here in that context because I think that there would certainly be overwhelming pressure in another crisis of this magnitude to reestablish those swap lines.  Then you would have the difficulty of having to, as you say, renegotiate and set up the details, as you did this time.  So I’m wondering what you think about that as opposed to the idea that we are pulling back and we’re maybe implicitly saying that we may not reestablish with, say, South Korea or other countries like that in the future.  What’s your thinking on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Bullard, is expressing uncertainty and questioning the policy of discontinuing swap lines with certain central banks. He suggests that in another crisis, there would be overwhelming pressure to reestablish those swap lines, but it would be difficult to negotiate and set up the details again. Mr. Bullard is questioning whether this discontinuation means that the central bank may not reestablish swap lines with certain countries in the future.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 93.
 MR. SHEETS.  A couple of thoughts.  Your general point is well taken.  On the first point in terms of the pulling back, the scaling, and so on and so forth, our view is that we need to have a certain small number of swap lines in order to have the operational capacity to understand how they work, to have thought through all of the legal issues, and also to have a good sense from the Committee and from other central banks as to what the appropriate policy objectives of these things are. But from that relatively small set, if conditions require, it’s usually fairly easy to scale it out.  So I’m not worried about— if we only have four and then the world blows up and we want to have fourteen again— whether it is going to be harder to go from four to fourteen.  No. I would be worried about going from zero to four, however.  Ten years from now, the folks in New York who did all the work may be onto other things or other positions, and just as was the case in this lastepisode, we had to run around and pretty much figure these things out from scratch. I actually think that Trish has a few purple hearts that she earned in that process.  Now, the flip side of this is that we gave them a swap line once, and if things get bad, we’re going to give them a swap line again.  I think that is a very reasonable presumption if a crisis erupts in a year or two years.  But if the next crisis is eight or ten years out, there is a lot of water under the bridge. The world looks a lot different, and it’s not clear to me that there is the same presumption.  Now, the Committee at that point may want to look at it and come to the conclusion that, yes, we want to give Korea another swap line, but I do not think there would be as strong a presumption as if they actually had a swap line with us. So I do think there is some meaning in where we draw this set of counterparties.  As I mentioned in my remarks—but it is an important point—it is also very helpful to us in managing our relationships with foreign central banks from here until the time of the next crisis.  on Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that he is not worried about scaling up the number of swap lines from a small set to a larger number, but is concerned about starting from zero and going to four in the future. He also suggests that the presumption of providing swap lines in future crises may not be as strong as it was in the past. This implies a difference of opinion or perspective on the need for and effectiveness of swap lines in managing financial crises.


Passage number 94.
 MR. NELSON. Could I add another piece of information for President Fisher.  The repayment of TALF loans has been concentrated in the plain-vanilla, short-maturity ABS where secondary market spreads have come down the most:  autos; credit cards; equipment ABS to a lesser extent. Because those spreads are now well below the TALF loan rate—and for example, in the current subscription that is going on today, there was no request at all for TALF loans against the auto ABS that were issued—it strikes me as pretty unlikely that a very large part of the TALF lending that’s going on now is going to finance ABS that have already been paid back.  Those would have appreciated in price, and their spreads would now be too narrow to be attractive to finance under the TALF.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing additional information and making an observation based on that information. There is no contradiction or argument present.


Passage number 95.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a polite statement expressing gratitude.


Passage number 96.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that there are other questions without providing any opposing viewpoints or conflicting arguments.


Passage number 97.
 MR. LACKER. Yes, about the liquidity swap lines that would enable us to lend foreign currency to our institutions and some other countries.  My recollection is that those were motivated—I won’t say “primarily,” but largely—by one large institution.  At the time it seemed— correct me if I’m wrong, if the reasoning goes in a different way—preferable to the long and arduous task of encouraging through supervisory means that the institution find other foreign currency liquidity sources on which it could rely and reduce the extent of maturity transformation that it conducted in foreign currencies.  So I was wondering if progress has been made on supervisory efforts to encourage that institution to reduce its vulnerability to maturity transformation in other currencies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply recalling their understanding and asking for an update on progress.


Passage number 98.
 MR. SHEETS. I don’t have specific information about that institution.  The motivation for this proposal, however, is much broader and more generic than a single institution.  Our expectation is that these lines wouldn’t be used anytime soon.  We do not have a single institution in mind.  But we do have a generic class of problems in mind in which you have a U.S. institution that is operating abroad that for some reason has either difficulty in mobilizing its collateral to use at the foreign central bank’s window or a real possibility that the foreign central bank is unwilling to lend to an institution with legitimate collateral.  We have had conversations with various central banks— one in particular—when they have said that, under certain circumstances, they wouldn’t be willing to lend to our institutions.  So these are very precautionary in nature, but I think that they respond to a real class of problems that it makes sense for us to take out some insurance against.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents information about the motivation behind a proposal and the need for precautionary measures.


Passage number 99.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions.  Trish.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "other questions" simply suggests that there are additional inquiries or topics to be discussed.


Passage number 100.
 MS. MOSSER.  May I make one more comment to President Lacker.  Although not mentioned specifically in the memo, it is probably worth remembering that the first time that liquidity swaps were used was on September 12 and September 13, 2001.  So there are othercircumstances for having these kinds of facilities in place, and in the case of the reverse lines particularly, should there be some sort of catastrophic event in another large financial center where our ability to basically do broad distribution of foreign currency, not just to specific institutions, might be useful.  We didn’t really discuss that here, but we know that it has been done at least once the other way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply providing additional information and giving an example to support a point. There is no disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 101.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. The next item on the agenda is billed as an opportunity for interaction—[laughter] a way of saying that we don’t necessarily want to have a go-round.  We do have two subsequent go-rounds.  Everyone will have a chance to give their views.  However, this is an opportunity both to interact with each other and to give comments and feedback to the staff on the issues that they’ve raised.  So that people know what you would like to hear, let me just go through that quickly.  As I understand it, there are no formal actions proposed for today; is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information about the agenda and the format of the meeting.


Passage number 102.
 MR. SHEETS.  That’s right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no disagreement or contention in the passage. It is a simple affirmation or confirmation of information.


Passage number 103.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. But, Mr. Burke, you would like to hear some views on the counterparty issue. Anything else that you would like to hear from the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking Mr. Burke if he would like to hear some views on the counterparty issue and if there is anything else he would like to hear from the Committee.


Passage number 104.
 MR. BURKE.  Actually we want to affirm, if we can, the plan to put RCAs on hold until we get the reverse repos and term deposits more fully squared away.  We would like approval to do some small, real-value test operations of the reverse repos and, if we are going to do that, maybe the ability to issue another operating statement similar to the one on October 19.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Burke is simply suggesting a plan to put RCAs on hold until certain conditions are met and is seeking approval for test operations and issuing an operating statement.


Passage number 105.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. That would be, I think, implied.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states a personal opinion or belief.


Passage number 106.
 MR. BURKE. But the last one, as you mentioned, is on counterparties, whether we can create a system by which we can select a small number of large firms to transact with or whether we need to cast a wide net and allow small firms to participate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply discussing two different options for selecting counterparties and exploring whether it is better to transact with a small number of large firms or to cast a wider net and allow small firms to participate.


Passage number 107.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Mr. Clouse.  Anything from you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 108.
 MR. CLOUSE. The staff is proposing a Federal Register notice, potentially this month for design input on the term deposits.  It would be helpful to hear whether that’s a desirable thing or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or differing opinions on the proposed Federal Register notice. It simply asks for input on whether it is a desirable thing or not.


Passage number 109.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Bill, anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage provided.


Passage number 110.
 MR. NELSON. The only near-term decision that we’re asking of the Board in the next few days is on the maximum maturity of the primary credit rate.  But if the Presidents have views on that issue, if they could convey that directly to a staff member or to a Governor over the coming days outside this meeting, that would be best.  The other issues are ones for coming months or early next year, and I suppose that views expressed on those as well would be valuable now.  Those have to do with, in the intermediate term, the scaling-back of the TAF to possibly zero in the first half of next year and also the eventual adjustment to the return to normalization of the terms of primary credit.  Again, both of those things are decisions that would be made next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating different issues that the Board will need to address in the near future and suggesting that if anyone has views or opinions on these issues, they should communicate them to the appropriate parties before the formal decision-making process begins.


Passage number 111.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay, and, Nathan, you want comments on the swap proposal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking comments on the swap proposal from Nathan.


Passage number 112.
 MR. SHEETS. Right.  Particularly the counterparties, the size, and how to handle the North American swaps with Mexico and Canada.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about discussing specific aspects of handling swaps with Mexico and Canada.


Passage number 113.
 MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, Scott is straining at his chair there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a simple observation about someone named Scott and their position in a chair.


Passage number 114.
 MR. ALVAREZ. Yes. The matters that Bill Nelson just brought up and the matters that Jim Clouse brought up on the Federal Register are matters that will eventually come to the Board for its decision.  So if the Presidents want to express some views that the Board should consider when the Board is formally presented with those matters, that could be helpful; but they are not matters for the Board to discuss in today’s meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that the matters mentioned by Bill Nelson and Jim Clouse will eventually come to the Board for its decision. It acknowledges that the Presidents may express their views, but states that they are not matters for the Board to discuss in the current meeting. There is no contention or disagreement evident in this passage.


Passage number 115.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right.  There are too many items here.  We are not going to have a quasi-decision process here.  Okay. So we will poll the Committee—can we do that.—and  get feedback from everybody.  If you haven’t had time to think about these issues, we will get back to you after the meeting and get feedback on the relevant issues, and we won’t take a decision until we hear.  But I would still like to have an opportunity for people who would like to make arguments or comments on any of these issues to do so now.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 116.
 MR. HOENIG.  Just a suggestion.  It would be helpful to me, given the breadth of choices among us, if there was following this meeting a one-page summary of each list of questions, and then I’d feel much more comfortable responding to that after some thought than to try to give an answer at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Hoenig is simply suggesting that he would find it helpful to receive a one-page summary of the list of questions discussed in the meeting before providing a response. There is no opposing viewpoint or conflict evident in the passage.


Passage number 117.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Brian, would that be possible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 118.
 MR. MADIGAN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 119.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right. Nevertheless, we could have any interaction, discussion, comments, or input anyone would like to have at this point on any of these issues.  Anyone.  Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply inviting anyone to participate in a discussion.


Passage number 120.
 MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  A couple of points— not on the Board matters, Scott. On Chris’s points, I think the small number of large firms is consistent with the way we do primary dealers, but I do think it is important to have criteria that can be easily justified about why we are doing a small number of large firms.  I mean, in this case we are borrowing money, right, rather than lending it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kohn is expressing agreement with Chris's points and adding his own thoughts on the importance of having criteria for selecting a small number of large firms.


Passage number 121.
 MR. BURKE. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or indicators of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 122.
 MR. KOHN. Right. So it’s not clear that the risk of the counterparty is the right criterion, but it could be the size that you can execute in and the speed with which you can execute.  I think you just need to be very clear on the criteria so that it’s easily defensible when people say, “Why aren’t you doing it with every small person who wants to lend us money.”I think putting the RCAs on hold is a good idea.  They always seemed very complicated to me and potentially bifurcating the fed funds market, and I think that, if we can get it done without that change, we should.  Maybe we need them, but I think putting them on hold is a good idea and concentrating on the reverse RPs and the term deposits is the right way to go.  I would be fine with a small real-value test with the rate thing. On the swaps, this is more difficult.  I think the swaps were a very, very useful instrument in the recent crisis, and it wasn’t just about particular institutions.  It has come down to that, I think, as the crisis unwinds. It has come down to that both in our domestic facilities and in our international facilities.  But at the height of the crisis, there was a generalized demand for dollar funding that the markets were unable to meet because there was segmentation.  There was a lack of arbitrage.  There was a hoarding of liquidity.  And the swaps—particularly once they got to be open ended—were very, very important in both relieving pressure on the markets and building confidence. I like the idea that the home country central bank is in charge of the lending for the most part.  That’s where the problems are going to be.  That’s where the fiscal issues are going to arise.  So to the extent that the home country central bank can do the lending, that’s a benefit.  And I think the point implied by President Lacker about reserves is a good one, but the problem with relying on reserves is that there is a limited amount of reserves that any particular central bank has, and I know in talking to people from the ECB, a problem they had was mobilizing the reserves in the various national central banks. So I think the idea of this swap facility was very, very useful.  It’s important that we have something that is ready to activate on short notice and that we keep the machinery oiled at least for a small number of central banks, the Big Four that Nathan talked about.  And I guess in theory that standby lines will do that.  There could be some sort of contingency facility that you also tested on a periodic basis.  In some sense I’m indifferent about how it is done, but I think it is important to have it there. I am much more torn about the Mexican swap line, to tell the truth.  I worry about emerging market swap lines.  I worry that we’ll have to get into the business of judging whether the underlying policies in that country are good.  In this case, we had a generalized demand for dollars all over the world.  So smearing the dollars all over the world was a good way of dealing with that.  The next crisis could be more particular to an individual economy.  President Hoenig and I were in Mexico about two weeks ago, and it was quite striking, I think, Tom, that the Mexicans as well as the visitors thought that it was a pretty troubled economy with lots of problems.  I guess I’m worried that we’ll get involved in something that is particular to Mexico rather than a general dollar liquidity shortage.  I recognize that the Mexican economy, as well as the Canadian economy, is deeply integrated with ours—it is in our interest that it not be destabilized in some sense. It would be important, as I think Nathan mentioned in his briefing, to come back to the FOMC before any of these swap lines are activated for the first time.  I would not delegate it to the three of us on the subcommittee.  I would want the FOMC to do it, and I think we need to be careful about how we specify the criteria under which the swap lines would be activated in the material that backs it up, that somehow we make it clear that, if there is a very specific problem keyed to the specific economy, other ways of dealing with it—through the IMF, the Administration, the Congress, if the United States is going to provide support in that case—are more appropriate than using the Federal Reserve, bypassing those other channels.  I am still a little concerned about the Mexican part of this thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses concern about the Mexican swap line and worries about getting involved in an individual economy's problems rather than a general dollar liquidity shortage.


Passage number 123.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman, you had a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that the Vice Chairman had a "two-hander," without any indication of conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 124.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I had more than a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting or opposing statements. It simply states that the speaker had more than a two-hander, indicating they had a large quantity or a significant amount of something.


Passage number 125.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Oh, okay.  One moment.  I just wanted to say on the counterparties that there’s not any particular reason that this can’t be done in stages.  I think it’s important that we have an open process and criteria and so on, but given the exigencies of trying to get this up and running in a reasonable amount of time, why can’t we just do the ones that meet certain criteria in terms of size and capacity and so on first, and then as we did with the TALF, for example, go on to a broader set of counterparties.  I just raise that possibility.  Okay. Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by the speaker, discussing the possibility of implementing a process in stages for the counterparties.


Passage number 126.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.  On the counterparty issue, I guess the question I have would be, Will there really be much interest by smaller counterparties given that giving funds to us is not really different from giving funds to the U.S. Treasury in the T-bill market.  It’s not as though we have a very special thing here that’s going to be particularly attractive to small investors.  So it seems to me that we want to find out how much interest there is before we design a very complicated mechanism that might or might not be of interest to them.  And I would reinforce the Chairman’s view that there’s no reason, if there is an interest, that you couldn’t go to the large ones first and then broaden it out over time.  I think it’s very clear that you want to be able to have the capacity to go large—to President Lockhart’s point earlier—and if you can’t do a lot of money, then this is really a bit of an illusion in terms of its effectiveness. Let me just go through the other ones very quickly.  RCAs on hold, I agree with that.  I think cash operations, real-value operations, make sense.  We just have to be very clear that it’s just a test.  As far as Mexico is concerned, I share a lot of Governor Kohn’s concerns about going from generalized market problems to country-specific problems.  One way to get around that might be to require that Mexico continue to be rated investment-grade.  I think they’re triple-B plus.  So if they were to drop below that, then you could argue that you’re really morphing from something that’s more into a country-risk issue.  Obviously the issue I think you are raising, Governor Kohn, is the issue of our getting involved in true credit risk with a sovereign entity, and that’s something that I think we should be very uncomfortable about if we really think that is above a meaningful threshold.  Other than that, I think the four counterparties—the ECB, the SNB, the Bank of Japan, and the Bank of England—make perfect sense to keep in practice, and I think the counterparty-risk issues there are pretty negligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and opinions on different issues. They agree with the idea of testing cash operations, share some concerns about Mexico's credit rating, and believe that the four mentioned counterparties make sense.


Passage number 127.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher, did you have a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is a straightforward question directed at President Fisher.


Passage number 128.
   MR. FISHER. Well, on the subject of Mexico, I think it is a difficult subject when you include Canada in the equation. Clearly, Canada is a higher-grade economy and would have a higher investment grade.  But, again, we think of them all as North America.  I have no problem with the four. If we think through this NAFA issue, there are delicate politics when you deal with Mexico because you are also dealing with Canada simultaneously.  So I would just ask you to bear that in mind.  I think Vice Chair Dudley’s proposal may be a way to slice that, but the answer may be to leave it untouched, the $3 billion and the $2 billion.  Right now we have $3 billion to Mexico and $2 billion to Canada.  And I would just point that out. Like Tom Hoenig, I would like to have time to think about the other questions.  But I just wanted to point that out.  It is a very delicate issue, not because I am a Texan but just because of the nature of the agreement that we forged with these two countries as trading partners.  So maybe the answer there is to leave it alone.  But you can’t treat one without offending the other.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the complexity of the issue and pointing out the delicate nature of the agreements with Mexico and Canada. The speaker suggests considering leaving the current investment amounts untouched in order to avoid offending either country. There is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 129.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. You will have time to think about the issues.  Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It's a straightforward statement suggesting that there will be time to consider and reflect upon the issues at hand. The mention of Governor Warsh does not introduce any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions either.


Passage number 130.
 MR. WARSH.  Sure. Let me just add to what sounds like maybe a growing chorus on the currency swaps.  I certainly favor the currency swaps.  With the four central banks, in terms of the size, it strikes me that it should be just big enough to be a useful, well-practiced engine on both sides. And frankly, I don’t know whether it needs to be as big as in the proposal to accomplish that objective.  If we found ourselves in a crisis, we could always amplify those to a greater extent. So in some ways I wonder whether the numbers that were proposed were, in an ambiguous world, large enough that it is certainly more than some kind of testing program but not large enough to make a huge difference in the context of a global financial panic.  I don’t have better numbers in mind, but I think the idea of being operational with those four makes sense. With respect to the NAFA issue, I think it would probably make the most sense for us to let the temporary swaps extinguish on their own accord in February and put the new swaps in accord with the four, and then sometime later, after we are done hearing pleadings from the Singaporeans and the Koreans, then decide what we want to do in the context of this NAFA piece. But I wouldn’t want to conflate that issue with the swap line because that in some ways begs the question, with the Koreans in particular, from whom we hear quite a bit. With respect to the reverse repo issue and the small banks, I guess this is really a question for Chris Burke and for Bill Dudley and the team, which is, Would there be a large financial institution that would be willing to do the work on this for us.  To see whether they would be responsible, for a fee, for aggregating the small institutions, verifying their interest in whether they, in aggregate, could be of some real use, given what we are trying to accomplish.  Because if I think about the relative scarcity of our resources, it could potentially be a good piece of business for someone, and that someone might not be us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily includes the speaker's personal opinions and suggestions.


Passage number 131.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to answer this question without the specific passage that includes President Lacker.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 132.
MR. LACKER. Yes. On the swap lines, I have never been a real big fan of these.  My affection rose slightly earlier in the year, but it was a transitory rise. [Laughter] I find my enthusiasm waning.  Basically, I don’t think they solve an economic problem worth solving.  We have dollars out there, and maybe I am just really sanguine about the ability of the system to move dollars around. I guess at the end of the day that might be where we differ.  It has the disadvantage of our having to police other central banks’ use of the funds and not let them do foreign exchange with them and all.  So, broadly speaking, I wouldn’t favor it because I think we can maintain the operational capability without the authorization for these things.  I think we can practice these things some way or another.  I think we can manage to maintain our human capital. On the foreign currency swaps, where we borrow a foreign currency in order to lend to one of our institutions, I think at this time horizon, nine months down the road, the vulnerability of any of these institutions, because of maturity transformation in a foreign currency, is entirely endogenous. It is entirely the choice of how they run their business, and I don’t think there is any excuse at this horizon not to have pushed them out of the nest.  I don’t know the details of these institutions, but I think we ought to be working toward pushing them to run their business in a way that they are not so vulnerable to that. As for the NAFA things, I think those are classic foreign exchange.  It’s a vestige of our classic foreign exchange currency swap things that we have always opposed.  They are really fiscal policies—the same reasons that Vice Chairman Dudley articulated. I am glad to hear that RCAs are on hold.  I didn’t think they were worth pursuing, and they seemed to benefit mainly the GSEs.  As for the other things, I think a question we want to ask ourselves before this is, What sense of urgency do we really feel about reverse RPs and term   deposits.  I was struck by that chart that Brian showed us and the new section at the end of the Bluebook that discusses a sequence of potential statements that we could use for the exit.  I was struck that they placed primary reliance on these two mechanisms for draining reserves and held asset sales in abeyance. I would like to have the Committee really grapple with that.  I don’t know why we wouldn’t go to asset sales first.  If our balance sheet were as small as it would be, let’s say, nine months from now without these deposits, would we issue a bunch of deposits to buy MBS.  I don’t think we would do that. I don’t know why we would avoid selling MBS over the near term as we want to scale back reserve balances.  I think we ought to grapple with just how much urgency these things require before we go public and get everybody all excited about them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker expresses his lack of enthusiasm for swap lines and his belief that they do not solve an economic problem worth solving. He also disagrees with the primary reliance on reverse RPs and term deposits for draining reserves, suggesting that asset sales should be considered first.


Passage number 133.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, it seems as though more tools are better than fewer tools.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement expresses a positive sentiment that having more tools is generally preferable to having fewer tools.


Passage number 134.
 MR. LACKER. I understand the more tools part, but here we are at the threshold where—I mean, we have already tickled their fancy in the financial markets.  And before we go too much farther down the road, I am not sure we shouldn’t think of these as the backstop and asset sales as the primary tool.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their understanding and suggesting that asset sales could be considered as the primary tool.


Passage number 135.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. "Vice Chairman" is a title or position, and it does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 136.
   VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I just had one very quick interjection.  One of the values of the whole foreign exchange swap program during the crisis was not the swaps per se or the dollars that were extended but was the international policy coordination signal that was sent.  It is really hard to quantify the value of that, but I think it was actually very helpful to perceptions that central banks around the world recognize that this is a global crisis and responded collectively.  I think that actually was helpful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement expressing the author's opinion and belief that the international policy coordination signal sent through the foreign exchange swap program was helpful during the global crisis.


Passage number 137.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only mentions President Plosser without providing any information or context that could indicate contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 138.
 MR. PLOSSER. I guess I will start with swaps because that seems to be popular.  I share a lot of the concerns, actually, that Governor Kohn had.  Don, I thought I understood you to say that your inclination, which I would agree with, is that it is fine to keep these things on the shelf, but you don’t necessarily want to delegate it to the Foreign Currency Subcommittee to make the decisions each time that it really ought to come back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Governor Kohn and Mr. Plosser share concerns about swaps, but Mr. Plosser argues against delegating the decision-making to the Foreign Currency Subcommittee.


Passage number 139.
   MR. KOHN. For the first draw.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide information about any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a neutral statement about someone named Mr. Kohn and a draw.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 140.
 MR. PLOSSER. For the first draw. I found the argument in the memo a little strange about the transparency issue—that we wouldn’t want to have it appear in the minutes that this was voted on. And I find that sort of anti-transparency, which I wasn’t sure I found very compelling. The other thing I think about the swaps is that, as President Lacker was asking, many of these banks do have lots of dollars at their disposal.  Okay.  Given that, I would think one proper way to think about this may be that we would like them to use their own dollars as their first line of defense, rather than coming to us.  I don’t know whether that really makes sense, whether we could price this in a way that would make that a sensible strategy, or whether it is even a desirable strategy in some sense, because if these things were operational on a continuous basis, would this be a kind of “no questions asked” way for them to request dollars.  Or is it only reserved for crises.  So I’d like to put their dollars on the line first, and I’m not exactly sure how we would do that. I don’t mind having these things on the shelf and ready to go and operationalized. I am a little concerned about the usage and whose dollars come first.  And I think putting the RCAs on hold is fine.  The other aspect is something that President Lacker returned to, which is the term deposits and the RPs. I kind of share his view in that I am not sure we have the tools in the right order, at least as suggested by some of the staff discussion.  But one question I had about the term deposits was, if the term deposits are eligible for collateral at the discount window, a bank could have a term deposit and turn around and post it as collateral at the discount window and borrow, taking out short-term reserves again.  It seems as though they would undo the term deposit by doing that. So what is the point of having the term deposit if they can turn around and undo it this way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is some contention in this passage. Mr. Plosser expresses disagreement with the argument in the memo about transparency and also questions the strategy of using the banks' own dollars as a first line of defense. He also expresses concerns about the usage of these measures and the order of tools suggested by the staff discussion. Additionally, he raises a question about the effectiveness of term deposits if banks can turn around and undo them by using them as collateral at the discount window.


Passage number 141.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The discount rate is higher than the term deposit rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This statement is not a source of contention or disagreement. It is a factual statement about the relationship between the discount rate and the term deposit rate.


Passage number 142.
 MR. PLOSSER. So that interacts with how much that discount rate varies.  But they would be willing to pay something to get that reversed.  It almost makes these things tradable at a fixed price for short-term reserves. Right.  And so how do we control, or would we control, that in terms of this conversion.  It seems as though we are defeating part of the purpose by doing that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It primarily focuses on discussing a particular topic without presenting conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 143.
 MR. CLOUSE. Yes. I’m sorry. There are lots of complications, obviously.  I think, to your point, if they were eligible for collateral, that would presume that the primary credit rate was substantially above the IOER rate, for example, so that there wouldn’t be an incentive for them to use these particular classes of assets as collateral at the discount window to undo exactly the operation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Clouse, acknowledging that there are complications and discussing the potential incentives for using certain classes of assets as collateral at the discount window.


Passage number 144.
 And, of course, they have to worry not only about the spread, but also any nonpecuniary— MR. PLOSSER. Well, suppose they did it today, posted the collateral at the discount window, and went to the TAF auction and borrowed 28-day money for reserves in the TAF auction at the minimum bid.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 145.
   MR. CLOUSE. Of course, in doing so, they would be suffering a 25 basis point cost in that operation, so it wouldn’t be an incentive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is merely stating a fact about a potential cost associated with a certain operation.


Passage number 146.
  MR. PLOSSER. Well, they are borrowing at less than the primary credit rate, right. That is what they would be doing today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement made by Mr. Plosser is simply an observation stating a fact about borrowing rates.


Passage number 147.
 MR. BURKE. I think the context for these tools is that we are in an exit strategy with rising rates. The spreads are much larger than they are now when everything is compressed.  The other side of that is, if we want banks to use the facility and be interested, our feeling was that you need to allow them either to break the trade if they needed funds or to be able to pledge it as collateral at the discount window if they needed funds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing contextual information and explaining the rationale behind allowing banks to break the trade or pledge it as collateral.


Passage number 148.
 MR. PLOSSER. Well, but at the end of the day, that kind of undoes the purpose of the term deposits to begin with.  Right. I guess here is my point.  I think this is maybe part of what President Lacker may be getting at—a lot of these tools interact with each other in how you would design them and how you structure them.  So rather than doing them on a one-off basis, we need to think of them in the context of how we are going to manage the discount window going forward. Are we going to have term primary credit.  Are we going to go back to overnight money. I think these things are interrelated.  And to get a sense of how they will play out, we need to think of them collectively in how they interact with one another, rather than on a one-off basis. I guess that is really what I am thinking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the need to consider various tools and their interactions with each other in order to effectively manage the discount window going forward. The speaker is suggesting a more holistic approach rather than considering each tool individually.


Passage number 149.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes. We will just have to make sure that all of the pricing works. So, for example, there could be a prepayment penalty or something to take out the deposits. Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 150.
 MS. DUKE.  Just a response to President Plosser.  I think from the standpoint that the smaller banks would be the ones that would tend to use these term deposits the most, and they  would be unlikely to use them if there were no way to get out of them in an emergency situation.  So they just need some way to reverse it.  It wouldn’t necessarily be a pricing piece—in other words, there is a penalty to do it. But as long as they know they could reverse, then they would be likely to use it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply elaborates on the response to President Plosser and provides additional information.


Passage number 151.
 MR. PLOSSER. I am just saying that is fine, but then that undoes the purpose that we have for the term deposit, which is to reduce reserves or hit our target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not demonstrate contention or disagreement. It is a statement of Mr. Plosser expressing his concern about how a certain action might affect the purpose of a term deposit.


Passage number 152.
 MS. DUKE.  Yes. I think the difference is the decisionmaking of an individual institution versus the aggregate, and so you have to set up something whereby the individual institution can make that choice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing their own opinion and explaining the difference between individual institutions and the aggregate in terms of decision-making.


Passage number 153.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I’m sorry.  Vice Chairman, did you have something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is apologizing and asking the Vice Chairman if they had something to say.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 154.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes.  What was interesting as we went through the crisis was that, for the foreign central banks, there was clearly a very high threshold against using their own dollar reserves, liquidating their Treasury securities or whatever, to fund their domestic banks. We know that because they didn’t do it, and they told us that they didn’t want to do it because they thought it would be very confusing to the market in terms of what they were up to.  Was this some sort of foreign exchange intervention.  Or was it a sign of distress particular to their country.  We also know that there was a pretty high threshold because we actually charged them quite a bit for the foreign exchange swap lines relative to the fact that they are basically virtually a risk-free rate, yet they chose that rather than to liquidate their dollar reserves.  So I think you have to recognize that there is something special about the dollar reserves holdings that they have that they don’t want to mess with.  There was a cost for them to engage in dollar reserves sales that seemed to be fairly significant as we went through the crisis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage discusses the hesitation of foreign central banks to use their dollar reserves to fund their domestic banks during the crisis. It mentions that they didn't want to do it because it would be confusing to the market and there was a cost associated with engaging in dollar reserves sales. This suggests that there was some contention or disagreement surrounding the use of dollar reserves during the crisis.


Passage number 155.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. This is because only the name of a person, President Lockhart, is mentioned without any specific context or information that could indicate disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 156.
 MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want just to explain how I understand something and ask the question whether I understand it correctly.  It is really a comment in support of moving quickly, with a sense of urgency, counter to what President Lacker said, on the reverse repo counterparties and all of the other tools.  I think we need to address any uncertainty about our ability to drain. As I understand it, if we are going to make a decision to tighten or even signal in our statement that we are moving in the direction of tightening through the rate mechanism, we need to be able to execute an operation to move the federal funds rate, and that is going to require the draining of lots and lots of reserves. If we find that it is not feasible, realistically, to drain reserves in a time frame that is going to allow us to execute rate policy, then we are probably opting for an interest on reserves policy rate that is somewhat independent of the level of excess reserves. And if we are going to opt for that, then we need to begin to educate the market that our implementation of monetary policy is through interest on reserves.  So that is what I am thinking.  Tell me what I am missing or whether I don’t understand something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining their understanding of the situation and asking for clarification or confirmation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 157.
 MR. MADIGAN. President Lockhart, I think our view is that the primary tool will be the interest on reserves rate. But the experience to date leads us to have some doubts as to whether that will put a hard floor on the federal funds rate.  So we’re presuming that we will, in order to harden that floor, need to take at least some reserves out of the system.  Whether or not we will have to take a whole lot out at this point isn’t clear, but it is possible we might have to.  That is why we have been working on a number of tools.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Madigan, expresses doubts about whether the interest on reserves rate will effectively put a hard floor on the federal funds rate. This implies a potential difference of opinion or uncertainty about the effectiveness of the primary tool.


Passage number 158.
 MR. LOCKHART. In the old federal funds rate system, we used to operate with essentially about $30 billion to $50 billion, did we not, of excess reserves in order to create the supply to meet the demand that allowed us to hit that.  We are a long way from that, so thatsuggests to me that we are going to have a hybrid system.  Is that it.  We bring excess reserves down by $300 billion or $400 billion and operate in that territory.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Lockhart discussing how the Federal Reserve used to operate and his suggestion for a potential hybrid system.


Passage number 159.
 MR. MADIGAN. That’s possible. Well, of course, pre-crisis, obviously, we didn’t have interest on reserves. And so we have only very limited experience as to what the parameters will need to be in terms of the excess reserves rate and draining reserves to hit a particular fed funds rate target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact that before the crisis, there was no interest on reserves, and they have limited experience in determining the parameters for excess reserves rate and draining reserves to hit a particular fed funds rate target.


Passage number 160.
 MR. SACK. As I noted in my briefing, however, market participants are asking a lot of these same questions about the strategy.  I think right now the strategy is not well defined or well laid out.  So the questions they are asking are, “Will the reserve drains take place ahead of the increase in the interest on reserves rate or concurrent with it.  Even if you are relying at least partially on the interest on reserves mechanism to work, how, then, will the appropriate level of reserves be decided.  So just how big will the drain be.”  There is obviously a lot of room between where we are and where we were in the old regime, and I think they are not sure in terms of reserves where the Committee intends to end up in that range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is just presenting market participants' questions and expressing uncertainty about the strategy.


Passage number 161.
 MR. LOCKHART. Mr. Chairman, just to beat a dead horse here, many of us have been out reassuring the market that we have the tools. If there is uncertainty about that, I think we need to smoke that out and get as clear as we can as fast as we can.  I think there is a big sense of urgency around these issues.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily expresses the speaker's opinion and urgency surrounding the need to clarify and reassure the market about the tools they have.


Passage number 162.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I agree.  But I feel reasonably comfortable.  We think the interest on excess reserves could almost probably do the job by itself because, even if there is some gap, it is hard to imagine that, if you raised the interest rate on reserves high enough, it wouldn’t bring up money market rates along with it.The ability to drain reserves, sort of a belt-and-suspenders thing, is a second dimension of tightening. And if you look at Brian’s sequence of exit statements, the first statement of actual tightening combines an increase in the interest rate on excess reserves with a $200 billion drain or something like that.  And I am actually, I would say, moderately encouraged by what we have been hearing.  The staff has been extremely effective in getting these things up so that they can operate at large scale by the end of the year or early next year.  So I think we are in pretty good shape. Now, of course, we are in a new world, but I think we are in a pretty good shape.  It would be good to give more clarity to the markets, but my own sense is that what we want to do is to state policy in terms of our tools.  You know, the federal funds rate target is not going to be particularly informative.  What we are probably going to want to do the first time that we tighten is to say that we have agreed to do this to the interest rate on excess reserves, to do this to the primary credit rate, and to drain x hundred billion dollars of reserves.  And we can see what that does, and we can fine-tune it. I think that, clearly, we have the ability to tighten policy.  But what is not firmly complete is a sharp correspondence between our actions and money market rates. Obviously we know the direction, but we need to get some experience with that.  Then, I think the market is maybe a little overfixated on the question of sequencing and so on.  When we have more control of the timing and more understanding of these tools, it would probably pay us, in a speech or some other context, to lay out more clearly both what the sequencing would be and what the regime is going to be.  I mean, how are we going to express tightening and so on. But in terms of the fundamental ability to tighten policy, nothing I am hearing makes me think that we don’t have that capacity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and comfort with the ability to tighten policy and is encouraged by what they have been hearing. They also suggest giving more clarity to the markets and discussing the sequencing and regime of tightening in the future.


Passage number 163.
 MR. LOCKHART. That is very helpful to me, just to hear your views on it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lockhart is expressing gratitude and stating that he found the other person's views helpful.


Passage number 164.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is a simple expression of gratitude from President Rosengren.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 165.
 MR. ROSENGREN. Just a quick comment on the unintended consequences of lists.  When we came up with the primary dealer list, I don’t think anybody could have guessed that we would have a primary dealer credit facility.  So when I think of coming up with lists of counterparties, I just worry about the unintended consequences.  If we select firms based on size of institution, it might quickly be inferred that there is a broader reason to have the list constituted the way we have it. So when I think about that, it does seem that Governor Warsh’s suggestion that, to the extent that we can broaden it but make it manageable for the Desk to do, we avoid the unintended consequence of making it look like a list that was based on size that may be misinterpreted for other purposes.  I know it is much easier to deal operationally with fewer counterparties; but just given the perceptions that can be created by that, we might want to give some thought as to whether there are ways to broaden it so that we don’t give that misperception. Then the second list is the list of countries.  We spend a lot of time thinking about stigma, and President Yellen and I were talking about this on the elevator coming up.  But to the extent that we could come up with a size criterion that made it very clear that, if a market got to this size then we would entertain—it’s kind of the opposite.  It seems like having a much clearer criterion. One reason all of these other central banks want to be our counterparty is that we are signaling something.  If we have a swap line with Mexico, people are inferring a signal that we are comfortable having them as a counterparty.  I worry about stigmatizing the countries like Mexico and Korea and other countries that want potentially to be a counterparty in part for the signaling benefit. The way we get around that is if we have a very clear criterion that says, “If you get to this size, then maybe we will think about having a swap line.”  Maybe size isn’t the   right metric, but coming up with some metric other than country-specific choices would make me more comfortable with that list as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Rosengren expresses concerns about the unintended consequences of creating lists of counterparties and suggests that the criteria for inclusion should be broadened to avoid misinterpretation and stigma. He questions the use of size as a metric for selecting firms and countries, and suggests the need for a clearer criterion. Overall, he disagrees with the current approach of using size and country-specific choices for creating these lists.


Passage number 166.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The North American location is hard to change.  [Laughter] President Yellen, you had a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The laughter that follows may suggest a humorous reaction to the statement, but it does not indicate disagreement or contention. President Yellen's response, which is not provided in the passage, would be necessary to determine if there is any disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 167.
 MS. YELLEN. Yes. I just wanted to support that point.  We were discussing this, and I agree with President Rosengren’s comments. I do think we should think about, if we stigmatize this larger group of countries, what their response might be.  For example, they might not feel so happy about having unfettered capital flows or having subsidiaries or branches of U.S. or European-based multilateral banks in their countries.  They might change the way in which they supervise and regulate those operations, if they thought it was not automatic that they would get access to dollar liquidity in the same way they did in this crisis. If I could just—this is the only thing I want to comment on—respond to President Plosser’s comment on this, that ideally they have large stocks of reserves and we should want to encourage them to use those reserves first before drawing on us.  I am not sure that is actually true. I think that the distinction here is similar to the old one between inside and outside money.  The reserves that they hold are equivalent to inside money.  When they sell dollar reserves they have in a crisis situation to provide liquidity to their banks, it is a propagation mechanism for causing exchange rate movements and international transmission of the disturbances that they are suffering. In contrast, when we provide liquidity, we are printing money.  We are adding to the stock of outside money, and we circumvent those repercussions.  So, in a crisis, the dynamics aren’t the same.  There is a good reason to have this kind of facility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. In the first part, Ms. Yellen disagrees with President Rosengren's suggestion of stigmatizing a larger group of countries and warns about potential negative consequences. In the second part, Ms. Yellen disagrees with President Plosser's comment on encouraging countries to use their reserves first, arguing that it could have different effects on exchange rates and international transmission.


Passage number 168.
 MR. TARULLO. Janet, I think your comment may have answered my question about your first observation. So you would favor a broad range of permanent swap facilities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Tarullo is simply stating that Janet's comment has answered his question, implying agreement or understanding.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 169.
 MS. YELLEN. You know, I don’t know what the right answer is, but I am worried about restricting it to these four.  President Bullard mentioned this concern as well, and I think President Rosengren is suggesting one way to use criteria to maybe broaden the group.  But I am quite concerned about singling out these four and not making it larger.  I understand there are political issues around that and boundary problems and so forth.  But I am concerned about limiting it to these four.  And there could be economic consequences.  If you take a country like Korea and you say, “Well, we are not putting you in the same category as before,” beyond what they might do with our banks, they may decide they need an even larger war chest.  They may be more reluctant to have current account adjustments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Yellen, expresses concern about restricting the criteria to only four options and suggests the possibility of broadening the group. She also highlights the potential economic consequences and political issues associated with limiting it to four options. This shows a disagreement or contention with the idea of singling out these four options.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 170.
  It could have implications for— MR. TARULLO. So you are kind of for swaps but are leaning toward more rather than fewer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. MR. TARULLO seems to be expressing a preference for more swaps, while the other person appears to be undecided or leaning towards fewer swaps.


Passage number 171.
 MS. YELLEN. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information that suggests contention or disagreement. It simply states "MS. YELLEN. Right," which appears to be a simple agreement or acknowledgement without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 172.
 MR. TARULLO. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply acknowledges the statement made by Mr. Tarullo.


Passage number 173.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The four big ones clearly have far bigger banking sectors than any other countries in the world.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a factual observation without any explicit contention or disagreement. It simply compares the banking sectors of "the four big ones" (presumably referring to major global economies) with other countries, highlighting their significant size. The inclusion of "President Bullard" does not introduce any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 174.
 MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just wanted to follow up and echo the points that President Yellen was just making.  We have talked a lot here about swaps, and it has always been a very intuitive thing about what countries are included and which are not and why not. I think what we need is to lay out a policy for why countries are in and why countries are out, and then we would have something to say when Singapore comes to us as to why we are making the decision that we are making.  I understand it is wrapped up with other sorts of geopolitical considerations. But there should be some sort of basic criteria that will delineate why certain countries—I can imagine Asian countries being moderately upset that the Swiss arein, for instance. When I say Swiss, “It’s a small country, come on.  This is an old club that you guys have been fostering for years.”  And “You just don’t like us because we’re in Asia.”  I can imagine that that is sort of the attitude.  So if we could delineate a clearer policy about why we are doing this, that would also help us a lot on the Mexican situation and Canada, which has been inherited from the NAFA treaty. But you guys all know this.  It is all very sensitive because of the difficulties of assessing country risk and really saying, “Hey, your economy is not up to this.”  So that is where I think we should go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing agreement with the points made by President Yellen and a suggestion for the need to establish a clearer policy regarding which countries are included in swaps and why.


Passage number 175.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I have two-handers from Presidents Plosser and Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker has received two-handers from Presidents Plosser and Lockhart.


Passage number 176.
 MR. PLOSSER. Yes, I had a quick comment.  Janet, I think we’re talking about two different things.  My support for the swaps early in the crisis is exactly the point you were making of the difference between inside and outside money, and I understand that.  I was more concerned about having these lines of swaps continuously open in normal times whether we really wanted them used or whether, as Vice Chairman Dudley suggests, we price them in a way that prevents their usage except when a crisis might occur. I think that was where I was going.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Plosser is clarifying a point and expressing his concern about continuously open lines of swaps in normal times.


Passage number 177.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There doesn't appear to be enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 178.
 MR. LOCKHART. Nathan, aren’t these facilities to four central banks effectively providing liquidity facilities through the central bank to at least three and maybe four major Eurodollar markets that would operate just as we did.  They have foreign bank organizations that can get liquidity in a time of crisis.  So South Korea or Thailand or whatever would be going to market conceivably in one of these places to get their liquidity; is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Lockhart, is asking for clarification and confirmation from Nathan regarding the facilities provided by the central banks.


Passage number 179.
 MR. SHEETS. Yes, absolutely.  The memo that we put forward didn’t have a lot of quantitative indicators for these economies.  We’ve gone down that path in the past, and the problem we have is that there is a whole range of different things—comparing apples and oranges. That makes it very difficult to compare.  But in this particular case, one of the reasons we came up with the recommendation that we did is, as the Chairman mentioned, the large size of the financial institutions from these four, and then the dollar funding markets in these economies clearly set them apart from other potential counterparties.  You really see a qualitative difference between the folks that we are recommending and the ones that we aren’t.  Given that there is such a gap, my sense is that it’s not creating stigma in saying that the dollar funding needs and the size of institutions for these four are different from those for the Koreans or the Mexicans.  I think they very much agree with that. Now, the justification for the North American ones is a little different.  As the Chairman mentioned, that has to do with the extent of our integration.  If Mexico blows up, there is a high probability that we’re going to feel some effect from that, or if the Canadians have some sort of financial tension, there’s a high probability we’re going to feel that.  That is a different kind of relationship than exists with some of the Asian economies, even though we also very much value those relationships. The other point that I think is worth making here, which also helps with the stigma point, is that, over the last year, the stable of IMF facilities has expanded.  In particular, they now have a very attractive facility, the flexible credit lines, which Mexico has received, which is geared for top-tier emerging-market economies and is designed to give them significant access to liquidity, frankly, on more-generous terms and longer horizons than our swap lines would.  So there are other mechanisms out there in the global financial system to address these issues of stigma, including what the IMF has to offer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an explanation for the recommendation made and discussing the different factors that were considered.


Passage number 180.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lockhart, in one of my  previous comments to you about our ability to tighten, I should have mentioned this.  The backup to all of that is the Lacker strategy, of course, of selling the assets, which we can always do if necessary.  Anyone else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging a previous comment they made and providing additional information about a strategy that can be used if necessary. There is no disagreement or dispute present.


Passage number 181.
  MR. LACKER. Potentially a primary strategy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, is simply stating a potential strategy.


Passage number 182.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I’m  just saying in terms of having some assurance that we can respond if necessary.  Okay.  Thank you for very useful input.  We will try to get something to you to get more comments shortly. We do need to quickly ratify domestic open market operations.  Could I have a motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It consists of statements and requests for input and action.


Passage number 183.
  MR. KOHN. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. "So moved" indicates agreement or support for a previous statement or motion.


Passage number 184.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any objection.  Okay. Coffee is ready.  Why don’t we take about fifteen minutes for coffee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply includes a statement, a response, and a suggestion to take a break for coffee.


Passage number 185.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Why don’t we recommence.  Next on the agenda is the economic situation.  Let me turn it over to Dave Stockton to begin the presentation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply suggests continuing the meeting and moving on to the next agenda item.


Passage number 186.
 MR. MADIGAN.2  I will be referring to the package labeled “Material for Briefing on FOMC Participants’ Economic Projections.”  Exhibit 1 depicts the broad contours of your projections for 2009 to 2012 and over the longer run.  Most of you continue to project a protracted economic recovery, with the unemployment rate declining slowly and inflation remaining subdued over the next few years.  Based on your accompanying narratives, most of you anticipate that about five to six years will be needed for the economy to converge fully to its longer-run path.  However, some  of you stated that the convergence process might well require seven or eight years, while a few of you expect inflation to reach its longer-run rate in just a few years but anticipate that the convergence process for the real economy could take somewhat longer. Exhibit 2 reports summary statistics regarding your projections for 2009.  Your previous projections—collected in conjunction with the June FOMC meeting—are provided in italics, and Greenbook forecasts are included as a memo item.  Your current projections for real GDP growth this year have a central tendency of about minus ½ percent to zero, around a percentage point higher than in June.  The GDP decline during the first half was a bit sharper than most of you expected at the time of the June meeting, which took place a few weeks before the BEA’s publication of its preliminary second quarter release and its substantial downward revision for first quarter. Regarding the second half, most of you now anticipate 3 to 3½ percent real GDP growth, a couple of percentage points higher than the central tendency of your projections last June. Some of you noted that the recent pickup in economic activity was importantly influenced by transitory government programs such as “cash-for­clunkers” and the first-time-homebuyer tax credit.  Your projections for the fourth-quarter average unemployment rate are about the same as those made in June, and your forecasts for inflation for the year as a whole are also little changed. However, for the first half of 2009, overall and core inflation came in somewhat lower than most of you had anticipated.  For the second half, most of you revised up your forecasts for overall inflation, probably reflecting at least in part the recent increase in energy prices, and many of you shaded up your forecasts for core inflation. Exhibit 3 tabulates the central tendencies and ranges of your projections for calendar years 2010 through 2012 and over the longer run.  The broad contours of these projections are much the same as in June.  Most of you anticipate that real GDP will increase 2½ to 3½ percent in 2010 and then accelerate by about a percentage point to about 3½ to 4½ percent in 2011, with growth remaining brisk in 2012.  A few of you made modest revisions to your estimates regarding the longer-run sustainable rate of GDP growth, but the central tendency of longer-run growth projections is virtually unchanged at 2½ to 2¾ percent. Most of your unemployment rate projections for 2010 and 2011 moved down a notch since June, perhaps reflecting stronger near-term growth, but nearly all of you still expect the unemployment rate to remain above 8 percent in the fourth quarter of 2011. Moreover, nearly half of you made upward revisions to your projections regarding the rate of unemployment that is sustainable over the longer run; the central tendency for these projections now stands at 5 to 5¼ percent, roughly ¼ percentage point higher than in June. As in June, most of you see the outlook for inflation as subdued over the next several years. Your projections for total PCE inflation next year have a central tendency of about 1¼ to 1½ percent, a bit above the central tendency of your core inflation forecasts, perhaps reflecting lingering effects of increased energy prices.  Most of you see total and core inflation next year running noticeably below the 1¾ to 2 percent central tendency of your longer-run inflation projections, shown to the right for total inflation. Over 2011 and 2012, your inflation projections exhibit considerable dispersion, with a central tendency of roughly 1 to 2 percent and, by 2012, a range of about ¼ to 2¼ percent. This dispersion apparently reflects substantial differences in your views of the determinants of inflation and, to a degree, differences in your estimates of economic slack.  Perhaps the staff briefing on inflation dynamics at the December meeting and the subsequent Committee discussion will further elucidate the reasons for these divergences. The left panels of exhibit 4 indicate that nearly all of you continue to view the degree of uncertainty surrounding your projections of both output growth and inflation as high compared with historical norms.  In your narratives, some of you cite continuing vulnerabilities in the financial sector as reasons for this elevated uncertainty, while others highlight the uncertainties associated with fiscal stimulus and persistent budget deficits. As shown in the right-hand panels, nearly all of you now judge that the risks to output growth are roughly balanced, with a sharp drop   since June in the number who see the risks tilted to the downside.  Most of you also  continue to view the risks to the inflation outlook, the lower right-hand panel, as  roughly balanced. However, a few of you see the prospect of protracted economic  slack as tilting the inflation risks to the downside, while a few others point to the  challenges in managing the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, and possible adverse  effects of fiscal policy on inflation expectations, as skewing those risks to the upside.   That concludes our presentation, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 187.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much.  Questions for our colleagues.  It must be a very good briefing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 188.
   MR. STOCKTON. As we used to say in Little League, Mr. Chairman, a walk is as good as a hit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Stockton, referring to an expression commonly used in Little League, suggesting that a walk (when a batter is awarded first base due to a certain number of balls being thrown by the pitcher) is just as valuable as a hit (when a batter successfully makes contact with the ball and advances to a base). The tone of the passage is casual and supportive.


Passage number 189.
 [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I’m detecting a theme here.  Okay.  Then we’re ready to begin our go-round. President Lockhart, you’re lead-off hitter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements that suggest contention or disagreement. The use of laughter and the informal tone indicate a light or relaxed mood, suggesting agreement or camaraderie among the participants.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 190.
  MR. LOCKHART. Lead-off hitter [Laughter].  Singles and doubles, Mr. Chairman.  Despite better-than-expected economic growth in the third quarter, the sentiment of my Sixth District directors and business contacts has neither improved nor deteriorated substantially since our last meeting. The current tenor of business activity is flat to moderately more positive, but where it is more positive, there is uneasiness that improvement may not be sustainable. Several directors reported conversations citing uncertainty about the future policy environment, including health care policy, as retarding hiring and investment.  We also heard skepticism about the durability of private spending absent stimulus programs.  A number of my contacts said that orders and top-line revenue would have to grow a great deal and be sustained for many months before new full-time hiring or capital expenditures would be undertaken.  Firms reported that they have ample ability to expand their business with their existing labor force and temporary labor if needed.  However, few expect a significant upturn in orders in the near term.  Our inquiries about capital expansion got more than a few incredulous looks.  Capital spending for business expansion does not seem to be a realistic consideration for most of our contacts. I continue to hear that small businesses are struggling to find adequate financing to support any expansion and rehiring.  Work done recently by the Atlanta research staff on the makeup of job losses points to the unusually large concentration of job losses in the small business sector.  Through the end of 2008, businesses with 50 or fewer employees accounted for about 45 percent of net job losses in the recession.  Firms of this size accounted for only about 9 percent of job losses in the 2001 recession.  Our contacts also broadly confirm the view that a major commercial real estate problem is developing.  We have the view, along with others, that commercial real estate will have a sizable downside impact on regional and small banks.  I am concerned that the interplay of the commercial real estate correction and weak job growth due to constrained credit is shaping up to be a serious headwind. To sum up, anecdotal feedback from our recent contact cycle does not validate any reliable trend in the stronger GDP numbers and paints a picture of highly cautious and extremely reluctant business actors.  That said, I think it is reasonable to incorporate solid near-term growth in second-half estimates, but I remain skeptical about the medium term.  I remain to the pessimistic side of the Greenbook forecast, and I am not inclined to make too much of improved recent and near-term expected data in thinking about exit timing and communication. As regards the inflation outlook, incoming price data suggest a little more disinflationary pressure than I had assumed in June.  In the forecast submitted with this meeting, I marked down my core inflation projection a little, and I judge the inflation–deflation risks to be roughly balanced. In preparation for this meeting, I and my staff had a number of conversations with financial market participants.  There was uniform satisfaction with the continuing normalization of financial markets.  Contacts expressed more confidence and reported that they believed the markets, in general, have confidence in the idea that the Fed has the tools to execute an exit strategy.  A universal concern, however, is the strategic approach to and timing of the exit.  My contacts see some risk of a premature exit, a concern I share. But what was most notable in my recent conversations was concern about premature communication of exit intentions and the market reaction to changes in the Committee’s statement wording.  I won’t venture any further into tomorrow’s discussion.  So I will stop there.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses skepticism about the sustainability of economic improvement, the ability of private spending to continue without stimulus programs, and the likelihood of capital expansion. They also express concern about the impact of commercial real estate problems and weak job growth. However, they do acknowledge solid near-term growth and a balanced inflation outlook. The speaker also shares concern about a premature exit from current monetary policies.


Passage number 191.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply expresses gratitude towards President Plosser.


Passage number 192.
 MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I guess I’m up second.  So I don’t know what that means I’m supposed to do as a baseball player.  Get on base, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage mentions a baseball analogy made by Mr. Plosser, but there is no clear indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 193.
 MR. TARULLO. Advance the runner.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply giving an instruction or suggestion to advance the runner.


Passage number 194.
 MR. PLOSSER. Advance the ball.  [Laughter] PARTICIPANT.  Sacrifice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The response to Mr. Plosser's statement is laughter, indicating agreement or amusement.


Passage number 195.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Hit to the right side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. "Hit to the right side" is a brief statement that does not express any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing direction or instruction.


Passage number 196.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Thank you. President Bullard" does not present any clear contention or disagreement. It appears as a simple expression of gratitude towards President Bullard.


Passage number 197.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Eighth District economy has generally performed better than the U.S. economy as a whole during the last two years.  Payroll employment nationally has declined about 5.4 percent since 2007, since the recession began.  In the District, for 16 metropolitan statistical areas, payroll employment has declined only about 3.7 percent—bad to be sure but considerably better than the nation as a whole.  This generally extends across two-digit SIC codes.  One exception is education and health, which has actually grown 3.7 percent nationally during the same time period but has grown only 2.8 percent in the District metropolitan statistical areas. Very recent data on employment in the District, however, have been worse than in the nation as a whole, and we’re watching this very closely.  But the District data tend to be more volatile, as you might expect, and it is not clear at this point how meaningful they are, but I will report on that in the future.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting information about the performance of the Eighth District economy compared to the U.S. economy as a whole.


Passage number 198.
 Eighth District unemployment is just over 9 percent in our sixteen MSAs.  Anecdotal reports indicate—as many of you have noted and, I’m sure, will note—that commercial real estate is a key concern.  The near-term outlook for this area is quite grim indeed.  Businesses are very reluctant to hire, and we are in an environment of continued business caution and continued caution on capital expenditures, in particular.Nationally, I thought it was heartening to see the positive GDP growth number after four consecutive declines. I have actually seen only two positive numbers since joining the Committee.  [Laughter]  I have seen four negative ones.  So I hope that this is one in a long string here.  I was also heartened. I take this as hard evidence that the recession is ending and that we are in a position to recover from this very deep and very severe recession.  We certainly had an equity market rally through the spring and summer, but that was based on an expectation of actually better performance in the fall of 2009 and, I think, also the marking down of the probability of a very severe depression-like outcome during the spring.  That was an expectation of good numbers coming in.  So it was heartening to see a good number actually come in.  I expect that the economy will continue to grow in the fourth quarter and into the first half of 2010 and that the probability of returning to recession at this point is small.  I think history shows that the double-dip recession is actually not that common an outcome.  It could happen, but it is not that common. Based on both business contacts and models, I expect that labor market outcomes will continue to lag behind the rest of the economy, and I continue to be encouraged by growth globally, on the whole.  I was one who was very worried about the global nature of this downturn.  I thought we might get stuck in a new reality that we did not understand completely and that we had not faced in the postwar era.  That has turned out to be unwarranted.  We have a lot of growth globally, and I find that very encouraging.  I continue to believe that there is a near-term deflation risk and a medium-term risk of higher-than-desired inflation, and that is how I have continued to describe the inflation outlook.  I do think the near-term deflation risk is fading.  I am not quite ready to give it up completely; maybe if we make it all the way into 2010.  For instance, year-over-year CPI headline inflation is actually still negative. So I am still a little worried that, if we got some bad data over the winter, you could  get into a deflationary scenario.  But the risk of that is fading.  The medium term—say, two-to­three-year—inflation risk is rising because of large fiscal deficits and a very accommodative monetary policy, which may, in fact, overwhelm all other considerations. Inflation expectations are relatively stable, indeed; but in my opinion, it is a bit of an illusion. I think expectations are more at risk of becoming unmoored today than at any time in the 25 years prior to this crisis.  If we were a smaller, emerging-market type of economy pursuing the policies we are pursuing today, we would not do very well.  Investment would flee our country, and our currency would depreciate a lot.  We do not see those outcomes in the United States partly because we’re the big kid on the block.  We have a lot of size, and we have a reservoir of credibility on our side.  But those advantages do not guarantee success and should not lull us into complacency about the types of outcomes that can materialize when you put these types of policies in place. The Greenbook policy path for the fed funds rate seems unlikely to me.  I think we may be forced into a tightening action well before 2012, even though the 2012 date is actually consistent with the past behavior of this Committee.  In the past the Committee has not started a tightening cycle until two and a half to three years after the recession was over.  That was the case in 1994 and again in 2004.  Our quantitative easing program as envisioned in the Greenbook looks suboptimal to me.  It is unclear to me why we should take a large position in agency MBS arguing that it influences long-term interest rates and then not adjust on that margin in reaction to incoming data on the economy.  This is a tool that we can and should use to carry out stabilization policy for the United States during the period when our preferred short-term interest rate instrument is near zero.  The Greenbook does not do this so far, as the key assumption is buy and hold for agency MBS with no change in purchases beyond those currently scheduled.  That sounds to me like a suboptimal policy.  It should be a state-contingent policy, and I would like to see more along these lines.  But I will reserve the rest of my comments on policy for tomorrow.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their analysis and perspective on various economic issues.


Passage number 199.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a simple expression of gratitude and does not involve any conflicting opinions or views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 200.
 MR. ROSENGREN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Incoming data seem consistent with third-quarter and fourth-quarter GDP growth averaging roughly 3 percent—a welcome change after several consecutive quarters of decline.  However, although I expect the economy to continue to recover, it will likely grow much more slowly than previous recoveries. I remain particularly concerned that, as the monetary and fiscal supports subside, there will be insufficient private spending to make much progress in labor markets.  Growth in consumption and housing tend to be drivers in recoveries, and although both grew in the third quarter, they were supported by a variety of government programs, which are now in the process of winding down.  As a result, I expect that, by the end of next year, unemployment will not be much lower than its current level, an outcome quite similar to the Greenbook forecast.  I expect that, even by the end of 2012, the unemployment rate will be well above our estimate of the natural rate of unemployment.The Greenbook assumes that credit conditions will ease, making credit more available for businesses and households.  I am concerned that banking conditions over the next year may well deteriorate.  For many banks, nonperforming loans are rising and rising faster than they are reserving for problem loans.  Thus I expect that capital constraints will not ease over the next year.  In fact, they might tighten. Research at the Boston Fed has found that forecasters tend to underpredict unemployment when the percent of bank assets in banks with a poor CAMELS rating is elevated.  Currently, the percent of bank assets in banks with a CAMELS rating of 3 or worse is high and climbing.  Supporting this concern is the decline in lending in the Call Report data, which are continuing to   worsen. In fact, if one splits the lending between banks with a CAMELS rating of 1 or 2 with those of 3 or worse, the declines in lending are much larger at institutions experiencing problems, in part because they are likely shrinking to improve their capital ratios. In light of the substantial excess capacity in the economy and given that credit is likely to remain constrained, I expect a gradual disinflation over the forecast period.  The Greenbook forecast for core CPI and core PCE looks like an annual step function bounded below by 1 percent.  My concern is that the inflation rate may not be bounded by 1 percent, and we may experience more disinflation than in the Greenbook forecast.  In part, this is the result of forecast equations in Boston, but in part, it reflects the incoming data on wages, salaries, and benefits.  The continued decline in the rate of growth of wages and salaries, especially in the context of rapid productivity growth, makes it quite unlikely that core inflation will reach my 2 percent target over the forecast period.  As others noted at the last meeting, this outlook represents continued poor outcomes for both aspects of our dual mandate.  I hope, but do not expect, that growth will be faster than most of us forecast.  This would at least diminish the length of the other extended period, the period for which unemployment remains severely elevated. In turn, while we can hope that anchored inflation expectations will keep inflation from falling more than the Greenbook envisions, even in a protracted period of significant excess capacity, I am concerned about the risks that expectations will move down or that they will not sufficiently offset the downward pressure from resource slack.  While potential output may have fallen and the natural rate may have risen as a consequence of the crisis from which we are emerging, it is difficult to imagine a shift so dramatic as to materially change the size of these resource gaps.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Rosengren, expresses disagreement with the Greenbook forecast and raises concerns about the potential for slower economic growth, worsening banking conditions, declining lending, and disinflation. This is evident when he says, "I expect the economy to continue to recover, it will likely grow much more slowly than previous recoveries" and "I am concerned that banking conditions over the next year may well deteriorate."


Passage number 201.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no presence of any contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply consists of a thank-you statement addressed to President Fisher.


Passage number 202.
 MR. PLOSSER. That’s like Philadelphia sports fans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Plosser about Philadelphia sports fans.


Passage number 203.
 [Laughter] MR. FISHER. The retailers themselves report continued trends of smaller unit sales at lower prices and a shift to private labels and economy brands over a greater number of transactions, with volumes falling off as the month progresses.  This is confirmed by MasterCard’s data, which show year-over-year growth of transactions but lower average tickets.  Pricing power is nil.  Again, going to Wal-Mart, it reports that food price deflation in its average  market basket is 0.8 percent year over year through this week and has had a third consecutive month of slight deflation in general merchandise.  Inventories remain lean.  They are being managed surgically.  There is scant desire to build them overall.  Stocking is being regeared to just-in-time response in demand for specific items.  And I take note, with regard to retailers, my Bible, Women’s Wear Daily, is reporting that retailers have started laying off workers in the month of October.  That is very unusual for the fall season. There are no complaints from the big boys about accessing the credit markets.  Indeed, they report far more robust and better priced credit markets.  AmeriCredit, which is a company I have started talking to, is interesting because it finances purchases of used automobiles and has 900,000 customers.  It reports that, thanks to the TALF facility and the improved tone in the ABS market, its borrowing costs, for example, have been cut in half.  So that is good news. But one reactionary theme has emerged as expected—at least as I would expect from the global operators. The combination of projected continued dollar weakness and low interest rates earned on excess cash held in dollars is incenting their treasurers to keep their cash balances abroad.  That phenomenon should wax and wane over time. Of less topical concern, and more disturbing to me, is the belief expressed by several that risk adjustments had better prospects for returns by investing cap-ex elsewhere.  If you have read the Wall Street Journal recently—and we will have to check on the accuracy—it estimates that the S&P 500 companies are carrying $1 trillion in cash on their balance sheets.  The last time we had that kind of carry on the balance sheets was the 1960s.  As I say, this is not your mother’s 1960s. We live in a globalized world, and there are options for investing abroad.  I am finding a good many CEOs and CFOs who are planning to commit to cap-ex and deploy that $1 trillion in build-up in cash, plus additional cashflows, but very few—in fact, none out of the somewhat 30   that I spoke to—are planning to commit it here in the United States, unless there is greater clarity about future policy initiatives. The grape-shot approach that the Administration and the Congress have followed—announcing so many policy initiatives—is adding to uncertainty regarding progressive budgeting and planning for 2010.  I might note that those who have spent some time actually interacting with Mr. Summers and others at the White House have come back more concerned than placated, and this concern persists.  The bottom line is that there is a lot of hand-wringing and a great deal of hesitancy by my corporate contacts.  I would say that the mood is a little less sour, but still a little dour, and, Mr. Chairman, these anecdotal soundings do nothing to change my checkmark-shaped forecast. I continue to expect that, after this and the third quarter’s 3 percent plus growth rates, we will settle in 2010 to a slower crawl, say to 2½ percent with unemployment hanging in at about 9.7 percent, which is I guess at the low end of our central tendency, as was presented earlier, and only in 2011, will growth ramp up to near and above 4 percent, with unemployment lingering above 8 percent well into 2012.  Now, that said, these are still positive numbers, and they beg the question of whether we should begin de-accommodating earlier rather than later.  That we will talk about tomorrow. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily a report of various facts and observations.


Passage number 204.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude towards President Lacker.


Passage number 205.
 MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In the Fifth District, the outlook hasn’t changed much since our last meeting, so I will be brief.  Both our manufacturing and services indexes slipped a bit in October, but the overall manufacturing index remains in positive territory. Reports from our directors and other contacts remain decidedly mixed.  They say, for example, that many commercial real estate and banking markets continue to weaken, but they are also reporting more optimism in some sectors as well.   National economic reports also seem to remain mixed.  We are making progress toward a recovery, but clearly not all segments of the economy are participating.  Commercial construction continues to decline.  It is likely to be a drag on growth for some time.  People are losing jobs more rapidly than people are finding them.  And as long as that is happening, average consumers’ confidence in their income prospects is not likely to increase dramatically.  Moreover, the contribution from the inventory swing to top-line growth is bound to fade at some point, as is the contribution from the stimulus.   Nevertheless, I find myself somewhat optimistic, though cautiously so.  Consumer spending seems to be on a moderate upward trend, as does the housing market.  Business investment in equipment and software, in the aggregate numbers, seems to have stabilized.  And the end to the massive inventory liquidation will add at least somewhat to growth in the near term.  At this point, the distress in commercial real estate seems likely to be relatively manageable for the banking system taken as a whole.  And I think the decline in initial claims suggests that the overall job market is likely to bottom out reasonably soon.  I also like the fact that inflation seems pretty quiet now. In closing, let me just again note the passage in the Bluebook outlining potential sequences of statements going forward.  We will talk more about policy tomorrow.  I think it does make sense in this environment to look ahead, though, and to think about potential sequences of events and actions and see if we can’t take them on board in crafting our statement today. I will also note the expansion of the “extended period” sentence introducing language that gives at least some suggestion of conditions under which we might start removing accommodation.  It would be useful for us to spend a lot of time talking about what we think  those conditions might be and reaching a modest consensus on what we could put in the statement about that.  I think that would be useful.  That concludes my statement, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker gives an overview of the economic outlook in the Fifth District and shares their cautious optimism. They also mention some challenges, such as job losses and commercial real estate, but overall they see signs of moderate improvement in consumer spending, housing, and business investment.


Passage number 206.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists of a simple statement and a polite expression of gratitude. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 207.
 MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Much as I indicated in our last meeting, the incoming data and reports from my business contacts continue to reflect an economy that is in the early stages of a modest recovery from a deep recession.  Business activity is expanding, and we expect that GDP growth will average 3 to 3½ percent over the next year or so.  However, my contacts are expressing a good deal of uncertainty regarding sales and order flows in the first half of 2010, once the current inventory cycle has largely run its course.  In fact, although this is a swag to me, their reports feel more as though they expect a 2 percent growth rate than my own 2010 projection of 3½ percent. On the positive side, businesses are certainly positioned to accelerate production when demand finally does improve, as it inevitably will.  All industrial segments currently have more than enough capacity in place to meet their near-term expected sales and order flows.  But like President Fisher, I heard too much commentary from my contacts suggesting that a lack of sustainable orders and sales developments could spark another wave of cutbacks, and I suppose your reports actually had those cutbacks in train.  This seems like a serious threat.  The positive third-quarter nonfinancial earnings reports were built on cost reductions, not revenue expansions.  If fourth-quarter revenue growth continues to be modest, I suspect there is a real possibility of businesses attempting a repeat of the third quarter.  For me, the odds seem tilted toward further risk aversion on the part of businesses in the first half of 2010. The financial landscape surrounding bank credit also continues to be a headwind for the outlook. This is not a large issue for large, high-quality firms with direct access to capital markets.  They are able to obtain funding at spreads they consider to be closer to normal.  But small and medium-sized companies that rely on bank credit continue to complain about onerous terms and an inadequate supply of borrowing options.  Have you gone out and spoken to your local businesses and community bankers lately.  Community and regional bankers respond that borrowers’ credit quality is substantially worse than these businesses acknowledge, but they also say that the only way they can improve their capital ratios today is to shrink their assets, much as President Lacker was talking about. Bottom line, there continues to be a modest credit crunch for small and medium-sized businesses.   With regard to inflation, my outlook is unchanged from our last meeting.  I continue to expect that core inflation will be flat to down a bit in 2010–11 but then move up to about 1¾ percent by 2012. As I discussed at length last time, substantial resource slack remains, and I suppose we will talk more about that at the December meeting, as I understand that agenda.  Inflation expectations, as best I can judge, appear to be stable.  Longer-dated measures of expectations derived from surveys, SPF forecasts for the TIPS market continue to run in their typical ranges, and the stability of these measures stands in contrast to strong countervailing forces. For me, the risk of an outsized medium-term increase in inflation seems small, especially an increase that threatens price stability.  After all, core inflation is running currently well below my 2 percent guideline for price stability, and the medium-term prospects are for more of the same.  Of course, we will need to listen intently for changing fundamentals that may alter these risk assessments.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is providing their own analysis and opinions based on the data they have received.


Passage number 208.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is simply thanking someone, not expressing any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 209.
 MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have been encouraged by the positive tone of recent economic data and continued signs of healing in the financial system.  Improvements in the housing sector are particularly welcome because they contribute both to economic growth and to mitigating the strains on the financial system.  In the corporate bond market, risk spreads have come down, and that should support business investment for those corporations with access to market financing.   However, these encouraging signs are marred by the persistently weak labor market and stagnating wage income.  In addition, my business contacts, too, report that bank credit conditions remain tight, and most have reined in capital spending, limiting expenditures to essential projects and those that promise immediate efficiency improvements.  Finally, some of the recent strength in housing and auto purchases results from temporary government programs.  Overall, the recovery is shaping up as a long, difficult slog for several reasons, including the extraordinary depth of the recession, the pressure on financial firms and households to repair their balance sheets, and the zero bound’s considerable constraint on monetary policy. I find myself in agreement with the Greenbook’s assessment of the outlook for the economy, but this is not an outcome that I find at all satisfactory, not with unemployment rising to 10 percent this year and remaining above 8 percent through 2011 and inflation below desired levels as far as the eye can see.  That said, the most frightening downside risks to this forecast have receded, and I now view the risks to the outlook as roughly balanced.  Nevertheless, those risks are considerable.  On the upside, it is possible that consumers and businesses may be better able and more willing to spend than I have given them credit for.  Over the past several months, we have seen improvements in a number of factors that pulled down consumer spending over the past year.  These include uncertainty, consumer confidence, wealth, and credit availability.  My staff has estimated consumption-forecasting models that include these variables, and their preferred specification generates a forecast for PCE growth over the next four quarters of around 5 percent due to the improvement in those factors.  Because the model misses other forces that are restraining consumer spending, I haven’t adjusted my own baseline forecast up to nearly this extent, but this analysis does highlight for me a potential upside risk to the outlook similar to the V-shaped recovery discussed in the Greenbook. Counterbalancing this upside risk are some significant downside risks.  Some of the most worrisome ones also relate to consumer spending.  In particular, the still-parlous state of household balance sheets could restrain consumption more than is incorporated in the Greenbook. In the past, I have highlighted the potential drag on consumer spending that we may see if households, to rebuild wealth and reduce leverage, boost their saving beyond the rather modest rebound incorporated in the Greenbook forecast.  The United States was one of many countries to experience a massive increase in debt-to-income ratios followed by a severe housing bust and a retrenchment in consumption.  Interestingly, cross-country evidence reveals a remarkably strong correlation between the increase of debt to income before the crisis and the decline in real consumption once the crisis began.  I recognize that correlation does not necessarily imply causation, but this evidence provides a cautionary note that we may see abnormally low consumer spending for some time. Another downside risk relates to the effect on the banking sector of further deterioration in the commercial real estate market.  As many of you have mentioned, the prospects for commercial real estate have continued to deteriorate.  We estimate that a significant share of banks in our District will fail over the next five years as a consequence.  In fact, we are concerned that we now have a large number of already economically insolvent zombie banks whose troubles may have seriously impaired their ability to extend credit to the businesses in   their communities.  In addition, lenders are commonly asking borrowers either to repay loans or to provide more equity to offset the erosion of real estate values.  And given the very weak conditions in commercial real estate, this situation sets the stage for further increases in delinquencies and foreclosures. This process could generate an adverse feedback loop akin to that associated with residential real estate. So in summary, the economic outlook remains very uncertain, but I think the tail risks and their associated costs have receded to the point that the risks for growth are now balanced. Turning to inflation, the basic story has not changed much since our last meeting.  I expect substantial slack in labor and goods markets to reduce core PCE price inflation from about 1½ percent this year to 1 percent in 2010 and 2011.  The risks to this forecast are roughly balanced as well, but I am very concerned by the sharp deceleration we have seen in wages over the past year, and that is a development that is echoed by comments from my directors.  They report that wages are flat or even slightly down, with no increases in sight. Against this backdrop of substantial slack, a key factor putting a floor on the decline in the inflation rate is the public’s confidence that we will do whatever it takes to bring the economy back from recession and keep inflation from falling too low.  If we waiver from that pledge and tighten too soon, confidence in our commitment to economic recovery and price stability could be undermined, and that could be a recipe for an extended episode of disinflation or even deflation like the one Japan suffered through.  A commitment to low and stable inflation involves defending the inflation objective on both the upside and the downside.   A concern in this regard is the fact that implied forward rates from fed funds futures contracts now suggest that market participants expect us to start raising rates as early as next spring. This assessment, however, depends critically on the assumption that term premiums andfed funds futures contracts are very low by historical standards—about 1 basis point per month.  This assumption seems questionable, given evidence that historically these term premiums appear to have varied considerably, and estimated risks and term premiums on a wide range of assets are now quite elevated. My staff just recently completed the development of a new model of the term structure of Treasury yields and has used it to back out estimates of expected future short rates and the term premium on fed funds futures.  They find that the term premium on fed funds futures has risen substantially and is currently much higher than 1 basis point per month.  The implication, in contrast to the usual interpretation from futures, is that market participants currently expect a relatively shallow path for the funds rate similar to that in the Desk’s primary dealer survey.  These expectations exceed but are closer to my own views concerning the appropriate course of policy given what we now know. Of course, our policy decisions must depend on how economic developments actually unfold.  But if we signal a tightening of policy before it is justified by the evolution of inflation and economic slack in the economy, perhaps partly out of concern that market participants see us as getting behind the curve, we could upset confidence in our policies, cause longer-term rates to rise, and end up in a more dangerous deflationary situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, there is contention or disagreement. Ms. Yellen expresses frustration and dissatisfaction with the current economic outlook, particularly regarding the weak labor market and stagnating wage incomes. She also discusses the downside risks to the economy and warns about the potential for further deterioration in the commercial real estate market. Additionally, she disagrees with the market participants' expectation of raising rates as early as next spring, arguing that term premiums and risks are currently elevated.


Passage number 210.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. May I ask a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple request to ask a question.


Passage number 211.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: I cannot provide an answer without the passage being provided.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 212.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You said much more than 1 basis point.  Can you give me a rough order of magnitude.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The use of the phrase "much more than 1 basis point" suggests that there is a disagreement or contention about the magnitude being discussed. The speaker is seeking clarification to determine the rough order of magnitude being referred to.


Passage number 213.
 MS. YELLEN. I think the order of magnitude is about 3 or 4 basis points a month over the next year or two.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Ms. Yellen without any conflicting views or opposing arguments.


Passage number 214.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Okay. Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement expressing gratitude.


Passage number 215.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Thank you. We are halfway through our go-round. It is 5:45.  Maybe this is a good time to adjourn for today.  We will start tomorrow at 9:00 a.m. There is a reception up in the cafeteria, followed by dinner.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 216.
 [Meeting recessed]   November 4, 2009—Morning Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good morning, everyone.  Let me just start with a few items before we go into the rest of the go-round.  Just, first, one data point: The ADP employment number this morning was minus 203,000, which the stock market viewed as a decent number.  We have a small correction from yesterday’s presentation.  Brian.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing information and making a correction to a previous presentation.


Passage number 217.
 MR. MADIGAN. Yes, Mr. Chairman.  Yesterday we reported that TALF loans declined 10 percent over the intermeeting period because of repayments of TALF loans.  That decline actually applied to TALF loans backed by ABS.  We want to note that the decline in TALF loans backed by ABS was offset by an increase in TALF loans backed by CMBS.  So, on balance, over the intermeeting period, TALF loans were flat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing additional information to clarify a previous statement, indicating that there was a decline in TALF loans backed by ABS but it was offset by an increase in TALF loans backed by CMBS, resulting in a flat overall balance.


Passage number 218.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. With your indulgence, also, as I said yesterday, we want to inquire to get the views of all members on some of the issues that were raised in the presentations yesterday. But I think there are a few noncontroversial items, and maybe we can just very quickly see if everybody is okay with them and just simplify the process.  So let me just try to get a little feedback quickly. The most number of issues were raised about the swap lines, and I think we need to have a full memorandum to you on those issues.  Obviously, there were questions both about how to define the line, how to deal with the North American counterparties, and so on.  So we will send you a memo on this and ask for a thoughtful response.  If there is no objection, though, I think the staff would appreciate it if they could continue their informal nonbinding talks with the four major central banks.  In any case, this is part of the process of winding down the existing lines.  If there is no objection. Okay.  That is the swap lines.   On the material relating to various lending programs, we mentioned that we plan to consider shortening the maximum maturity of primary credit loans to 28 days.  That would be announced soon and presumably be effective after year-end.  I didn’t hear any commentary on that. Was anyone concerned about that.  Seeing none—though if you do have any comments, by all means let us know in the next week or so. The other point that was raised was that the staff wanted input on publishing a Federal Register notice on the term deposits, which would ask for input on how to structure those term deposits. Of course, again, this is nonbinding. It is just for information.  I propose that we would circulate the proposed language to the Committee and ask for any feedback on that.  But we will move ahead with developing a notice and then circulating that for any concerns. Okay. Finally, on the other issues relating to the reverse repos and so on—the staff suggested prioritizing reverse repos and term deposits and putting RCAs, the collateralized accounts, on hold for the time being.  I didn’t hear any objection to that.  Are there any concerns about that.  Let me say for myself that putting it on hold doesn’t mean killing it.  I think we ought to maintain all of our options.  The RCAs are meant to address a specific issue that we had earlier, which was the GSEs and the problems that their excess liquidity might cause for us in managing the short-term interest rate.  But this is just a prioritization for the short term.  Any concerns.   Okay. And on the reverse repos, there was some discussion of who would be the counterparties. I think what we heard from this were a couple of things.  First, in order to get this going soon, we should probably prioritize the high-volume counterparties as the first step.  But, second, we should plan to include a broader set of counterparties, and we should be developing criteria for doing that.  Governor Warsh mentioned using the private sector as one particular possibility that we should explore. Assuming that we are going to go forward with this today, which I believe we want to, we would want to continue our testing process.  I promised yesterday that we wouldn’t make final decisions, so if anybody is uncomfortable with it or would just like to have more time, please say so.  Are those things okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a discussion about various issues and proposals, with the speaker seeking feedback and approval from the committee members.


Passage number 219.
 MR. EVANS. Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is addressing the chairman in a respectful manner.


Passage number 220.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without the passage provided, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement. Please provide the passage in question.


Passage number 221.
 MR. EVANS. Just so I can understand this a little more clearly, where do the money market mutual funds enter into that prioritization.  That seems to be where a large pool of funds might come from.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a simple inquiry for clarification.


Passage number 222.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think that they would be a high priority.  Those are the major sources of funding.  But I guess the question would be, Do we go first to the Fidelitys and so on.  At some point we should try to make sure that any money market mutual fund with an interest should have access either directly or indirectly.  But in the interest of monetary policy implementation in the very short run, we would start with the larger ones.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses the priority of certain sources of funding and suggests starting with larger ones for monetary policy implementation.


Passage number 223.
 MR. EVANS. I agree. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, expresses agreement and gratitude.


Passage number 224.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the word "Okay" alone.


Passage number 225.
 MR. LACKER. Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply noting the speaker as Mr. Lacker and addressing the chairman.


Passage number 226.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right.  Yes, President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The word "Yes" is part of a response but does not indicate disagreement.


Passage number 227.
 MR. LACKER.  So we are not going down this path; it is just testing still.  We are not making a commitment to any particular volume of reverse repurchases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that there is no commitment to any particular volume of reverse repurchases, indicating a lack of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 228.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Absolutely not.  This is just making sure we have a working tool.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It focuses on ensuring the functionality of a tool.


Passage number 229.
 MR. LACKER. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 230.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Is everybody okay. All right.  Thank you very much.  We are ready to continue where we left off on the go-round.  President Hoenig, I think that you are next.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The tone is positive and the speaker is expressing gratitude and readiness to continue where they left off.


Passage number 231.
 MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Conditions in our District and my views on the outlook haven’t changed a lot since last time.  On the region, I think the operative words there are “moderately improve,” and you can kind of go through that.  We have seen our manufacturing moderately improve, driven by new orders and some orientation toward exports.  Actually, there has been some hiring in manufacturing, but that is mixed.  Of course, you get some hiring, and you get some layoffs.  So in a sense, that is pretty stable but not improving dramatically at all.  Housing has also improved.  How much that is related to the homebuyers’ credit is not clear, but we do see improvement.  Our big downside in the region is commercial real estate, and that is going to remain so for at least a couple of years, we think.  Our energy sector has also moderately improved, oil particularly.  Our natural gas, which is a big part of it, still has plenty of supply; depending on the season, that will be effective.  But one thing about the energy industry is that they have been very able, in terms of current independence, to renegotiate their lines; they have had no trouble getting those renewed.  Our labor markets, on balance, are still weak, but they are not declining, as indicated perhaps by this morning’s numbers.  One other thing I would comment on. Our larger companies do have fairly sizable cash balances. For cap-ex, they are talking about maintaining and spending to maintain, but not expanding, at this point as well. On the national economy, our outlook for GDP is not unlike that of the Greenbook.  We have a little more modest growth in 2010, and then it picks up.  We also have an assumption in there where policy is less accommodating sooner.  Still, we see modest growth going forward and, in that environment, a very modest pickup in inflation over the next couple of years.  And other than that, things are stable, moving forward, and I will leave it at that for now.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is providing an update on the conditions in their district and their views on the outlook, stating that conditions have not changed much since the last time. They provide information on various sectors such as manufacturing, housing, commercial real estate, and energy, and they mention that labor markets are weak but not declining. The speaker also shares their outlook for GDP and inflation. Overall, there is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 232.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 233.
 MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  While I am pleased by the output gains that the economy posted last quarter, I do remain concerned about how the economy will develop over the coming year.  So in preparation for this meeting, I focused my discussions with my business contacts on the question, How sustainable are the third-quarter growth figures. Despite many signs that housing prices and sales of existing homes are stabilizing, home builders in my District are still largely anticipating a bleak outlook for 2010.  They noted that their interest costs for holding land continue to rise, even while the value of that land has sagged.  Small builders reported that the increase in housing starts that we saw in the third quarter is due in large part to the fact that big builders are working off land inventories and then selling their homes at fire-sale prices.  These smaller builders do not see the gains that we saw in housing starts as sustainable. The commercial real estate developers, realtors, and investors fundamentally view their circumstances as dire, and they see a lot more pain ahead.  I am not expecting commercial construction to add to GDP next year, but beyond that it is going to take a lot of skill by many people to resolve the commercial real estate problems in an orderly way.  The problems in the commercial real estate sector add another dimension of uncertainty to my outlook. Although consumption figures picked up notably in the third quarter, many of my contacts stressed the continuing effects of weakened household balance sheets on consumer spending. A national apparel and personal care retailer confirmed this perspective by noting that households are turning from credit cards to debit cards to rein in their spending.   An auto insurer in my District reported that households are registering and insuring fewer automobiles as households try to reduce their expenses.  The insurer also reported that more customers stopped making payments after they received confirmation of having insurance or proof of insurance. Demands for these services are lower, but this insurer emphasized that the patterns that he is seeing reflect general ongoing stress that is evident in household balance sheets. The progress that is evident in consumer spending in the third quarter, seems unlikely to be sustained without notable progress on employment. I think that reports like these make it hard to extrapolate forward the full strength in the third-quarter growth rate.  So while my forecast has good growth in the third quarter, which I think was aided by many government interventions, my expectations for the fourth quarter and for next year are for less growth than is in the Greenbook projection.  In my outlook, the recovery does not build momentum until the second half of 2010.  The restraints on economic growth in my projections stem primarily from the continued weakness in both residential and commercial construction and a slow recovery in consumer spending.  Despite the weaker output path that I have in my projection, my unemployment rate does look very close to the Greenbook’s. My projection for inflation hasn’t changed materially in response to the recent good news in output. Core inflation rates continue to sag despite stable inflation expectations.  The median CPI has declined over the past several months, which points to the influence that the economic slack is having on current pricing.  I appreciate that others correctly point out that output gaps have not always been reliable in forecasting inflation.  But the compensation data show plenty of evidence that economic slack is currently affecting our economy.  Indeed, based on the rate of productivity growth that I expect we will see posted for the third quarter, it seems that unit labor costs have fallen sharply.  Fortunately, inflation expectations haven’t declined, which helped to prevent some of the downward pressure that we are seeing from converting into sharper deflation in consumer prices.  Still, my outlook for core PCE inflation is that it will dip below 1.5 percent in 2010 and only gradually increase toward 2 percent in 2011.  In sum, I view the risks around my outlook as balanced.  The risks to my outlook for inflation remain balanced because I think that shifting inflation expectations could go in either direction.  Even if we have seen stable inflation expectations to date, we could, as President Bullard pointed out in his memo, experience an expectation shock in this highly unusual economic environment. On output growth, I have shifted my balance of risks from downside to balanced.  I still harbor the concern that the momentum we are currently seeing may fade more quickly than I currently have in my outlook.  But the strength in the third-quarter data also shows that surprises to the upside are possible. Notably, export growth has been a surprise in the third quarter, and stronger world growth, as Nathan pointed out yesterday, would boost my outlook considerably.  And as the Greenbook points out, we just don’t have a lot of experience with systemic financial shocks, and perhaps the economy will prove to be more resilient to these shocks next year than I currently expect. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 234.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is evident as the statement is expressing gratitude towards President Kocherlakota, indicating a positive sentiment.


Passage number 235.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to begin by thanking the Chairman for his generous introduction yesterday.  It is an incredible honor to be a participant in this discussion, and I am looking forward to working with all of you, both today and in the meetings to come. In the Ninth District, real economic activity is stable but subdued.  Unemployment did fall considerably in Minnesota from August to September, from 8 percent to 7.3 percent, and  Minnesota has a majority of the population in the Ninth District.  However, unemployment remained elevated in the rest of the District, although I should say that unemployment has been low in the Ninth District relative to national averages elsewhere, except in the upper peninsula of Michigan. The information from our directors about their local communities is consistent with this mixed picture.  Our directors report that our consumers remain cautious about spending.  One reported that shipping was dormant in Duluth through much of the summer before picking up in late September, which, if you are familiar with Duluth, you know is very late in the shipping season for them.  The directors generally agreed that things had stopped getting worse, but they also agreed that they did not actually see them getting that much better. Nationally, an advance estimate of third-quarter GDP growth was better than expected at 3½ percent.  This increase followed four quarters of negative growth.  As a consequence, output is well below its trend levels, if we assume that trend grows at 3 percent per year beginning in the fourth quarter of 2007. Of course, 2007 represents a peak, so you may not want to draw your trend line from that point.  Given that, it is worth noting that output remains well below a 3 percent trend line that begins at the end of the 2000–01 recession.  The Greenbook predicts that GDP will rise 3.9 percent per year over the next two years.  Based on our Minneapolis model’s forecast, I believe that prediction is optimistic, if anything.  But even if it were right, GDP will be well below this 2000–01 trend line of 3 percent through the end of 2011.  Of course, it is an important question whether this discrepancy is attributable to a fall in the efficient level of output or to the effect of price and wage rigidities.  I will leave that question open.  Unemployment has stabilized in the past three months.  However, it remains extremely high by historical standards at nearly 10 percent. I agree with the Greenbook that it will remain elevated through 2011.  The employment–population ratio remains at a 25-year low. There is good news. Inflation remains low.  Inflation expectations, as measured by Blue Chip forecasts or TIPS spreads, also remain low.  However, I am concerned about a tail risk in inflation. The size of government debt held in the private sector has increased over 30 percent in the past two years.  There is a positive probability that fiscal imbalances of this kind will give rise to significant inflationary pressures.  The news is also good in financial markets.  Spreads in the interbank lending market have tightened considerably.  The spread between jumbo mortgage loans and conforming mortgage loans remains elevated but has fallen sharply since the first part of the year. House prices are stabilizing and, if you believe the Case–Shiller numbers, may actually be rising in much of the country.  So, overall, I would say the real side of the economy is recovering somewhat.  The trend in GDP is well below historical norms, unemployment is well above historical norms, and this characterization seems likely to continue well into 2011.  Inflation is under control and is expected to remain so, although the size of the government debt remains a possible large risk.  Financial markets continue to improve, and I see them as being much stronger than a year ago.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and analysis about the state of the economy without expressing any contradictory opinions or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 236.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. I’m sorry, I don’t want to put you on the spot, but I was just interested in your view on the relationship of government debt to inflation.  Do you take the fiscal theory of the price level as related here. Monetization. Excess demand.  I was just curious.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing curiosity and seeking the opinion of the person they are addressing.


Passage number 237.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Basically, when you have large government debt, as you know, there are going to be two ways to pay it off.  There is a third way, which is not to pay it  off. [Laughter] But let’s keep to the two ways of paying it off.  One is to pay it off by real tax collections, and the other way is to monetize. I think private markets will be concerned about whether or not we will be monetizing, and that will influence inflation expectations and the realization of inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing two ways to pay off government debt and stating that private markets may be concerned about the potential monetization of the debt and its impact on inflation expectations.


Passage number 238.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The phrase "Thank you, Vice Chairman" is a polite expression of gratitude and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 239.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a polite expression of gratitude directed towards Governor Kohn.


Passage number 240.
 MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Incoming data on economic activity seem consistent with not only an expanding economy but also one that will strengthen gradually with a slow decline in unemployment from very elevated levels.  So although my forecast has strengthened since June, it still has, as many of you have remarked, the same basic contour that it has had for some time—President Fisher’s checkmark contour. I think the good news was that final demand, if anything, was a bit stronger than expected, reinforcing the impression that the upturn is underpinned by more than an inventory correction with consumption outside autos and orders for capital equipment moving higher.  But as I noted, there  are reasons for sticking with the outlook for only a gradual strengthening.  The surprise in consumption came at the expense of a sharper-than-expected fall in the saving rate, which does not seem sustainable or repeatable.  I agree with the staff forecast that the saving rate is likely to rise over coming quarters as households adjust to lower wealth, uncertain job prospects, and less available credit. Payrolls and initial claims suggest that the job market remains quite weak.  The effects of this on incomes and on confidence are likely to be felt for some time.  There is no evidence yet that other forms of spending are likely to expand rapidly enough to fill the gap left by lower levels of consumption out of income for some time.  The housing market looks better, but starts and permits have only leveled out, and vacancy rates remain quite high.  High vacancy rates and financial constraints will weigh on nonresidential construction for some time.  Restraint on the growth of consumption along with excess capacity will hold down accelerator effects on business investment.  And net exports were still a negative contributor to GDP in the third quarter despite the pickup in growth abroad. Financial market developments over the intermeeting period also continue to point to financial constraints on the increase in demand.  As Dave Stockton noted, a sustained improvement in financial markets—including the greater availability of bank credit, a further decline in credit-risk premiums, and a rise in equity prices—are important preconditions for even the gradual strengthening of demand in the Greenbook forecast.  Most especially, bank credit remains quite tight.  On the quantity side, bank lending continued to decline very rapidly, and growth in the monetary aggregates was modest.  A good deal of the drop in bank loans undoubtedly reflects demand weakness, but the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey indicated that banks continue to cut back on all kinds of credit lines, and they continue to tighten standards, albeit by a smaller pluralitythan before.  And on the price side of bank credit, a considerable margin of banks reported a further tightening of spreads on business loans.  Many banks continue to struggle with loan losses, and it will take some time before they rebuild capital and become more comfortable increasing the supply of credit. In securities markets, the pace of improvement slowed amid questions about the strength of the recovery.  The decline in equity prices in the past two weeks, as well as the small rebound in the dollar and a decline in some commodity prices, suggests to me a healthy appreciation of the likely gradual pickup in the economy and the risks around it.  But it also implies a slowing in the financial market impetus to recovery.   Although I’m at the upper end of the central tendency on growth, I find myself at the lower end of the central tendencies on inflation.  I had core inflation drifting down further over the next two years to 1 percent, reflecting the effects of a lot of slack in utilization of capital and labor resources.  Like everyone else, I’m looking forward to the discussion in December.  I agree that slack and output gaps are hard to measure.  Potential supply could be and probably is being held down by some of the frictions associated with the required reallocation of capital and labor resources as construction, financial, and consumer goods and services sectors shrink, while net exports and business investments slowly fill the gap.  And financial constraints might inhibit the ability of small businesses—in particular, in sectors that are benefiting from shifts in demand—from expanding plant and staffing.  But the surprising strength in productivity suggests that firms are able to do more with less, and that provides a countervailing boost to potential GDP. Data on core inflation over the intermeeting period continued to come in quite damped, and we have experienced a percentage point or more of core disinflation over the past year, while all of these adverse influences on potential supply were already in play.  As a number of you have remarked, the growth in labor compensation is decelerating quite remarkably.  All of this has occurred while inflation expectations have been very well anchored.  Stable expectations will mute the effect of slack, will flatten the Phillips curve, but something has been pressuring inflation lower while expectations have been stable, and I infer that it is primarily a large margin of slack—of excess supply.  Furthermore, I confess to being one of the two people who saw the balance of risks around my inflation forecast as tilted to the downside.  If energy prices follow the futures market path, actual inflation will be quite low for a long time, and expectations could become unanchored but on the downside. I recognize that there are upside risks on the inflation forecast as well.  To my mind, they are primarily around a feedback loop from the dollar to commodity prices to headline inflation to inflation expectations.  Some decline in the dollar is a necessary part of the rebalancing of global demand.  We need some expenditure-shifting to get that rebalancing, although it would be preferable if the rising currencies were among the surplus countries of Asia.  And commodity prices should rise some as the global economy recuperates, especially with the recovery led by resource-using economies of Asia.  But the risk is that a loss of confidence in the dollar and its purchasing power becomes self-reinforcing feedback on inflation expectations.  We do not see this yet.  I don’t expect it in response to moderate declines in the dollar and the rise in raw materials prices, but it is a risk that we will need to be especially attentive to.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any statement of disagreement or contention. It is a statement of Mr. Kohn's views on the economy and inflation.


Passage number 241.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude addressed to Governor Warsh.


Passage number 242.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude from someone to Governor Duke.


Passage number 243.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "Governor Tarullo" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the title of a governor without providing any specific information or context.


Passage number 244.
 MR. TARULLO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First, let me say that I’ll be brief.  Second, let me say that I mean it.  [Laughter]  I think little has changed on net since our last meeting, and this   unremarkable story strikes me as itself unremarkable because the outlook for moderate growth in the next few quarters has been relatively clear for a while.  As to the second half of 2010 and beyond, though, while the forecast of modestly to moderately above-trend growth remains eminently plausible, there is considerable uncertainty.  Factors such as the waning of stimulus effects, the continued drag on consumption engendered by high unemployment, and the travails of the commercial real estate market could well lead to a more sluggish pace of growth.  On the other hand, as I’ve said at each of the last couple of meetings, despite these significant downside risks, I don’t discount entirely the possibility of a more rapid pace of recovery. Turning to price stability, the story is similar:  substantial clarity for the near-to-medium term with low levels of inflation and then more uncertainty thereafter.  I have my doubts that an unwelcome level of inflation could take hold in the absence of either a rapid acceleration in job growth that got us at least within shouting distance of full employment or a big, exogenous shock in the form of much higher commodity prices.  But I acknowledge that the unusual characteristics of a recession following a financial crisis and the consequent policy responses may make past experience less than dispositive.  And I would add that I am less convinced than I would like to be that recent exchange rate developments are wholly benign.  I think they bear watching. To conclude by referring to our statutory dual mandate, maximum employment is not remotely in sight.  Concerns about deflation have substantially receded, though they have not disappeared entirely.  Concerns about inflation seem at this point to be based more on anticipation than on observation.  But I’m happy to join others in continuing to keep watch.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker shares their observations and thoughts on the current economic outlook and acknowledges the potential for uncertainty in the future. There is no indication of disagreement with others or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 245.
   MR. PLOSSER. Mr. Chairman, on your discussion about credit and banks and the amount of loans outstanding—my understanding is that if we look at, say, C&I loan outstanding credit, there are two components to that.  One is new loans being made, and there are also the write-downs of existing loans that reduce what appears to be the outstanding value.  So one of the things that I think would be interesting in looking at that is distinguishing between those two things—where the volume of new loans is, how much of it is new loan creation, and how much of it is just write-downs of existing loans; and that might tell us some interesting things about what’s happening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser is simply providing additional information and suggesting a way to analyze the data in a more detailed manner.


Passage number 246.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes, that’s a very important point.  I guess I would say that, given that C&I loans have fallen much more sharply than other categories, it would seem unlikely that write-downs would be the major source of that.  It is part of it, certainly.  But the other factor that affects those numbers is the ability of banks to make loans and then to securitize them.  And   3 The materials used by Mr. Madigan are appended to this transcript (appendix 3). that has actually declined, which means that there is more holding of loans on their balance sheets.  So that to some extent goes in the other direction, but your point is well taken.  Other questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the point made and provides additional information to support it.


Passage number 247.
 MR. LACKER. Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that someone named Mr. Lacker is addressing another person known as the Chairman.


Passage number 248.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot answer the question as the passage is incomplete.


Passage number 249.
 MR. LACKER.  The research you referenced, VARs and lending, is that available.  Is that written up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MR. LACKER simply asks a question about the availability of research on VARs and lending.


Passage number 250.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, this was just a simple VAR that I asked for, but certainly we can send it to you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses the speaker's willingness to send the requested item.


Passage number 251.
 MR. LACKER. Give us a list of the variables, we’ll run it ourselves if we have to.  If it was written up, it would be really convenient.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply requesting a list of variables and expressing that it would be convenient if it was already written up.


Passage number 252.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any other comments, questions.  All right.  Brian, let me turn to you for introducing the policy round.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a request for comments or questions.


Passage number 253.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you, Brian. I have actually a quick question.  In the final part of the exit, you have a federal funds rate target, which changes, and then you support that with an increase in interest rate on reserves, and so on.  Are we comfortable with that.  The alternative would be, say, to tighten monetary conditions—“The Federal Reserve is taking the following actions”—and those would include the interest rate on reserves, sterilization of some  reserves, and so on. You don’t have to answer the question now exactly, but it seems to me that an alternative, rather than targeting the federal funds rate, might be simply to state the actions that we would be taking, which we know we can control, and therefore reduce that slippage.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting an alternative approach to targeting the federal funds rate. They are not challenging or arguing against the original proposal, but rather presenting another option for consideration.


Passage number 254.
 MR. MADIGAN. Yes. That certainly seems as though it is worth further thought and discussion. And I don’t have a definite answer for you at this point.  One disadvantage of proceeding in that direction might be that market participants would wonder what happened to the target funds rate range and why the Committee didn’t set one.  And it would seem that we would need to explain why we didn’t set one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Madigan is simply expressing the need for further thought and discussion regarding a specific topic and acknowledging the potential concerns or disadvantages that may arise from a particular course of action.


Passage number 255.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "Other questions" does not involve any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 256.
 MR. LOCKHART. Brian, in your discussion of alternative B and the new language that precedes the “extended period” statement, if I heard you correctly you were saying that you were proposing to add the new language, but it is not necessarily the sole trigger, and that that is conveyed in the statement.  Is that conveyed by the word “including”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is seeking clarification and understanding about the proposed language, rather than expressing disagreement or arguing a point.


Passage number 257.
 MR. MADIGAN. Yes, President Lockhart, that was our thought—that by referencing primarily economic conditions and then including a subordinate set of phrases, these specific items, those would not be necessarily the only factors that could lead to a change in the target range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining their thought process and rationale.


Passage number 258.
 MR. LOCKHART. And it is your sense that adding this new language, which is a lot more specific as to conditionality, is balanced with the “including” word and others to convey that it is not necessarily those factors that are going to dictate our decision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is merely stating the speaker's opinion and interpretation of the language being discussed.


Passage number 259.
 MR. MADIGAN. That was our thought.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "That was our thought" suggests agreement.


Passage number 260.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only mentions President Plosser without stating any contrasting views or arguments.


Passage number 261.
  MR. PLOSSER. Just in thinking about this transition, one of the things that would be interesting to know is—and, Mr. Chairman, you talked a bit about this yesterday—where do you want to get to at the end of the day in terms of how we are going to conduct policy.  Are we going to envision ourselves in a corridor system of some kind or a floor system.  How are we going to treat the federal funds market.  Getting more specific about where that endpoint is, where we think we want to get to as we come to more normal policy, would be helpful to us, and then working backwards to figure out the transition we want to get there.  I think this is a really good exercise for us to be doing, and so I would encourage you to keep pursuing that, and thinking about that endpoint would be a useful addition to thinking about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Plosser expressing his thoughts and suggesting that the Federal Reserve should consider determining their desired endpoint for policy and work backward to figure out the transition.


Passage number 262.
 MR. MADIGAN. And we do continue that work.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the work continues.


Passage number 263.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I cannot provide a response without the specific passage you are referring to. Could you please provide the passage so that I can assist you?


Passage number 264.
 MR. EVANS. Thank you. It’s a small question.  I am probably parsing this too closely, but the words that you gave us—in alternative A, you refer to “this exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate for an extended period,” and, in B, “exceptionally low levels . . . for an extended period.” My inference on this would be that B accepts the possibility that this might be a higher funds rate than 0 to ¼, since it is not this exceptionally low. I wouldn’t have interpreted B that way, but—am I parsing too much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification and expressing their own interpretation of the given options.


Passage number 265.
 MR. MADIGAN. Well, that was the distinction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a simple statement made by Mr. Madigan.


Passage number 266.
  Alternative A just pins it down more tightly than B does, but it may not be an important— MR. EVANS. I would guess that the Committee’s interpretation of B is this 0 to ¼ range for an exceptional period of time.  Okay. Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an explanation and the response of "Okay. Thanks" suggests agreement or acceptance.


Passage number 267.
 MR. KOHN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is insufficient information given in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 268.
 And that repeats the language of the September—  MR. EVANS. Yes, it does. It is something only we would recognize as a difference, because we see A and B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply acknowledges that the language being used in the conversation is repeating what was said in September. The response of "Yes, it does" is in agreement with the statement.


Passage number 269.
 [Laughter] MR. FISHER. Brian accented “this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is a quoted dialogue that includes laughter, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 270.
” MR. EVANS. Well, it’s in red.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a color.


Passage number 271.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. He used the language.  I assure you that someone will notice it. President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The first sentence states a fact, and the second sentence assures the reader that someone will notice it. Both statements are in agreement with each other.


Passage number 272.
 MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This has to do with your interpretation of the “including” word. The original version last week was that we continue to anticipate that these three things are likely to warrant low levels for an extended period.  I interpreted that as a one-way thing and as that we are not going to raise rates unless one of these three things changes.  So there are two things. First, I take low rates of resource utilization to be a broad reference to the level of economic activity.  Then there is inflation.  I am wondering what else there is that is relevant to policy. And then I have another question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification and asking for additional information.


Passage number 273.
 MR. MADIGAN. Well, just as an example, and this may or may not be a good example, the value of the dollar was mentioned earlier as a possible consideration in making monetary policy. The revised language was intended just to loosen things up a bit so that it was not solely these three factors that would necessarily drive policy decisions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It presents a statement made by Mr. Madigan, discussing the value of the dollar as a possible consideration in making monetary policy and the intention behind the revised language.


Passage number 274.
 MR. LACKER. The second question is, The original way in which I read this is that we are not going to raise rates unless one of these three things changes; is that the way you interpreted the original.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a question about the interpretation of a statement.


Passage number 275.
 MR. MADIGAN. Well, it is not an absolute commitment.  It is an expectation. But apart from that distinction—yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply clarifying a distinction without expressing any disagreement or contradiction.


Passage number 276.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. This is the Bellman principle, President Lacker.  The Bellman principle is that, if the situation looks the same, you do the same.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information about the Bellman principle and confirming its validity with President Lacker.


Passage number 277.
  If the economy looks six months from now exactly as it looks today— MR. LACKER. Yes, I understand that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a simple statement made by MR. LACKER, showing his understanding of a hypothetical scenario.


Passage number 278.
 But now there is a fourth thing that we are not telling them about, which could induce us to change rates, even if these other three things— MR. FISHER. Are you talking about the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply adding another factor that could lead to a change in rates.


Passage number 279.
 MR. LACKER. Whatever it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply starts their sentence with "Whatever it is," suggesting a continuation or response to a previous statement or question.


Passage number 280.
 MR. FISHER. Oh, the unknown fourth thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher is simply expressing curiosity or wonder about the unknown fourth thing.


Passage number 281.
 MR. LACKER. We are saying that we are not going to change rates unless one of these three things changes or a fourth secret thing changes.  Is that the right way to interpret this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining a condition that needs to be met in order for rates to be changed.


Passage number 282.
 MR. MADIGAN. Well, I don’t certainly see it as referencing a secret.  Clearly, these three factors that we list explicitly are very important factors in governing the stance in policy.  But, again, this is simply intended to allow for the possibility that something else might incline the Committee to adjust its policy even without a significant change in these three items.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Madigan is not expressing disagreement or contention. He is explaining his perspective and stating that he does not see the reference as indicating a secret. He acknowledges the importance of the three listed factors but also leaves room for the possibility of other factors influencing the committee's policy.


Passage number 283.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think it conveys a sense also of not being an automatic mechanical trigger—that there is still going to be judgment involved in looking at all of these issues.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any conflicting opinions or opposing views. It simply states that there is still judgment involved in looking at the mentioned issues, implying that it is not an automatic process.


Passage number 284.
 MR. LACKER. But it is one way, right.  It says that we are not going to do it unless one of these three things changes. But if one of these three changes, we don’t have to do it, the way it was worded before. So it doesn’t require us to do it if one of these changes.  It just means one of those things has to change before we do it.  Right.  That’s the way I was interpreting it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their interpretation of the statement without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 285.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I don’t think it actually means that.  Remember what we said originally. We made a forecast of policy that we said economic conditions would likely  justify. It wasn’t an unconditional forecast.  It was a conditional forecast that we thought the economy was going to evolve in such a way that would justify low rates of interest, and this is a description of some of the things that we would be looking at that we expect to happen and that would, therefore, tend to keep us at the low rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the conditions and reasoning behind a previous forecast.


Passage number 286.
 MR. LACKER. I guess what I’m saying is that the way it was before and the way it was done, if conditions are in this set, rates will be low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 287.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Likely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide explicit information about contention or disagreement, but the use of the word "likely" implies that there is a possibility of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 288.
 MR. LACKER. And if they are out of this set, all bets are off.  We’re not saying whether they are going to be low or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no explicit contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that if the mentioned conditions are not met, the outcome would become uncertain.


Passage number 289.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We can go back to the old language if you want, but the purpose of it is to try to provide more explicit information about what we are going to be looking at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating the possibility of returning to the old language, and clarifying the purpose of the new language.


Passage number 290.
 MR. LACKER. Exactly. I endorse that entirely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker is expressing agreement and endorsement of the previous statement, indicating there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 291.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. And I think the presumption would be, if there were a sharp change in inflation expectations, for example, that we would respond to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining a hypothetical scenario and stating that they would respond accordingly.


Passage number 292.
 MR. LACKER. Absolutely. Yes. I think it is valuable to provide some more guidance like this and to round out the reaction function.  But my interpretation is that we are just saying that in this set of conditions we expect low rates.  It is sort of asymmetric in that regard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, agrees with the idea of providing more guidance and rounding out the reaction function. They also acknowledge that the expectation of low rates is specific to a particular set of conditions and is asymmetric in nature.


Passage number 293.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think it would be read as saying that, if these conditions fail to hold, we would have to respond to it or at least seriously consider responding to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no specific contention or disagreement in the passage. It only explains a condition and the potential response to it.


Passage number 294.
 MR. LACKER. All right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any evidence of contention or disagreement. It simply states "MR. LACKER. All right," without any indication of conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 295.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions for Brian.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that there are more questions for Brian and mentions President Pianalto.


Passage number 296.
   MS. PIANALTO. Mr. Chairman, when the first draft of alternative B came out, it dropped economic conditions and just listed these three factors, and I commented to Brian that I thought that was just too narrow because it was so closely focused on these three factors.  So I prefer this revised language because it leaves in economic conditions and then, as you point out, highlights these three factors.  I just wanted to highlight that it was a concern that I had raised.  I prefer the language as it is now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Pianalto is expressing her preference for the revised language and highlighting that she had raised a concern previously.


Passage number 297.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any other questions for Brian.  Okay. The coffee is ready. And in order not to interrupt the policy go-round, why don’t we take a break and restart at 11:00.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "Thank you" shows gratitude or appreciation, but it does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 298.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Why don’t we recommence with the policy go-round. President Plosser, lead-off hitter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting that they resume discussing the policy, using a sports analogy ("lead-off hitter") to refer to President Plosser as the first person to speak.


Passage number 299.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Plosser, just a couple of factual matters.  I think we do anticipate that the Treasury will raise its balances again.  But if they don’t, we’ll have to address that.  Second, I think a lot of people around the table agree with you about inflation targets, but if they are to be credible and democratically legitimate, they need to have at least some political support.  And I think this moment is probably not the optimal point.  Okay. President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 300.
 MR. PLOSSER. I just keep making my plugs.  That’s all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states a simple fact without expressing any disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 301.
 [Laughter]  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I understand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the speaker understands something, followed by laughter, which suggests a light or humorous tone.


Passage number 302.
 MR. ROSENGREN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B and the language. We are seeing some initial signs of recovery, but that recovery is likely to be weak and subject to reversal.  Given that we make little progress on reaching full employment or 2 percent core PCE inflation over the forecast period, even with the funds rate pinned at zero, I am strongly in favor of retaining the “extended period” language.  Given the significantly greater losses that would be associated with the realization of downside versus upside risks to my growth outlook, I hope we retain some policy flexibility over the coming months.  I can easily conceive of conditions under which we would need to provide additional stimulus to the economy. Two additional comments.  First, while I am comfortable with the language that has been added surrounding the agency purchase program, I would say I still am concerned that some will view that as a policy change. So to the extent that we can possibly use informal mechanisms to reiterate that it is not a policy change, I think that would be advisable.  Second, in terms of communicating policy as we do start shifting to changes, I think we should focus on things that we know we can influence.  So interest on reserves would be where I would be focusing the statements, at least initially, until we get a better sense of how that works.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Rosengren, expresses support for alternative B and the language used. He also discusses the need to retain the "extended period" language and the possibility of providing additional stimulus to the economy. While there are some concerns raised, there is no indication of disagreement or contention with the overall direction or decisions being discussed.


Passage number 303.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists of a simple expression of gratitude towards President Lacker. There is no assertion or disagreement present.


Passage number 304.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you, President Lacker.  President Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement “Thank you, President Lacker” is simply expressing gratitude towards President Lacker, and “President Yellen” is most likely a continuation of the acknowledgement or address to another individual.


Passage number 305.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B.  With the funds rate effectively constrained at zero and our large-scale asset-purchase programs nearing completion, communication relating to the future path of policy is the main tool now available to shape market expectations, influence longer-term interest rates, and thereby affect the overall degree of monetary accommodation.  For this reason, I think it’s important that we clearly communicate our goals and policy strategy, and I very much like alternative B’s clear portrayal of the key factors that will guide our future policy decisions consistent with our own past behavior—namely, resource utilization, inflation trends, and inflation expectations.  That’s not to rule out the possibility that some other factors could play a role, but these have been the prime drivers in the past, and I think should and will be the prime drivers going forward.  It is because I expect resource utilization—namely, unemployment—to remain far above the NAIRU for a long time, for core inflation to be below my preferred 2 percent objective, and inflation expectations to remain anchored that my own policy expectations accord with the assumptions in the Greenbook and the constrained optimal policy path in the Bluebook.  Of course, we are in wait-and-see mode now.  But at this critical juncture we need to be very careful not to add to market confusion about what the main determinants will be of policy going forward, and I fear that, if we are confusing, we may hinder recovery and the attainment of price stability. I was pleased to see the additional language relating to our decision on agency debt in the revised version of B.  I think it’s very important to avoid leaving market participants with the impression that our decision not to go up to the maximum of $200 billion reflects a shift in our intended monetary policy path.  And I would support President Rosengren’s suggestion that, if there is an informal way to convey to market participants that this was a technical decision rather than a policy decision, doing so would be useful. On the issue of asset sales, I also agree with Presidents Bullard and Lacker that we should consider using asset sales as part of an exit strategy, especially if we think that the market for MBS is beginning to normalize and function more effectively.  I think, as we taper down our purchases over the next couple of months, we’re going to get a much better sense of that.  But if that’s a properly functioning market, I also think it may make sense to begin to actually sell assets when— this is a long way off—we finally exit.  I would not necessarily assume that we’re only going to let those run off our portfolio rather than sell them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 306.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple expression of gratitude towards Governor Kohn. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 307.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor the language of alternative B.  I agree with President Plosser that the passage of time and the confirmation of the upturn in the economy brings exit closer, but the outcomes are still quite unsatisfactory through 2012, certainly by my forecast.  And looking at the central tendency of the Committee’s forecast, as Brian pointed out, in 2012 we still have resource utilization a couple of percentage points below where we think it should be over the longer run and inflation below where we think it should end up.  So being constrained at the lower bound, we’re not in any way at an optimal setting, and I think it will be quite a while before we tighten.  I had my tightening in mid-2011.  I think President Plosser and President Lacker have raised interesting points about how to structure the exit and what to do, and so we have all next year to discuss it.  [Laughter]  Doesn’t that sound like fun. Paragraphs 1 and 2 to me present the right picture, which is that not much has changed since the last meeting, and that’s the consensus here.  So I’m happy with that language.  Obviously, with my policy expectations, I feel very strongly that we ought to retain the “extended period” language. With regard to the three factors in here, I think that’s a good idea.  Those factors are related to our mandate, and to my mind, levels are very important not only because of the legislative mandate but also because they make sense in my economic model.  Adding those factors underlines that it’s a conditional forecast that talks about the economic conditions, and it gives us some elements to talk about as we edge closer to exit, whenever that might be.  I like that the words “anticipate” and then “are likely to” give a certain forward-looking aspect to it, and that’s right.  We should be thinking about what those factors are going to be in four or eight quarters, not necessarily what they are today.  I think that President Lacker is right:  The “including” language suggests that something else might be out there.  It gives us some flexibility.  To my mind, these issues about the dollar and asset prices would play primarily through these three factors that we have here and wouldn’t have an independent role in monetary policy, but the way it is worded gives us a little flexibility in that regard.  And I could live with President Lacker’s suggestion about putting “very” in front of “low rates of resource utilization.”  After all, we’re justifying exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate. I agree with specifying the $175 billion.  That’s the path we’re on.  Why not reduce uncertainty as long as we’re clear about the fact that it’s because of the market functioning that we’re doing this and we’re not really pulling back policy.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 308.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing gratitude towards President Bullard.


Passage number 309.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage provided. It solely consists of a polite expression of gratitude from the speaker to President Hoenig.


Passage number 310.
 MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like a couple of others, I would have some preference for alternative C; but this is not the day, and I recognize that.  The reason I have some   preference is that I do worry about this environment in which we are at such low rates and we are purchasing assets and sowing the seeds of some future imbalances.  It does significantly rely on a reversing at the right time.  And to the extent that we are prepared to do that, I think the language is good. I would prefer the language sometimes in alternative C—if not today, then at some point as we transition to this. The three factors language is fine.  I’m fine with “very low” as well and also with $175 billion. I am also looking forward to the discussions about how we reverse ourselves and the discussions of asset sales or interest on reserves and how to juxtapose those very hard choices that we have ahead of us, and I think that will be an important part of our future deliberations.  So alternative B, as you are describing it, I think will be the way to go with my preferences noted.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses a preference for alternative C but acknowledges that it may not be feasible at this time. They also express agreement with the language and figures in alternative B.


Passage number 311.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 312.
 MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like so many others, I support the policy choice in alternative B.  I interpret this as a stay-the-course option.  For the most part, I support the language in draft alternative B, but I do have some reservations about the changes in paragraph 3 from the September statement. I’m not sure I see the benefit of replacing the assertion that the Committee continues to anticipate that economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the fed funds rate for an extended period with the new statement of low rates of resource utilization, subdued inflation, and inflation expectations.  I think it’s generally understood that the conditionality of our decisions is based on resource utilization, inflation, and inflation expectations.  So I think this could be interpreted as trying to emphasize something new by changing the language in this way, and I suspect it could be interpreted as implying increased focus on the unemployment rate, which of course I’m sympathetic with as a criterion, but we may very well begin to initiate tightening before  there’s any substantial improvement in unemployment.  So I think this could serve to confuse more than illuminate. So I don’t see a percentage in a lot of forward guidance at this point, and I would prefer simply to stick with the language that we used in September. I am concerned, based on some of my soundings in the financial markets, that we’re sort of in a strange loop dilemma. We’re not ready to initiate tightening, at least through the policy rate, but changes in the “extended period” language, including maybe even the words around that language, depending on how they’re interpreted, could create an unwanted adjustment in rate levels that would amount to tightening.  So I prefer that we start to signal when we’re much closer to action. As regards the $175 billion agency debt purchases language, I would have the concern that this could be misinterpreted, but I think the adjustments between the first draft and the draft we have in front of us adequately explain this as very much a technical matter; so it will avoid misinterpretation or overinterpretation.  So I’m comfortable with that.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker expresses disagreement with the changes made in paragraph 3 from the September statement and argues that the new language may cause confusion rather than clarification. They also express concern that the changes in language could lead to unintended tightening of rates. The speaker does agree with the adjustments made in the language regarding the $175 billion agency debt purchases.


Passage number 313.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions President Fisher without elaborating on any conflicting opinions or arguments related to him.


Passage number 314.
   MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, with a Norwegian mother and Australian father, I’m genetically disposed toward alternative C, given that those are the two central banks—the only thing that they had in common—that recently raised their rates.  But I won’t argue for it.  I don’t think it’s timely, and I favor alternative B.  I did note in the statement issued yesterday by the Reserve Bank of Australia the following.  It said that “it is prudent to lessen gradually the degree of monetary stimulus that was put in place when the outlook appeared to be much weaker.”  One of the things I worry about is that we are finding our statements in constant iterations from a period when we feared depression 2.0, deflation 2.0.  What I’m hearing at the table, and looking at the estimates of economic growth going forward, is that depression 2.0 is no longer a risk. But I still hear—perhaps   selectively because I fear it myself and through the retailers that I speak to—that there still is a risk of deflation.  I don’t think we’re out of the woods on that front. So I’m encouraged by at least the latter part of Brian’s presentation.  The alternatives have been laid out.  On that front I would simply say that I would personally be in favor of asset sales first, and I hope we can flesh that out somewhat.  On the other options that have been presented and the way they are being phrased, I would like to consult my team back at home and then perhaps send in a memo, Brian, with some suggestions. I am concerned about the dollar.  Mr. Chairman, you raised this as one of the possible dislocations resulting from low interest rates.  Other people who intervened, Governor Tarullo and others, have mentioned the dollar.  In thinking this through and how we phrase alternative B, I put on my old hat as a foreign exchange adviser, which I did for four years at Brown Brothers advising corporations in the late 1970s and early 1980s, certainly different times, as to how treasurers should position themselves and how speculators should position themselves. Were I doing that today, I would be advising, say, a large Russian trader like Vitol, which is the largest speculative oil trader—bigger in terms of financial positions in the world than Shell or BP—on a dollar play based on the language you have in this statement because it’s not simply the level but also the predictability and duration.  So as an adviser, were I reading that language—that we’re going to keep rates exceptionally low for an extended period—to me it would be great kindling wood for the carry trade.  I do believe that that’s a risk and a problem right now.  It may be less of a risk for us per se, but if I know that I can borrow dollars cheaply and have this likely for an extended period, I’m going to jam as much into the A dollar, as much into the Brazilian real, and as much into these little currencies and move those markets as I can.  I do believe it has something to do with the price of oil. I think in a great deal of the pricing of oil currently, given the excess inventory that’s on the  seas and given the excess inventory of gas and other alternatives to oil, the dollar is clearly a significant factor. Therefore, my one suggestion—which I don’t think will carry the table, but I’m going to put it out there anyway—is that, if we do change the term “extended period,” to change it for “some time.”  I think that would throw enough uncertainty into those who are pursuing the carry trade and, very importantly, to those corporate treasurers who are not repatriating capital because they find the ability to earn a return here is less than what they can earn somewhere else, and it might mitigate the risk of the kind of dollar crisis that we all fear.  But that’s the only suggestion I have, Mr. Chairman, from a practicable standpoint.  Other than that, I would embrace alternative B.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, is expressing his personal views and concerns but does not argue against any specific point made by others. He states his preference for alternative B but also acknowledges the merits of alternative C.


Passage number 315.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The words "Thank you" and "President Evans" indicate gratitude and respect towards someone, implying agreement or appreciation rather than disagreement.


Passage number 316.
 MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  You know, in the old days it wasn’t uncommon at this point for the Committee members to begin to say, “I agree with the Chairman,” and have a pretty quick commentary. But since you don’t do it that way, I’ll just say that today I agree with President Yellen and Governor Kohn.  The unemployment rate is headed toward 10 percent or above. Inflation by my forecast is well under-running my inflation guideline of 2 percent.  For me this suggests a low likelihood of a policy switch for some time.  Frankly, any tightening of the fed funds rate, for lack of a better policy tool, before June 2010 seems unlikely to me.  It’s not a zero probability.  It seems small.  Maybe it will be later, as Governor Kohn said.  I personally find it very difficult to say that, but it could be true.  And this is my view of appropriate policy, by the way, not just a prediction of what the Committee will do.  It is a state-contingent viewpoint, and it’s not a promise. In terms of the statement language, I think that the statement should provide an accurate description of how we view the risks and the policy markers.  I think the list is good.  PresidentLacker suggested “very low” resource utilization.  That could be okay.  Some other possibilities are “unusually low,” “exceptionally low,” “notably low,” and “historically low.”  If the unemployment rate goes to 8 percent, it’s still going to be pretty low real resource utilization.  So I don’t really think that that has a shocking implication for how policy would change. But that said, our statement is only one form of communication.  You do testimony.  Others do that. We have speeches.  And small changes in language generate phone calls from a number of people who used to be on the Board asking, “What does this mean in terms of exceptionally low or just low or something like that.”  So there are a lot of different ways that we communicate.  I think that the statement should be descriptive.  I don’t think it should necessarily be proscriptive or even prescriptive.  If the events and the risks change and change quickly, policy can change. In summary, Mr. Chairman, I think that policy is likely to stay— at low rates for an extended period.  I agree with alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing agreement with the views of President Yellen and Governor Kohn and sharing their assessment of the unemployment rate and inflation. The speaker also shares their viewpoint on appropriate policy and suggests possible changes to the statement language. Overall, there is no disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 317.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "Okay. Thank you." is simply a polite response to the statement made by President Pianalto.


Passage number 318.
 MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also support alternative B.  I think the language in B acknowledges the improvement in economic conditions that we saw last quarter but limits the importance of that information in a way that I think is appropriate. When I read the initial version of alternative B, before we had the benefit of the Bluebook’s explanation in which the staff laid out a communication strategy, I was concerned that the public would not understand why we were making this change in the language in paragraph 3 from our September statement around economic conditions.  I was also concerned, as I said earlier, about leading the public to focus on just the three factors that are listed.  I think this new language is more flexible in a constructive way, and yet it is still consistent with the staff’s communication strategy that has been laid out.   In regard to the communication strategy, I also want to express my appreciation to Brian and the staff for being so responsive to our request that a communication strategy be laid out that will line up with and support our exit strategy.  The sequence of statements that you’ve given us is very constructive. It will give us time to think about and adjust the language well in advance of our having to take action.  So I just want to thank you for doing that.  It was very helpful.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Pianalto expresses support for alternative B and appreciation for the staff's communication strategy.


Passage number 319.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of thanks to President Kocherlakota.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 320.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Just a couple of comments.  Saying that reserves facilitate deposits implies that the banks have to lend the money to the consumers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there may be some disagreement or contention in the passage. The statement "Saying that reserves facilitate deposits implies that the banks have to lend the money to the consumers" suggests there might be an opposing view or interpretation of how reserves function in facilitating deposits. One perspective might argue that reserves are solely meant to facilitate deposits, while another perspective may contend that reserves also involve lending money to consumers.


Passage number 321.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 322.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. So they are at the moment not lending, as you know, and if they were to lend, it would show up in inflation but also show up in aggregate demand.  So presumably both of our objectives would be moving.  Thus it would be appropriate for us to tighten through interest rates and through other mechanisms in that case. Several people have mentioned asset sales, and I thought President Bullard’s point about last in–first out was an interesting way to think about it.  I want to point out just the practical point that we are committed now to purchasing through the end of the first quarter.  So to do that, you’re essentially putting off any interest rate response until late next year.  That may be the right thing to do, but it may be inconvenient to do it, given that our commitment to purchase goes into next year.  Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the current lending situation and potential actions that could be taken, without any conflicting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 323.
 MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me talk about two things with respect to policy: first, the mortgage-backed securities, which have been much discussed, and second, the third paragraph and the suggestions therein.  First, on the MBS—no surprise.  I’m pleased that we’re ending and announcing the end of our purchases with respect to both MBS and agency debt.  On the agency debt side, I don’t think it’s likely to be misunderstood or misinterpreted, but back-channel communications there could be constructive.  With respect to the mortgage-backed securities, I think we may well have overstayed and outstayed our welcome, but at least providing clarity that we are at this moment completing our purchases early next year is useful.  It may turn out that rates move even over the intermeeting period, as Brian Sack and Bill Dudley suggested, in anticipation of the end of that program.  I think they are anticipating some move, and from our perspective, it’s okay. It will be interesting to see what the fiscal and political authorities think about our comfort with that move in thirty-year fixed-rate mortgages and what sorts of responses they either ask of us or ask of themselves there.  As I think we all know, the form and function of the GSEs is likely to get more attention come next year. The exit problems that we’re talking about with respect to mortgage-backed securities factored into some of our thinking about the purchases after these markets started functioning.  I guess you should add me to the camp of those who are certainly open minded and even forward leaning about thinking about the net benefits of bringing some liquidity and duration back to those markets at the appropriate time, which is not now.  And Mr. Chairman, I think it is at least as important that we don’t signal that $1 trillion or $1.25 trillion of MBS are permanently off the market.  I think that is likely to be unconstructive and restricting of our options going forward if markets come to that view.  So not only for our own internal purposes of thinking about it but also given the uncertainties about the mortgage finance market, I think making sure that’s one of a number of alternatives that we talk about more publicly at this point would be useful. Turning to policy in the third paragraph, I think that the additions and the “including” phrase are actually quite useful. They amplify the conditions that underscore our condition-dependent forecast. I noted and giggled like many of you when Brian showed the number of speeches by FOMC members in this intermeeting period, and I guess I’d make a couple notes about it.  First, I saw remarkable accord then and, frankly, around this table about the conduct of policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 324.
  I think, with the exception of the President who represents the Game 6 loser of the World Series, [laughter]—  MR. PLOSSER.  New York.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It only presents a statement without anyone opposing or conflicting with it.


Passage number 325.
   MR. WARSH.  —that there is at least to this point remarkable accord that rates are low and will need to stay very low for quite some time.  I’d say that there’s a second bit of agreement among those thirty speeches and that is that we are all very humble about what the risks of that forecast are,very humble and uncertain about the 2010–11 forecast.  Where there are differences, they are over what we think the risks are when we get ready to change regimes.  What are the risks on the inflation front or on the output front or some other exogenous variable.  And I’ve been impressed by the markets through these 30 speeches.  Markets did not bring forward, not even a little bit, the time at which policy could become less accommodative.   What did we see though.  Markets became less certain about the degree of what that move might be, and I think in some ways their variance on the speed of that policy accommodation matches at least what I’ve heard today.  I don’t view that as a troubling development at all.  I think what we’re doing in amplifying the economic conditions and referencing utilization, inflation trends, and inflation expectations is making very clear to them that those are uncertainties of ours and theirs, and we aren’t trying to prejudge what their own judgments on those should be.  So I think that the market for information is improving and will be improved by our being just a little more explicit on those fronts, and I think that variance is, frankly, quite a useful thing. With respect to the question of whether we should use the word “including,” I do think it’s useful.  While everything, I suppose, could be reduced to these three phrases that speak to our dual mandate, I wouldn’t want markets to have the impression that we are immune to what could be going on in the world geopolitically with respect to the foreign exchange value of the dollar or with respect to asset prices.  So I think it is credibility enhancing to suggest that we understand the uncertainties in this world, and I would strongly support including it.  I don’t think that by using the word “including” we’re suggesting there is some secret condition that we are hiding from their view.  It’s just acknowledging those uncertainties.  With that, I support alternative B as drafted.  While I think it will get a reasonable amount of attention on these three phases, I consider it   consistent with intermeeting speeches and also consistent with the discussions we’ve had today.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is reflecting on the level of agreement among the speeches and discussions, stating that there is remarkable accord about the need for low interest rates. They also mention agreement on being humble and uncertain about future forecasts. Any differences mentioned are about the risks and uncertainties surrounding changing policies, not about conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 326.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage, as it only includes a polite expression of gratitude addressed to Governor Duke.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 327.
 MS. DUKE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like first to pile a little onto Governor Warsh’s comments about the mortgage-backed securities market.  The financial improvement does not extend to mortgage instruments.  As recently as the last meeting I was concerned that the lack of a housing finance system would require our continued purchase of the MBS even beyond the first quarter of next year.  I’ve thought about this a lot in the intermeeting period, and I’ve come to the conclusion that, just as we found with the TALF, there are some markets that our tools can’t fix.  I don’t see how our economy fully recovers without the true resolution of Fannie and Freddie and clarity in the role of government in housing finance and the structure of private-label loan securitizations.  In my opinion, it is much more important than homebuyer tax credits, but I don’t think either our continued purchase or holding of these securities can substitute for such a policy.  With that, I would like to agree with President Evans in his comments, particularly his agreement with President Yellen and Governor Kohn, and support alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: In this passage, the speaker, Ms. Duke, expresses disagreement with the idea that the financial improvement extends to mortgage instruments. She argues that the lack of a housing finance system will require continued purchase of mortgage-backed securities (MBS) even beyond the first quarter of next year. She also disagrees with the idea that the purchase or holding of MBS can substitute for a true resolution of Fannie and Freddie and clarity in the role of government in housing finance. Therefore, there is contention and disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 328.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 329.
 MR. TARULLO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like everybody, I think, I support the policy actions set forth in alternative B.  I do have some concerns about the language, specifically the insertion of the “including” phrase at the beginning of paragraph 3.  I didn’t have those concerns when Brian circulated the language.  I didn’t have those concerns after Brian explained to me why the language is in there.  But after this meeting, I do have them, [laughter] and let me explain why. First—this is a secondary point, but I will mention it—I am somewhat bemused by the inflation expectations criterion.  For a social scientist to put such weight on such a slippery metric,   whose relationship to outcomes historically is, as I understand it, not particularly well established empirically has just surprised me—something that I hadn’t focused on before being on the Board.  That’s something that I look forward to hearing more about in the December meeting, when we have a full presentation of the academic work behind inflation more generally. I understand that faith and intuition are important elements in economic policy making.  So in and of itself, that concern wouldn’t have moved me to speak.  I guess where I do have a concern is on the issue of what this phrase will communicate.  This is going to be the news out of this statement.  Everything else is expected.  Some of the things that some people expected to be in here are not going to be in here, and therefore, this is going to be the only thing for people to focus on. To the extent that the “including” phrase is understood as a positive statement of the principal factors that the 17 people around the table will be looking at over the coming meetings, I think that would enhance communications, and I took it that that was the reason it was included in the statement originally.  But unlike Kevin, I didn’t find the 30 speeches a wholly positive and productive development after the last FOMC meeting.  My own sense from talking to a number of market actors was that they thought that there was confusion within the Committee, which they thought undermined within a very short period of time the FOMC statement itself.  I don’t think it was serious, and I think people kind of bounced back, and some of the sophisticated analysts did a very nice job on our behalf of teasing out the points of agreement and putting them out to markets more generally.  But just having listened to the conversation, I am concerned that the release of this statement with the “including” phrase will be quickly followed by a litigation of the meaning and relative importance of each of these three items in a series of public statements, and when some people start making the public statements, other people are going to be moved to make public statements that kind of go a bit on the other side.  Therefore, I am concerned that what began as a  nicely stated, positive assertion of the principal factors that we all, some of us more than others, will be looking at will fairly quickly devolve into a bit of cacophony. Now, it may be that markets will just look at who the speakers are and say, “Okay.  Well, this is nothing new from this person,” and so it won’t be that serious.  But to the degree that what we’re looking for in the next three, four, five, six meetings is the capacity to speak more or less with one voice on how we plan to move ahead and eventually how we plan to exit, I fear that we’re setting a not-terrific precedent for our capacity to do so.  And so, Mr. Chairman, although I certainly wouldn’t even dream of opposing alternative B if you choose to keep the language in, I guess my own preference would have been to hold this language until perhaps the December meeting, after we’ve had a chance to talk about at least the inflation considerations in a bit more detail, in the hopes that the positive statement at that time would reflect a greater level of consensus among the seventeen of us.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: 
The passage shows disagreement or contention as Mr. Tarullo expresses concerns about the language in alternative B and the potential impact it may have on communication and consensus within the Committee. He mentions concerns about confusion, potential litigation of meaning, and the possibility of a cacophony of public statements. He suggests holding off on using the language until further discussion and consensus can be reached.


Passage number 330.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Thank you. Vice Chairman" does not express any conflicting or opposing views. It simply expresses gratitude towards the vice chairman.


Passage number 331.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B. I think that people have raised important points, that the changes in the language will be noted, and that people will be trying to parse out what those changes in the language mean.  There is some risk associated with that, especially given the fact that the public knows pretty clearly that we are also contemplating the broader question of the possible sequence of our statement language over time.  That said, I think the changes themselves are pretty innocuous, and my view would be that there is a little risk there.  I think I know which direction the market will move in response to them, but my judgment would be that they are small rather than they are large.  The first change just clarifies what the conditioning factors are in terms of our view of exceptionally low for an extended period, and the second change is really just explaining what we are actually   planning to do on agency debt. I don’t think we really have an alternative to that, because if we kept in the “up to $200 billion,” what would we do at the next meeting.  What would we do at the meeting after that.  At some point we would be saying right before the program ends that we are doing up to $200 billion, but we’re not. We are doing $175 billion.  So I think that one we just have to do to clarify the direction. In terms of the discussions of asset sales, I think the issue of sequence—in what order you do things—as we exit is hugely important.  I am not pre-committed to any ordering.  I certainly want to hear all of the arguments, but I don’t agree at all that asset sales would be gentle to the market at this time.  I think asset sales to the market at this time would be completely ungentle, especially given the primary dealer survey results, which showed fewer than 50 percent thought that we would ever do asset sales.  I think it is an open-ended question, isn’t it, Brian.  So to go from something that we would never do to something that we would do first, I think we have to do a lot of explaining and conditioning for the market to understand that it was not a big deal. So if we decide to go down that path, we’ve got a lot of work to do with the market participants before we do it. I just want to talk a bit about the possible sequence of actions going forward.  One thing we don’t ever really have detailed discussions about is what the language means, and I think you have to understand what the language means before you decide when you need to change the language. I have asked a bunch of people about what these words mean, just to get a sense of what the common understanding is. And there isn’t one.  But I am going to throw out as a strawman my view of what the words mean, because that will then condition when you might want to actually change these words.  My view is that “extended” means that no tightening is likely for more than six months, so the time frame is pretty far out.  So in making the consideration today whether I want to include the “extended” language, I have to think about whether it is likely that I am going to want to tighten monetary policy in the next six months.  And given my forecast, I don’t see that as likely. I am with Governor Kohn.  I don’t see us tightening in 2010.  I think we are going to talk a lot about it, but I don’t think we are going to do it for a very long time.  The “for some time” language, rather than the “extended period,” implies to me no tightening for three months or more.  We are not going to tighten at the next meeting.  It is possible that we could tighten the meeting after that, but that is sort of the frontier.  And the “before long” language seems to me to be signaling that we are likely to tighten at the next meeting, in fact. Now, what gets confusing is when we use two things together, as in alternative C in Brian’s handout. We removed the word “exceptional” and changed it to “low levels of the funds rate,” and we also changed the timing from “extended period” to “for some time.”  I think that is going to be totally confusing to the market.  I think the market would actually take that as that we are tightening at the next meeting.  We are moving from exceptionally low to low immediately, and then we are going to stay at low for a meeting or two.  So I think we have to be very careful when we change the language that we change one element, not two simultaneously.  Then, I think we will get ourselves in a lot of trouble.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 332.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much.  Well, most people supported the actions in alternative B. That is my preference as well.  Let me talk about some of the issues of language that were raised and see if we have any desire to make changes.  I don’t think anybody at all mentioned the first paragraph, which is a first.  So perhaps forget that for now.  On the second paragraph, there were a couple of suggestions to substitute the language in paragraph 2 of alternative C. I think it would be risky to do that.  I would note one logical issue, which is that the C (2) language suggests a somewhat different conditionality, which is that policy will be focused on price stability, which it certainly will be, but it would be kind of strange to introduce conditionality in two places with a somewhat different mix of factors.  But I recognize that issue. So now let’s go to the third paragraph, where the main concerns are.  To avoid for a moment the most important sentence, one or two folks had concerns about being explicit about the $175 billion. The Vice Chairman suggested that we have to do it in order to be transparent.  Could I maybe ask Brian Madigan and Brian Sack or anyone else if they have any thoughts on the market impact of this statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 333.
   MR. MADIGAN. Go ahead, Brian.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply gives permission for Brian to proceed.


Passage number 334.
 MR. SACK. Well, we did reach out and take a poll of various players in the agency debt market.  It seems as though the expectations are generally between $175 billion and $200 billion, maybe a touch higher than we had been thinking, so I think there is a modest surprise here.  But it is modest.  I wouldn’t worry about it. Could agency spreads back up a little.  Sure. Will there be a lot of talk about why and what this means.  Yes, absolutely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is acknowledging that there may be a slight difference in expectations but does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 335.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The concern—we tried to respond to President Yellen’s suggestion—was to make sure that nobody confused this with an intentional tightening.  And I guess I would like reassurance that we have explained what we are doing here.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There does not seem to be any contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a concern and seeking reassurance but is not in disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 336.
 MR. MADIGAN. I agree. I think our sense is that overall the statement is not likely to have much of a market impact.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both parties agree that the statement is not likely to have much of a market impact.


Passage number 337.
 MR. SACK. Right. And we changed the language exactly to accomplish that, to convey that this is consistent with what we have been doing already.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It states that the language was changed to convey consistency with past actions.


Passage number 338.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage provided.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 339.
  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. If there is starting to be a reaction to this, there may be some value to having a background conversation to make it clear that this is not a change.  I wouldn’t do it beforehand because we don’t know that we have a problem.  But if the market does take it the wrong way, which I think is a low probability, you might want to have a background conversation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: There is a potential contention in the passage regarding whether or not to have a background conversation. The author states that they wouldn't do it beforehand because they don't know if there is a problem, but suggests having a background conversation if the market reacts negatively. This implies a potential disagreement on the timing and necessity of the conversation.


Passage number 340.
 MR. LACKER. Or we can make 30 speeches.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker is presenting two options or alternatives, without expressing any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 341.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. That is probably not sufficient.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that something is not enough or adequate.


Passage number 342.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right.  So let’s go to the main sentence, which is about the extended period. First, a couple of comments.  I do think we need to maintain the “extended period” for now. I think most of the people around the table agreed with that, given the macro outlook. I am sensitive to President Fisher’s comments about the carry trade.  In fact, I tried to underline those issues when I gave my own remarks.  President Fisher, you had asked Nathan yesterday about this issue, and he pointed out that there is a good carry trade and a bad carry trade. The good carry trade is the appropriate response of asset prices to low interest rates essentially, and that shows up in exchange rates.  It shows up in other asset prices as well.  The bad carry trade is when people behave as if they know for sure that interest rates will be low forever and exchange rates will be stable, or at least they go in a one-way direction.  I have always had difficulty with the latter because it is not an arbitrage.  It is an irrational response.  But all I can say is that this is something we really do need to pay attention to.  I agree with that, and I mentioned this in my remarks.  So it is a concern, but we also have our macroeconomic concerns. President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with President Fisher's comments about the carry trade and mentions that they also highlighted these issues in their own remarks. They express concern about the "bad carry trade" but also acknowledge the macroeconomic concerns that need to be considered.


Passage number 343.
  MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, I simply wanted to point that out.  It is not clear to me, if we were to have a run on the dollar in an intermeeting period, what we would do.  Would we raise interest rates. What would we do.  So all I am saying is that we might consider this.  I am not going to argue for it. I don’t think it is going to carry, but I just wanted to be sensitive to it.  About the only thing we can do is the way we express ourselves, to say or to have the Secretary of the Treasury say—as every Secretary, not just Tim, has said forever—“I believe in a strong dollar policy.” That doesn’t sound anymore in the marketplace.  It has been said so many times by so many people it just doesn’t ring.  So I wonder what we would do under these circumstances, and the only point I wanted to make is, if we are worried about this, if we are at a tipping point or when we get to that, that maybe a little language change might help because it takes away the permanence.  It shortens and builds a lexicon for the period, but I don’t want to make too big a deal out of it.  I am concerned about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their concern and suggesting that a language change might be helpful, but they do not argue for it and acknowledge that it may not carry.


Passage number 344.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think there are various language things that policymakers, including myself, President Trichet, and others, could use to address this to some extent more credibly. Of course, we don’t want to talk about this here—it is a bad word—but there is always intervention, which seems to have an effect. Okay. So on the sentence—Governor Tarullo, I think, raised the possibility of delaying the conditionality. I thought most people were in favor of taking this step.  Are there others who are concerned.  I recognize that any change is risky, but we can’t avoid the risk.  At some point we have to move in a direction.  Maybe this is not the right moment.  But is there anyone else who is concerned.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and questions, but there is no indication of any conflict or differing opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 345.
 MR. LOCKHART. I spoke against it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The phrase "I spoke against it" indicates that Mr. Lockhart is expressing disagreement or opposition to something.


Passage number 346.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lockhart, that’s right.  Yes, sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. "President Lockhart, that's right" is a simple statement acknowledging the position of President Lockhart. The "yes, sorry" at the end seems to indicate that the speaker is apologizing for any confusion or mistake.


Passage number 347.
  MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. I spoke against it, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage only states that Mr. Kocherlakota spoke against something, without providing any information about any opposition or disagreement. Therefore, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage itself.


Passage number 348.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right. So we have some.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: information about the company's financial performance from the past quarter.


Passage number 349.
  I think, though, that the majority are still—I think there is a bit of risk, but— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. There is a bit of risk, but there is always going to be risk when we change language. The problem with that, of course, is that we lock ourselves into the statement more and more, which then makes it even a bigger risk when we change language.  So it’s a very bad dynamic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and beliefs about the subject without conflicting with any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 350.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. That’s right. That was part of the way I was thinking about this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating that their previous statement is correct and that it aligns with their thinking process.


Passage number 351.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. For me it would be helpful to hear an explanation why it is now suddenly so useful to be so specific as opposed to in the past.  That is something I don’t understand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Mr. Kocherlakota is expressing his confusion and seeking clarification, but there is no evident contention or disagreement in his statement.


Passage number 352.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The reason is, essentially, that what we have now is interpreted as a sort of an unconditional commitment to—even though we say “economic conditions will warrant”— it seems like an unconditional commitment to hold rates for six months or more, as the Vice Chairman was saying.  I think doing this helps to emphasize the conditionality of our commitment, so that we would be able to change if economic conditions changed notably. And although there may be some adverse reaction because people think this is a step to exit—I think that’s a risk—it will also be an increase in clarity and transparency.  Yes, Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The author is simply explaining their perspective on the issue being discussed.


Passage number 353.
 MR. TARULLO. Just to clarify or to restate what I said earlier, I agree with Bill Dudley.  I think that, all things considered, sooner rather than later is actually better because you are not locked in. But the risk associated with the statement is not simply a function of the statement itself on the day it is released. And that was the point—we are in a position to minimize the riskiness associated with the statement, and I would just urge everybody to bear that in mind, particularly over the next 72 hours.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is agreeing with Bill Dudley's statement and urging others to keep in mind that the riskiness associated with the statement can be minimized.


Passage number 354.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I'm not able to generate a response based on the information given.


Passage number 355.
 MR. EVANS. I’m having a hard time appreciating in some precise way what we mean by the risk in terms of this language.  I understand that markets react to every change that we make, and then sometimes the reaction is undone.  Sometimes it changes things.  But I am of the opinion that, when we have a pretty good approach to monetary policy, we are pretty forthright in describing what we are doing. Markets somehow figure out what we are doing, and these are well within the lines in terms of those types of changes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing his own understanding and opinion without directly opposing or contradicting any other viewpoint.


Passage number 356.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, I think the risk is that the markets will move forward the tightening path, which I don’t think is consistent with expectations in most of the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 357.
 MR. EVANS. Then, you go out and somebody talks and somebody really important talks and it gets clarified.  When people rely extraordinarily on the statement, then we begin to feel locked in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is describing a situation where someone goes out and talks to someone important to clarify a statement. The statement does not involve any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 358.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The counterargument is that we can only put this off.  All right, recognizing that there is some risk, we will have to see what happens. The last question I want to ask was raised by President Lacker first, and I think others, which is the phrase “low rates of resource utilization.”  Now, ironically, the reason that I was in favor of dropping “very” was in deference to President Lacker.  [Laughter]  I thought that it would be a concern that we could measure output gaps, distinguish between the output gaps that are very large and just ordinarily large.  In that spirit, I was concerned that adding “very” would   then create a cottage industry, figuring out the dividing line between “very” and “not so very.”  That was part of my concern.  I can be persuaded if the Committee approves that. But the other possibility I would just raise would be that this sentence very much echoes the terms in paragraph 2.  Paragraph 2 already refers to longer-term inflation expectations being stable and inflation being subdued.  And I think it actually elaborates because it talks about longer-term inflation expectations and about forward-looking inflation projections.  So in that spirit, it wouldn’t be particularly elegant, but we could replace “low rates of resource utilization” with “substantial resource slack,” if that was preferred.  Someone liked that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different options and possibilities, but there is no argument or disagreement present.


Passage number 359.
 MR. PLOSSER. I like “low rates of.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is a statement expressing the speaker's preference for "low rates of."


Passage number 360.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. You like “low rates of utilization.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. The speaker simply states that someone likes "low rates of utilization."


Passage number 361.
” MR. PLOSSER. Better than “resource slack.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing an opinion that something is "better," but there is no opposing viewpoint presented or any sign of disagreement.


Passage number 362.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. All right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. The words "Okay" and "All right" indicate agreement or acceptance.


Passage number 363.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. That is more an output gap idea, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is expressing a personal opinion, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 364.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, the passage does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement. The mention of President Lacker alone does not indicate any specific context or conflicting views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 365.
 MR. LACKER. I would point out there is going to be a cottage industry no matter what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, Mr. Lacker is pointing out the potential existence of a cottage industry. This statement may imply contention or disagreement because it suggests that regardless of the outcome or decision, there will be a certain industry, which can be interpreted as a disagreement about the outcome's impact on different industries.


Passage number 366.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 367.
 MR. LACKER. The question is, What is the object of their endeavors in their cottages.  [Laughter] So they are going to be focusing on “low” versus “very low.”  It seems as though “very low” is the right thing to focus their attention on.  It seems like a more accurate characterization.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their opinion on what the focus of attention should be, but there is no conflicting viewpoint being presented.


Passage number 368.
 MR. TARULLO. This, again, seems to me to be pre-judging rather than to have a criterion, which is, just to reiterate, what my concern is about this whole endeavor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not showcase any contention or disagreement. It represents a statement of concern by Mr. Tarullo regarding a particular subject.


Passage number 369.
 MR. PLOSSER. But they speculate that on what we mean anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not show any form of contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Plosser discussing speculation.


Passage number 370.
   MR. LACKER. Well, I would just reiterate that we are conveying a set of conditions under which we anticipate retaining low rates, and narrowing that range of conditions only reduces the amount of pre-commitment.  So it makes it a more inclusive, broader, weaker, statement in some sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply reiterating that narrowing the range of conditions under which they anticipate retaining low rates would make their statement more inclusive, broader, and weaker.


Passage number 371.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think it makes it a stronger statement because it could mean that, even if inflation is low and expectations of inflation are low, that if unemployment falls below 8 percent, then we’ll start to move, which might be possible but I wouldn’t want to commit to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion on the strength of a statement and presenting a hypothetical scenario.


Passage number 372.
 MR. LACKER. I go back to the way the sentence reads.  It doesn’t say “only if economic conditions are.”  It just says “if.”  It is if this, then low—it doesn’t say “if not this, then raising rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker is simply providing his interpretation and clarification of the sentence.


Passage number 373.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, I think that is how it would be interpreted.  Okay. I will try both possible options.  If there is not majority support, we will just stay with what we have. So, first, I didn’t see much support for “substantial resource slack.”  Was there anybody. Nobody wants to support that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their thoughts and opinions and trying to gather feedback and support from others.


Passage number 374.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Groundswell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 375.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Groundswell is supported.  All right. We’ll be democratic.  What is the view on “very”.  Who favors “very”. Anyone else.  All right. So I think we have about as much of a consensus as we can get.  Well, having gone through this at some length, we have ended up with the status quo. [Laughter]  Any further comments or thoughts on B. All right.  Again, I appreciate the commentary.  I think the points that were raised in the policy round, considering not only today’s statement but also about how we will exit and how we   will communicate it, are very important.  And, of course, the staff will continue to work on both the policy regime and the communication associated with it. If you will call the roll, please, Matt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges support for Groundswell and seeks consensus on the use of the word "very". They continue to express appreciation for commentary and indicate that the staff will continue to work on policy and communications.


Passage number 376.
 MR. LUECKE. This vote will encompass the alternative B policy statement on page 3 of the packet on monetary policy alternatives, as well as the directive for alternative B on page 9 of that same packet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating that the vote will encompass the alternative B policy statement and directive in the packet.


