Passage number 1.
Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on   April 28-29, 2009  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good afternoon, everybody.  This is a joint meeting of the FOMC and the Board, so I need a motion to close the Board meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a procedural statement requesting a motion to close the Board meeting.


Passage number 2.
 MR. KOHN. So move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement or instruction given by Mr. Kohn.


Passage number 3.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Without objection.  Thank you. Our first item of business is to get reports on Desk operations, liquidity programs, and balance sheet developments.  Let me  turn first to Trish Mosser.  Trish.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 4.
 MR. CARPENTER.2  Thanks, Trish. Mr. Chairman.  For this meeting, the Bluebook included a new section that presented projections for the Fed’s balance sheet, and I’ll be referring to the exhibits in the handout entitled “Material for FOMC Briefing on Projections of the Balance Sheet and Monetary Base.”  The projections 2 The materials used by Messrs. Carpenter and Burke are appended to this transcript (appendix 2).  that we put into the Bluebook were linked directly to the policy alternatives presented in the Bluebook.  Chris and I will briefly explain the assumptions that underlie those projections, caveats associated with the exercises, and the projections themselves. Under the current policy approach, the scale of asset purchases and demand for Federal Reserve liquidity and credit facilities, given their terms and conditions and the evolving financial and economic conditions, will drive the size and composition of the Federal Reserve’s assets and the quantity of liabilities.  The composition of those liabilities will be determined primarily by the evolution of currency demand and other factors on the liability side of the balance sheet, with reserve balances determined largely as a residual.  The balance sheet projections are “bottom up” forecasts based on assumptions about the various components of the balance sheet.  We should emphasize at the outset that all of our assumptions, and therefore the resulting projections, are subject to significant error.  The significant uncertainty surrounding the outlook for the economy, the uncertain response of users of Federal Reserve credit to the state of financial markets and the economy, and the fact that some elements of the balance sheet are policy choices make these projections more judgmental than typical forecasts. The charts in exhibit 1 illustrate the assumptions that the staff has made.  As suggested in the top set of graphs, we assume that the Board extends at least some of the section 13(3) lending facilities beyond their current expiration dates later this year and that the FOMC extends the horizon for the foreign central bank liquidity swaps.  The recent improvements in functioning in some markets, however, have led to decreased usage of several facilities, as Trish noted.  For example, draws on the foreign central bank swap lines and borrowing from the TAF have fallen so far this year. Consistent with this development, we assume that demand for credit from all of the facilities, with the exception of the TALF, falls to zero over the next couple of years as markets recover.  The assets held by Maiden Lane, Maiden Lane II, and Maiden Lane III are assumed to mature or eventually be sold over time; they reach zero in 2015. In light of the slow initial uptake of the TALF, under the baseline projection the facility is assumed to peak at $500 billion at the end of 2010, half of the announced $1 trillion limit.  For the baseline, we also assume that all TALF loans have a three-year maturity and that none defaults. As shown in the next set of graphs labeled “Securities,” in the baseline scenario (denoted by the blue lines) the Desk purchases $300 billion of Treasury securities, $200 billion of agency debt, and $1¼ trillion of agency mortgage-backed securities this year as directed by the FOMC in March.  We assume that the agency debt and Treasury securities are held to maturity.  MBS are held to maturity as well but are subject to prepayment.  Given the historically low coupon on the securities that the Desk has purchased, we assume a slower-than-average path for the prepayment of MBS that implies that approximately half of the MBS purchases remain on the balance sheet in 2016. Of course, the Committee may consider other possible courses for policy. Consistent with alternative A in the Bluebook, one alternative scenario is based on an additional $450 billion in purchases of Treasury debt (the red line in the   graph). Another scenario includes the additional Treasury securities as well as a TALF that reaches $1 trillion, with a second wave of loans that have a five-year maturity, shown by the red lines in the middle row of the top set of charts. On the liability side of the balance sheet, we assume that Federal Reserve notes, shown in the bottom set of charts, expand at the same rate as money stock currency as projected by the staff under the Greenbook forecast through 2010 and at the rate of nominal GDP growth thereafter.  The Treasury’s accounts at the Federal Reserve return to historically normal levels from their current total of roughly $300 billion; specifically, the supplementary financing account falls to zero, and the general account returns to the $5 billion target by the end of 2009.  Taken together, these assumptions plus additional assumptions for miscellaneous assets and liabilities imply a path for reserve balances. Chris will now discuss the projections.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the assumptions and projections that were made for the Fed's balance sheet.


Passage number 5.
 MR. BURKE. Thank you, Seth. Mr. Chairman.  I will now review the baseline balance sheet projections, which are shown in exhibit 2.  As Seth noted, assets determine the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet over the next several years.  If credit extended under 13(3) programs and through the liquidity swaps evolves as assumed, the long-term asset purchases and TALF loans will be the dominant factors driving balance sheet growth. The baseline projection sees these programs expanding rapidly over the remainder of this year, and consequently, total assets surge and eventually peak at $3.4 trillion at year-end, an increase of about $1.2 trillion from current levels.  At that point, agency debt and agency MBS make up over 40 percent of total assets, whereas Treasury securities represent less than a quarter of total assets, much less than the roughly 90 percent share that Treasury debt represented in 2007.  The increase in TALF loans also contributes to the very rapid expansion of the balance sheet in 2009. Subsequently, however, with asset purchases having ceased and TALF loans no longer being extended, the maturation and the prepayment of assets cause a gradual contraction in assets until the end of 2015.  At that point, the Desk resumes open market operations to maintain reserve balances around the $25 billion level. Because balance sheets balance, total liabilities increase along with assets this year. Given our assumptions for steady and moderate currency growth, the level of reserve balances largely parallels the path of assets, although the substantial reserve-adding decline in Treasury account balances at the Fed further increases reserve balances this year. In the baseline scenario, reserve balances peak at $2.4 trillion at the end of this year. Thereafter, reserve balances decline, following the contraction in assets, and approach zero in 2015. Because some positive level of balances is needed for the implementation of policy, as noted above, we assume that the Desk resumes its historical practice of open market operations to offset drains of reserve balances caused by currency growth and maturing assets. We calculate the monetary base as the sum of currency and reserve balances.  As presented in exhibit 3, in the baseline scenario the monetary base grows rapidly in 2009 and into 2010. After the first quarter of 2010, however, the monetary base begins to contract as the liquidity facilities are winding down, new asset purchases cease, and previously purchased assets begin to mature.  The base continues to contract until 2015, at which point the expansion of currency and the stabilization of reserve balances lead to a resumption of growth. If economic conditions worsen or the Committee judges that greater stimulus is warranted, an even greater expansion of the balance sheet would result.  A more aggressive path for asset purchases, like alternative A in the Bluebook, assumes an additional $450 billion in purchases of Treasury debt in 2009.  An even greater escalation—along the lines of that assumed in the Desk memo of April 24, 2009, to the Committee—assumes the same $450 billion in new Treasury debt purchases and also assumes that TALF loans reach the $1 trillion limit.  Moreover, for illustrative purposes, the second wave of TALF loans is assumed to have a five-year maturity.  The resulting path for the Federal Reserve’s assets is shown in exhibits 4 and 5.  Under these alternative scenarios, assets peak at $3.7 trillion and $4.2 trillion, respectively. Similar to the baseline, after asset purchases stop and TALF loans reach their limit, assets begin to decline.  Under both alternative scenarios, the balance sheet shrinks to the same size as in the baseline scenario in 2015.  Given the greater amount of assets, reserve balances are also larger in these two expansion scenarios.  They peak at the end of this year at $2.9 trillion and $3.2 trillion, respectively, but decline in a manner similar to the baseline until the end of 2015.  As was shown in exhibit 3, the growth in the monetary base is qualitatively similar to that in the baseline. Under the Greenbook projection, the Committee is assumed to begin raising the federal funds rate in 2013. At that point in the baseline, there is more than $400 billion in reserve balances, and balances are even higher under the two expansion scenarios.  Thus, these projections implicitly assume that alternative tools and operating procedures can be put in place to achieve the path for the federal funds rate consistent with the goals of monetary policy even with elevated reserve balances. As Trish noted, these issues are under study by the staff and will be discussed at the next meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 6.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. We will have an opportunity shortly to have a general discussion of these issues, but for right now let’s just take any questions that might be for the staff. President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing appreciation and suggesting a focus on staff-related questions before a general discussion of issues.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 7.
  MR. ROSENGREN. I have a question on the mortgage-backed-security purchase program, in particular looking at figure 13 and figure 14.  Figure 13 shows that the mortgage rates have come down as you discussed, and what’s striking to me is that it looks as though we accounted for roughly 80 percent of the issuance of mortgage-backed securities over the first four months of the year.  If we had been willing to buy 100 percent of the issuance, I assume that we would have been a price setter in that market and we would have had the ability to push rates even further down. So my question is, (A) Is that accurate, and (B) if our guidance to the Desk was to try to get the retail rate between 4 and 4¼ percent, do you think we would be able to do that for the new issuance.  As you’ve highlighted, we account for most of the coupon purchases between 4 and 5 percent. So if, instead, we had instructions that we’re really intending to try to get that rate down, would you be able to hit it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains contention or disagreement. The speaker is questioning whether the Federal Reserve could have had a greater impact on mortgage rates if they had been willing to buy 100 percent of the mortgage-backed securities issuance. They also question whether the Fed could have pushed rates even further down if they had instructed the Desk to target a lower retail rate for new issuance. This implies a potential disagreement or difference of opinion on the effectiveness and potential actions of the Federal Reserve in influencing mortgage rates.


Passage number 8.
 MS. MOSSER. Probably, but at a cost. Right now, even though we are buying a significant proportion of the new issuance, there are others who are buying new issuance as well—fixed-income money managers and a few banks and so forth.  In addition to that, there is a fair amount of trading activity in what I will call “off-the-run TBAs”—the higher-coupon TBAs—as well as in the forward market, both for hedging purposes and for speculation purposes. If we followed that strategy, we would effectively wipe everybody else out of the market.  There wouldn’t be any secondary trading.  We would be the only purchaser, and we could probably continue to drive down at least the secondary spreads.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not have any clear contention or disagreement. It is explaining different market dynamics and the potential consequences of a specific strategy.


Passage number 9.
 MR. ROSENGREN. What does “wipe out” mean.  Does “wipe out” mean that they leave the market temporarily and come back in once rates go back up, (if they go back up).  It’s not a wipe-out financially; it is just that they are not active in the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is seeking clarification and asking for the meaning of "wipe out" in a specific context.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 10.
MS. MOSSER. In the short run, they probably take some capital gains, in point of fact.  The big question is when they would come back and how quickly.  The experience of central banks completely taking over markets to the point that the market is effectively shut except for what the central bank is buying is not so pretty from a liquidity standpoint.  For example, in Japan it took a year and a half to get their money market to work again in any kind of normal way, and that was a money market, not a relatively complex product like MBS. I think the big question is, if we completely dominate the trading in this market, we can probably set whatever price we want, but if there are no other buyers that will complicate things for the originators in the following sense.  Originators will have to be very certain about how much we’re going to buy, the price, and the point at which we’re going to exit.  As long as they’re very certain about the price and we buy absolutely everything, they’ll have no problem originating at low rates. But the minute there’s any hint that we’re not going to buy every last dollar, there’s uncertainty about what they can sell to someone else.  At that point it’s going to be much harder for them to hedge their pipeline, and the spread between the secondary rate and the primary rate may be wider.  So I think there’s a concern that perhaps the spread could widen out despite our best efforts to drag the secondary rate down.  The short story is that there is a bit of a tradeoff between how low we can push the secondary-market rate and how much we want to preserve some liquidity in the market so that we have an exit strategy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Mosser, expresses concern about the potential consequences of central banks completely dominating the trading in a market, whereas there may be others who believe that central bank intervention is necessary and effective. This is evident in her statements about the liquidity standpoint, the time it took for the Japanese money market to recover, and the potential complications for originators.


Passage number 11.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Could I just follow up on that.  Looking at it from the other side, we’re focused mostly on new issues.  Is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply seeking clarification or confirmation.


Passage number 12.
 MS. MOSSER. About 85 percent of the TBAs that we buy are between 4 and 5 percent coupons, which is nearly all of the new issuance.  So, yes, we’re very focused on the new issuance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of fact about the focus on new issuance of TBAs with specific coupon rates.


Passage number 13.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Why are we doing that instead of mixing new issues and seasoned mortgages.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is a straightforward question, and there is no indication of contention or disagreement. It simply seeks clarification about the rationale behind a specific decision.


Passage number 14.
 MS. MOSSER. We are buying some seasoned.  I don’t know if I have a maturity breakdown in this chart pack, but there is one, I believe, in the balance sheet briefing that we sent around. About 10 percent is off the run. With the two refinancing waves, that part of the market is actually shrinking. Our purchases of high-coupon MBS may not be so big as a share of outstandings, but our market share keeps rising every day because those are exactly the loans that are being prepaid into 4s, 4½s, and 5s. So by the end of this refi process, a huge proportion of the market is going to be concentrated between 4 and 5½ percent—perhaps not 80 percent but we would guess 60 to 70 percent of the market—at which point our numbers will not look so out of line. We’re just a little ahead of the curve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and stating their own perspective without opposing or contradicting anyone else.


Passage number 15.
 MR. ROSENGREN. Just to follow up one more time.  If we had given instructions that our goal was to try to get the retail rate between 4 and 4¼ percent, which is what some of the projections had indicated we might get to, how much more do you think you would have had to purchase to achieve that goal.  And would it have had the undesirable effects that you were talking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a follow-up question seeking clarification on a hypothetical situation.


Passage number 16.
 MS. MOSSER. If we had started out purchasing absolutely everything, the answer is that it would have had the undesirable effects. We could have gotten the rate down.  I don’t know if I could quantify buying absolutely everything. It’s probably not, shall we say, a nice, linear relationship between how much we buy and how far we could have gotten the rate down.  I’m guessing that, if we really wanted to get the rate down another 100 basis points, which is what you’re talking about here—50 to 100 basis points on the retail mortgage rate—we would have   had to buy all the new issuance and quite a substantial amount of the outstanding 5s as well.  So we would have had to buy at least 40 to 50 percent more than we did.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the potential effects of purchasing everything and the possible relationship between buying more and reducing the rate further, but there is no contradiction or disagreement present.


Passage number 17.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information given in the passage to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 18.
 MR. FISHER. And this is independent of what happens in the Treasury market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Fisher about something unrelated to the Treasury market.


Passage number 19.
 MS. MOSSER. The narrower we make the secondary spread to Treasuries, the more everybody else is going to exit the market because nobody else has our funding advantage, shall we say, or our ability to just magically create the dollars to purchase these assets.  If the Treasury yields did not come down—and if we focused more on mortgages, presumably they would not— then the spreads would get so compressed that they would not be attractive to anyone else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a potential outcome if the secondary spread to Treasuries is made narrower.


Passage number 20.
 MR. FISHER. I want to come back to exhibit 14, about which President Rosengren asked a question. Are these the most up-to-date numbers, including the ones that were reported in the press in the last two days, regarding the budget situation and the likely Treasury issuance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 21.
 MS. MOSSER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Ms. Mosser agreed or affirmed something.


Passage number 22.
 MR. FISHER. Then I have a question on the last presentation.  I may have missed something, but you added that we would have a collateral gatekeeper.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they have a question about a previous presentation.


Passage number 23.
 MR. NELSON. We’re in the process of hiring at this time.  We don’t have someone now, but we are hiring two sorts of vendors right now.  The process is under way, and we anticipate hiring someone next week, I think.  We’re looking at what’s called a “collateral monitor,” which will be a number of firms that will help us value collateral that is pledged to us.  We need those professionals in particular for valuing legacy RMBS pledges of collateral, but they will also be able to help us evaluate other collateral, including CMBS, that’s brought to us.  Then another function that we’re hiring for is an expanded collateral custodian.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information about the hiring process and the specific roles they are looking to fill.


Passage number 24.
 MR. FISHER. So this isn’t just for the CMBS market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of fact.


Passage number 25.
  MR. NELSON. No, it is not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker straightforwardly states that something is not a certain way without any indication of disagreement or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 26.
 MR. FISHER. Okay. I was a little confused. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing confusion and thanking the person for providing clarification.


Passage number 27.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions President Pianalto without providing any additional information or presenting any arguments or opinions.


Passage number 28.
 MS. PIANALTO. Thank you. The staff memo on the recommendations for the expansion of the TALF mentions on page 3, in the paragraph on the TALF ceiling and credit support, that you project that the New York Fed will make less than $150 billion in TALF loans through December 31; and in the Bluebook baseline, it looks as though it is about $100 billion at the end of 2009. How confident are you that we can then do $400 billion in 2010, and how important are CMBS to the successful expansion of the TALF.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question asking for clarification and understanding.


Passage number 29.
 MR. CARPENTER. There are a couple of parts to that question, so I suppose a couple of people will have to answer. For just the baseline projections, we wanted to be illustrative, first and foremost, to give you all a chance to understand what sort of impact different sizes of TALF programs would have on the balance sheet and what that would mean down the line in terms of levels of reserve balances and potential exit strategies.  We intentionally, therefore, did not try to tie it to the operational details that Bill and colleagues are going through in seeing how quickly they would actually be able to arrange deals with specific borrowers for specific types of collateral. Bill, in terms of the detail, I don’t know if you or Trish want to comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 30.
 MR. NELSON. I would just highlight that this really illustrates the incredible uncertainty about forecasting things like this.  Several months ago we thought that this program would ramp up relatively quickly. We are now observing that it is not doing so, in large part because of things that are themselves hard to predict:  the ability of the primary dealers and the customers to work out their legal disagreements and the political concerns of the investors.  If those things were to clear up, this program could move up really quickly, but they may not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is highlighting the uncertainty and unpredictability of forecasting certain aspects of the program.


Passage number 31.
 MS. MOSSER. One parenthetical comment.  On CMBS, our understanding, in talking to the investors and the syndicators, is that the new-issue CMBS are obviously a substantially smaller pool of possible loans and securitizations than the legacy.  Opening it up to legacy actually makes the larger number seem, at least relative to take-up so far, more possible.  If for some reason we would stop with just the current-sized TALF, I think I at least would be surprised if we got to $400 billion.  But if it is opened up to legacy assets, then the possibility of getting the larger numbers is more likely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is presenting their understanding of the situation and speculating about the possible outcomes.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 32.
 MS. PIANALTO. Mr. Chairman, this obviously may be an issue for discussion in the policy go-round. But if there is a lack of confidence that we can expand our balance sheet with the TALF program, at what point do we talk about other ways to accomplish this.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: The passage suggests that there may be a lack of confidence in expanding the balance sheet with the TALF program and raises the question of exploring alternative methods. This indicates a potential disagreement or contention regarding the effectiveness or feasibility of using the TALF program.


Passage number 33.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The mention of the Vice Chairman is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 34.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you.  I just want to thank Trish Mosser as acting SOMA manager for dispensing her duties with such élan and skill.  As you know, Brian Sack will be joining us as the head of the Markets Group and, subject to the Committee’s vote, will become the SOMA manager going forward.  But thank you, Trish.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude to Trish Mosser for her work as acting SOMA manager and acknowledging the upcoming change in leadership.


Passage number 35.
 MS. MOSSER. You’re welcome.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. MOSSER simply expresses gratitude and says "you're welcome."


Passage number 36.
  [Applause] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I’d like to interject my thanks also, Trish, for a wonderful job, and to the staff in general. Our whole system has changed from interest rates to balance sheets and from money supply to lending programs, and I have been very impressed.  I think our colleagues would share my view that the material you’ve provided to us on the various programs and the analysis that the Board staff has done on their effects have been extremely helpful, and I just want to express my appreciation for that.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their appreciation and gratitude towards Trish and the staff for their work and the helpful information provided.


Passage number 37.
   MR. HOENIG. Just a question on the maturity on the TALF.  We want to go from three to five years. That, of course, means that rolling off our balance sheet will be slower.  Is the five years determined by conditions that they told us about or the length of the assets being brought on.  What caused us to move from three to five years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and seeking clarification on why the maturity on the TALF (Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility) has changed from three to five years.


Passage number 38.
 MR. NELSON. I guess it’s a compromise between what we’ve heard from market participants about the effectiveness of the program and the feedback from you and others and from the Board on their preferences that the maturity of the loans be kept as short as possible.  So we have discussed in particular whether or not a five-year loan would be more effective than a three-year loan, and we have heard back that it would be appreciably more effective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is summarizing the discussion and feedback from market participants and the Board without expressing any disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 39.
 MR. HOENIG. So the maturity they are really looking for is 10 years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a straightforward statement of fact about the desired maturity term.


Passage number 40.
 MR. NELSON. They would like for the maturity to be as long as possible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. The statement is simply a preference for a longer maturity period.


Passage number 41.
 MR. HOENIG. Right, because that is what they are turning over now.  So this would help them.  When they come toward the five years, then they would be pressed pretty hard because they would still have these assets to deal with—to refinance and so forth.  Is that right. We will see future pressure as they come against the five years because they need the ten-year length.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement followed by a question seeking confirmation or clarification.


Passage number 42.
 MR. NELSON. That’s right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It seems to be a simple statement confirming that what was previously said is correct.


Passage number 43.
 MR. HOENIG. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply expresses gratitude.


Passage number 44.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine as the passage provided only states "President Lacker" without any context or additional information.


Passage number 45.
 MR. LACKER. I want to express my appreciation to the staff for the comprehensive and voluminous information that they have presented this time about balance sheet projections, breaking out the components and doing a thorough job of presenting the implications for the  base, all the components, and the liabilities.  I think it’s an excellent, comprehensive, and much better framework for the Committee. Mr. Chairman, the staff material presented included a memo that I think Brian Madigan distributed about the simulations. There was one about the interest rate effects, large-scale asset purchases, and other work about the effects of different things.  Would it be safe to assume that there’s a later part of our program in which the staff will be discussing that.  If I had questions about the economic effects of changes in our balance sheet for the staff, would that be a more appropriate time to bring it up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing appreciation for the staff's work and is asking about a future discussion.


Passage number 46.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Will you be able to take questions on that after your presentation.  Yes, after the economic presentation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they will be able to answer questions after the economic presentation.


Passage number 47.
 MR. LACKER. Great. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage shows agreement rather than contention. Mr. Lacker expressed gratitude, which suggests a positive and agreeable tone in the conversation.


Passage number 48.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Anyone else. If not, I’d like to open the floor for a brief interactive discussion. We have two go-rounds to come, and so there’s no need for everyone necessarily to state their views. But I did want to leave open the opportunity so that we can address any issues that are on people’s minds. Let me start.  I want to make just a few preliminary comments.  I will, in fact, be repeating some things that Trish said, which is that, as we look at the time profile of the balance sheet even under our current plan, it is evident that we are going to need various exit strategies.  That is going to be very important.  I want to reiterate that we are working very hard—and I will talk specifically in a moment—to bring some specifics to the Committee in June. First of all, as I think Brian may discuss, one set of issues relates to winding down or extending existing programs.  Winding down could mean either letting them expire—many of them are slated to end in October—or changing the terms over time so that they become lessattractive. So in June we will bring to you a set of recommendations from the staff about which programs might be extended over year-end and which might be either allowed to expire or modified in some way so that they will naturally shut down.  So that’s one element. Second, as Trish was discussing, we have a set of work streams looking at different ways of sterilizing the balance sheet. I want to begin by saying that, although I think it would be prudent for us to assume that we do not have Fed bills or the supplemental financing program from the Treasury, I think in fact there’s a reasonable chance that we will get one or the other at least.  The Administration and the Treasury are strongly supportive of Fed bills, and I have gotten some good responses from some key congressmen.  So although it may not be the appropriate moment right now to do that, we will continue to pursue that.  If that doesn’t come through, then of course we can go back also to the SFP, which I think under your assumption was not included in the analysis. So that’s a direction in which to go. In addition, the staff will continue to work on interest on reserves to make that more effective. I think that there are things we can do.  Trish mentioned a redeposit facility or a term deposit facility, changing the structure of reserve requirements, and other things that we can do to make that more effective.  Another thing we can perhaps do is work with the Treasury to manage GSE balances in a better way so that they don’t get dumped into the market.  The issue of reverse repos has come up, which would be a way to essentially fund our holdings in the markets other than via excess reserves.  Utilizing the repo markets has the advantage of putting upward pressure on short-term interest rates at the same time that we’re trying to raise the federal funds rate. So it will have, in some sense, a double effect—both a market effect and an effect on reserve balances. The TALF doesn’t look to be likely to go to $1 trillion.  We’ll see how it evolves. In any case, we have limited at this point the longer-term commitments to $100 billion,and we are looking at possible options for finding different ways to finance the TALF, which also might relieve our balance sheet to some extent.  Then, if necessary, we can sell assets, which in turn would be tightening. So I think these are extraordinarily important.  We need to have a good sense of what our exit strategy is as soon as possible, both because we want to be able to reassure markets and ourselves that we are comfortable with where we are and because, if we do decide to become more aggressive and do additional purchases, we would obviously be much more willing to do that if we were quite confident about our ability to exit in a timely manner.  I just wanted to assure everyone that we are working on those things, and we plan more-extensive presentations in June on all those issues. Let me now just ask:  Does anyone want to comment or raise any issues on this whole set of topics.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information and updates on various topics.


Passage number 49.
 MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, want to extend my appreciation to the staff and to you, Mr. Chairman, as well, for your comments just now about the extensive work that’s being done. I think it’s really terrific, and I know that it has been a lot of work and a lot of new ideas on the table, and I just want to extend my appreciation for all the efforts. Mr. Chairman, I do have two questions that I’d like to raise.  One is in regard to Fed bills.  As I’ve expressed before, I have some trepidation about Fed bills, not because of their economic effect but because of the political ramifications that they may have in terms of a potential invitation for the Congress to express more opinions about what we do with our Fed bills and how we use them.  One way to describe this is to suppose that we propose Fed bills to the Congress, and of course, as we’ve discussed, your preference would be to have those Fed bills with no strings attached—not subject to debt limits, not subject to oversight by the Congress, and so forth. It’s not an unreasonable possibility, for example, that the Congress might come back   and say, “We’re going to give you this, but here are the strings that are going to be attached.”  My question is, What would we do in that circumstance.  Would we be forced then to take Fed bills with the strings attached, or would we then turn around and say, “Oh, on those terms we don’t want it”.  If we broach it that way and they come back and say, “Well, you’ve got it,” then from a political standpoint they have potentially a lever to call the Federal Reserve before them to talk about either debt ceiling limits or uses of Fed debt in replacing other kinds of public debt.  So I’m just wondering if we have a strategy or if we thought about the consequences.  Would we be forced to take it on their terms as opposed to our terms.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement of appreciation and a series of questions and concerns.


Passage number 50.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Let me just comment.  It’s a very good question. I would first like to make the observation that Fed bills are not an exotic instrument.  We are about the only major central bank that doesn’t have this capacity.  I was having a very entertaining conversation with Governor Shirakawa of the Bank of Japan, and he was explaining to me the subtleties.  They have the ability both to take interest on reserves and to issue their own bills and he was saying, “Well, it depends whether it’s two o’clock or four o’clock in the afternoon, which one is better for fine tuning;” and I was saying that I wish I had exactly that kind of flexibility.  But what I perceive—and of course, politics are always difficult to assess—is that the resistance that we might get would be less a desire to force us to use Fed bills to support certain credit programs but rather the opposite.  I think the concern of the Congress is that it might give us too much unchecked authority, and they might be resistant to doing that.  So one possible compromise that might come up, which might answer your concerns to some extent, would be to put a strict time limit in terms of allowing this for the exit strategy but not after that, for example. About strings being attached, obviously strings that compromise monetary policy independence would not be acceptable, and I do think that we have the Administration’s support  on that issue. For example, if they involved disclosures about programs and things of that sort, if we felt that they were consistent with the effectiveness of those programs and monetary policy independence, those would be the kinds of things we could discuss.  At the end of the meeting tomorrow, Governor Kohn is going to talk about some of our transparency initiatives, things we’re trying to do that will make us more open in the information we disclose—again, without compromising either the effectiveness of our lending programs or monetary policy independence. So that would clearly be my set of criteria.  But I appreciate your point, and I understand that Fed bills are not necessarily an unadulterated blessing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a response to a question and the speaker is providing their perspective and discussing possible compromises.


Passage number 51.
 MR. PLOSSER. Right. The political environments of other central banks that have those aren’t necessarily the same as our political environment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Plosser is stating a fact about political environments and their differences, without expressing any conflicting views.


Passage number 52.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. No, but things are tough all over.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "things are tough all over" typically implies that the situation or hardship being discussed is universal or widespread, without any disagreement or contention about it.


Passage number 53.
 MR. PLOSSER. My second question, which you haven’t mentioned, is that I’d appreciate any update or thought you have on the inflation-targeting issues that we talked about recently.  Is that a continuing discussion.  And if so, what is its status.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward request from Mr. Plosser for an update or thoughts on inflation-targeting.


Passage number 54.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes, we’ve decided that we would like the Administration to affirmatively say, “We think this is a good idea.”  We think that’s a possibility, but there’s an awful lot going on right now, and that doesn’t seem to be the top priority.  But it certainly is on the agenda. It is still quite alive, and one of the issues would be just when the right time is.  You and I would probably agree that there would be advantages to doing it at some point relatively soon, given the uncertainties about exit strategies, Fed policies, et cetera.  But we’re going to have to let the crush of events to some extent determine what is the optimal point in doing that.  I think the Administration has considerable interest in supporting this, and as I said, I got fairly good responses from a couple of key congressional people as well.  So I think it is alive, but we should not be too impatient and should wait for it to mature in the fullness of time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that the idea is on the agenda and there is interest from the Administration and key congressional people, but they also mention that there are other pressing matters and the timing needs to be determined based on current events. The overall tone is patient and understanding.


Passage number 55.
 MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 56.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other comments.  Questions.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply lists some other comments, asks some questions, and mentions President Fisher without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 57.
 MR. FISHER. I would like to go back to President Plosser’s first question, just to understand the politics here.  If we pursue getting approval for Fed bills, which committee do we go through to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a question seeking clarification on the political process.


Passage number 58.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I would imagine it would be the oversight committees—the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs in the Senate and the Financial Services Committee in the House.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any assertion or statement that can be agreed or disagreed with. It simply mentions the oversight committees responsible for banking, housing, and urban affairs in the Senate and the Financial Services Committee in the House of Representatives. It does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 59.
 MR. FISHER. For which there is also a lot on their plate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "For which there is also a lot on their plate" does not present any opposing viewpoints or contradictory information. It simply suggests that there is a significant amount of tasks or responsibilities for a certain group of individuals.


Passage number 60.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. True.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is not expressing any form of contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 61.
 MR. FISHER. I mean, look at the Dodd–Shelby committee, for example.  Having talked with Governor Shirakawa about this just two weeks ago—there’s enormous political interference in his operations, as you know—I share President Plosser’s concern—not that it’s not a good idea, but again, this is enormously complicated, given the other things that are involved.  From a banker’s standpoint, I’m particularly sensitive given some of the language that’s in there.  That, too, is complicated—that is the point I want to make.  I assume that we are aware of that and are trying to maneuver our way through it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and understanding with President Plosser's concern and acknowledging the complexity of the situation.


Passage number 62.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I understand that, and as I said, I think we have to plan.  We may have this tool, but we should plan as if we will not have it.  Other comments.  All right.  If there are no other comments, we have a couple of votes to take.  The first is to ratify domestic open market operations. PARTICIPANT. So move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement between the participants. They are discussing the need for planning and taking votes, but there is no indication of conflict or opposition in their statements.


Passage number 63.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Objection.  I see none.  Second, Trish mentioned very quickly—and you did receive a memo—the annual renewal of the swap lines with Mexico and Canada. This has been going on for many years.  I think that they are somewhat redundant at this point, given the other swap lines that we have, but we have maintained this relationship for some time.  Is there any discussion or are there questions about that.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any specific statements that indicate contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply presenting information and asking if there is any discussion or questions.


Passage number 64.
 MR. LACKER. In the past, the Richmond Bank and I, myself, have had a tradition of voting against these. Earlier this year I did vote in favor of the swap lines that were introduced as part of our management of this crisis.  I’m willing to support these, given that a reexamination of these is under way. The distinction in my mind is the association of these particular swap lines with the history of foreign exchange intervention, which has been thought of as fiscal policy and outside the bounds of this institution, quaint as that notion may seem these days.  [Laughter] So I’m happy to support this now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker is simply stating his personal position and explaining his change of stance.


Passage number 65.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Other comments or questions.  Could I have a motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage consists of a polite thank you and a request for a motion, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 66.
  MR. KOHN. So move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is evident in the use of the word "move," which implies a possible opposing or conflicting viewpoint or action. Without further context, it is difficult to determine the exact nature of the disagreement.


Passage number 67.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Without objection.  Thank you very much.  Let’s turn now to the economic situation and Dave Stockton.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Without objection" indicates unanimous agreement and the statement "Thank you very much" conveys appreciation, suggesting there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 68.
 MR. MADIGAN.4  I will be referring to the separate package labeled “Material for Briefing on FOMC Participants’ Economic Projections.”  Exhibit 1 tabulates the central tendencies and ranges of your latest projections.  Corresponding information about your January projections is indicated in italics, and April Greenbook projections are included as memo items.  As shown in the top left portion of the table, your forecasts for real GDP growth in 2009 have a central tendency of minus 2 to minus 1¼ percent.  That is a downward shift of about ¾ percentage point from January, reflecting markdowns to your forecasts for both the first and the second halves of this year. Most of you now anticipate that output will contract at an annual rate of 3½ to 4 percent during the first half of this year.  Almost all of you see positive growth during the second half, albeit generally at a low rate, reflecting slow and uneven improvement in financial conditions, some stabilization in the housing sector, and stimulative monetary and fiscal policies.  Consistent with the downward revision to near-term GDP growth, each of you revised up your projection of the unemployment rate for late this year; the central tendency of your forecasts for unemployment in the fourth quarter of 2009 is now 9.2 to 9.6 percent, an upward shift of about ¾ percentage point from your January projections. Looking further ahead, all of you project a pickup in economic growth in 2010, as financial conditions continue to normalize, and robust growth in 2011.  Consequently, you expect that the unemployment rate will be trending down during those years.  But each of you indicates that the unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of 2011 is likely to be well above your estimate of the long-run equilibrium unemployment rate.  As shown in the exhibit, the central tendency of your projections for unemployment in late 2011 is 7¾ to 8½ percent, whereas the central tendency for the longer-run equilibrium unemployment rate, just to the right of the dotted line, is 4¾ to 5¼ percent. Turning to inflation, shown in the lower half of the table, all of you see slower headline and core inflation this year than in recent years; the central tendency of your projections for headline PCE inflation in 2009 is 0.6 to 0.9 percent.  About three-quarters of you project that inflation will remain at or below your view of “mandate consistent” inflation through 2011. But reflecting the diversity of models of inflation dynamics in use among economists and central bankers, some of you see inflation slowing through 2011 in response to a persistently high degree of economic slack, whereas several of you see inflation rising above your estimate of “mandate consistent” inflation in 2011 or even in 2010 as inflation expectations respond to rapid expansion of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet.  The central tendency of your projections for headline inflation in 2011 is 1.0 to 1.9 percent; the range, at 0.5 to 2.5 percent, is much wider. Your views on the outlook for this year and next are broadly similar to the staff’s view: Greenbook projections for real GDP growth, unemployment, and inflation for 2009 and 2010 are all within the central tendencies of your projections.  That similarity breaks down in 2011:  About two-thirds of you predict both higher unemployment and noticeably higher inflation in that year than does the Greenbook.  Indeed, several of you noted explicitly that you do not share the staff’s view of inflation dynamics.  That divergence in views may help explain why about half of you anticipate that it will be necessary to begin moving the federal funds rate up in 2011 or even in 2010, appreciably earlier than envisioned by the Greenbook, which assumes that the federal funds rate will remain close to the zero bound through 2012.  None of you changed your views on the “mandate consistent” inflation rate in this round: The central tendency remains 1¾ to 2 percent, and the range remains 1½ to percent. Three of you are at 1½ percent, two are at 1¾ percent, and twelve are at 2 percent. As shown by exhibit 2, your views on the uncertainties and risks in your projections have not changed appreciably since January.  Almost all of you again see greater-than-usual uncertainty in your projections of both growth and inflation, reflecting the unusual nature of the shocks that triggered the current recession and our limited experience with unconventional policy tools.  Most of you continue to judge that the risks to growth are tilted to the downside (and those to unemployment tilted to the upside) but that risks to inflation are roughly balanced.  Some of you note that you see the near-term risks as tilted to the downside but see the risks to growth in your outyear forecasts as roughly balanced, whereas several of you stated that the rapid expansion of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet will shift inflation risks to the upside going forward. In short, your current projections show a deeper recession in 2009 than did your  January projections but not a longer recession.  Your projections continue to show a  recovery starting later this year.  Most of you still expect the recovery to be sluggish  initially but to gain traction in 2010 and to pick up steam in 2011.  Even so, none of  you thinks that the economy will have returned to full employment by the end of  2011. Most of you expect inflation to remain subdued, but the range of views on the  outlook for inflation in 2011 remains wide.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply summarizing the projections and forecasts made by the FOMC participants.


Passage number 69.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much.  Are there questions for Dave, Nathan, or Brian.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply expressing gratitude and asking if anyone has questions for three specific individuals. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 70.
 MR. LACKER. Yes. I would like to ask a question about the effect of our balance sheet expansion on the economy. I notice that the staff has come around to the view that purchases of Treasuries or MBS are likely to have roughly equal, similar magnitude, effects on a range of interest rates. As I have argued, that is the natural place to start.  A couple of points in some of the staff material mentioned that the amount of reserves on bank balance sheets could crowd out private lending. I wanted to explore that a bit because it is at the core of our struggles to figure out just how the stimulus of a larger balance sheet works.  I take it that the way your analysis works is that microeconomically, market by market, Treasuries do this and MBS do that, based on the ratios that you calculate, and you estimate the effects that way.  But on bank lending, wouldn’t it be the case that the Treasuries or the MBS that we purchased would free up space on  private-sector balance sheets that would crowd in private lending in an amount equal to the amount that the increase in reserves on bank balance sheets would crowd out private lending.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show contention or disagreement. It is a question and a request for clarification.


Passage number 71.
 MR. MADIGAN. I think to some degree that would be true.  The question is, to some degree, where the Treasuries come from, at least in terms of focusing on your question about the leverage ratio. If they are coming predominantly from the banking sector, that may have the effect you are talking about. But if they are coming from outside the banking sector, where capital ratios are less important, that won’t have the effect relative to the leverage ratio that you mentioned.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining that the effect mentioned in the question may vary depending on where the Treasuries come from, and whether they are predominantly from the banking sector or outside of it.


Passage number 72.
 MR. LACKER. Well, let me follow that up.  Let’s say it all comes from outside the banking sector. Then you have all these folks outside the banking sector, and they all have bank deposits because we buy these through banks. So the liability side of all the banks has gone up.  As a first step, that doesn’t change the capital ratio, but the traditional sort of money market buyer’s story, that traditional mechanism, has banks, when they have more reserves relative to deposits than they want, lending it out and scaling up their balance sheet.  And while the standard money-and-banking textbook leaves bank capital aside, the natural extension is that they are able to bid for capital in the appropriate ratio to the size of their balance sheet.  Granted, some banks are currently holding lots of these reserves and are having difficulty raising private-sector capital now and are not in a strong position to increase the balance sheet.  But there is the rest of the banking sector, and the reserves can easily be lent to them and find their way through the usual mechanism.  So it seems as though there ought to be the opportunity for that inflow of deposits to finance itself. That is just a one-for-one effect.  Then, on top of that, you have the potential for a multiplier effect.  Right.  The reason I ask about this is that the usual prediction would have been that this amount of reserves would have just led to an explosion in M2, an explosion of lending, and a burst of inflation. You mentioned at the beginning that one way to think about this is, well, we are buying Treasuries from banks, so they are holding more reserves, but we are on the flat part of the demand curve because of interest on reserves.  So what we are adding in reserves is a perfect substitute for what we are taking out—short-term Treasury bills.  But banks’ holdings of Treasuries, agencies, and MBS, which are all presumably perfect substitutes, have gone up $200 billion. So it doesn’t seem as though it is the case that we are just engineering a substitution of reserves for debt on bank balance sheets.  It seems as though banks have substantially increased their demand for liquid assets.  That seems to explain why we aren’t getting this money multiplier effect.  But, then, we are going to run up reserves to $2¼ trillion, $2½ trillion. What if we take this baseline assumption that reserves are a perfect substitute, at the interest rate on reserves—for short-term Treasuries, agency debt, and MBS, say—and we run up reserves to $2½ trillion.  Aren’t we going to run through banks.  I mean, unless their demand for liquid assets rises, aren’t we going to just push through that.  And how are we going to think about what happens to bank balance sheets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply presenting different perspectives and possibilities regarding the impact of reserves on bank balance sheets. There is no opposing view or argument being made.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 73.
 MR. MADIGAN. I don’t know what you mean by “push through.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be seen in Mr. Madigan's response of "I don't know what you mean by 'push through'," suggesting he does not understand or agree with the idea being presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 74.
”   MR. LACKER. Well, they are holding reserve balances of $800 billion, $900 billion, plus $1.2 trillion in the stuff that is kind of a perfect substitute for it.  We are going to make reserves bigger than that sum.  So something has to give, and we struggle with what that is going to be and what kind of stimulative effect that might have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, suggests that making reserves bigger than the current sum held by banks will have a stimulative effect, but there is a struggle in determining what that effect might be and what will have to give in response. This implies a disagreement or uncertainty about the consequences of increasing reserves.


Passage number 75.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. Part of the experience from Japan is that the Bank of Japan had a hope that that would happen—that in effect at some point you pile up enough excess reserves  that banks just don’t want them anymore and they begin to lend them.  So it begins to operate the way that you say. But it didn’t in Japan. The experience—at least the way we have read it—was that it never happened. So if we go back a few months, when we started thinking about how expanding the balance sheet might work, and go back to the list of things that we sent the Committee in December, the mechanism you just described was on the list of “Could it work this way.” We’ve learned a lot from the experience of Japan and have taken a lesson from it—that it seems as though you can run up excess reserves to a tremendous amount and the banks will just accept it. What came up this time was a twist that I had never thought of before—I’m definitely not the expert in this room on this; Brian can speak to it—the sense of how it actually could begin to work in the other direction.  Because of the way leverage ratios, for example, are calculated, the banks might actually get so uncomfortable with so many reserves that they would actually begin to cut back on lending.  I don’t know that we’ve seen that either.  We haven’t, but that was a sort of perverse effect like this that the Japanese began to worry about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing the experience of Japan and the lessons they have learned from it. They mention different scenarios and possibilities, but there is no argument or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 76.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Couldn’t you just as well argue that, if they ran into that constraint, they’d want to get rid of the reserves and lend them out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is simply posing a hypothetical question.


Passage number 77.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. But then the problem is that it doesn’t help.  But that’s a problem in the capital position.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a problem and its consequences without indicating any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 78.
 MR. MADIGAN. I think the question is whether the banking system as a whole is acting as though it’s constrained by capital and whether we expect that it will continue.  Now, we certainly think that that’s the case.  Bank credit overall is contracting pretty markedly, and of course, we all know about very low bank share prices and the difficulties in raising capital.  So I think the implicit assumption here is that, at least for some time going forward, the banking sector as a whole will remain capital constrained.  I agree that there is some scope for shifting  credit around among banks, but at least the current experience with the behavior of banks strongly suggests that the system as a whole is constrained.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker believes that the banking system as a whole is acting as though it's constrained by capital, while others may argue that this is not the case. The speaker mentions the contraction of bank credit, low bank share prices, and difficulties in raising capital as evidence supporting their belief. However, this does not necessarily mean that everyone agrees with their assessment.


Passage number 79.
 MR. LACKER. Well, the runoff of bank credit by itself doesn’t speak to whether or not they are capital constrained. I mean, lots of people report a decline in demand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that a decline in bank credit does not necessarily indicate that banks are capital constrained. There is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 80.
 MR. MADIGAN. No. Most people are not wanting the assets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states a fact or opinion without any opposing views presented.


Passage number 81.
 MR. LACKER. We’ve discussed this before at a few meetings:  Nobody is as creditworthy as they were two years ago, and there have been widespread reports of declining demand for credit, even in the Greenbook this time as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presenting a consensus or agreement among the speakers that nobody is as creditworthy as they were two years ago and that there have been reports of declining demand for credit.


Passage number 82.
 MR. MADIGAN. I agree. It’s both demand and supply for bank credit, but we have very strong experience that the supply of bank credit is contracting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker agrees that it is both demand and supply for bank credit that are relevant, but also expresses that there is strong evidence of the supply of bank credit contracting. There is no obvious contention or disagreement.


Passage number 83.
 MR. LACKER. But the Japan experience—I mean, there must be some limit to this, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 84.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. Well, they took it a long way.  Now, it could be that demand for credit was imploding enough that the Bank of Japan just never took it far enough, but the Bank of Japan took it an awfully long way. We thought that a distinction between what they did and what we have been doing is that we are targeting liquidity support operations toward particular sectors—markets that are having severe problems—or, alternatively, trying to do a major twist on the yield curve to drive down long rates—so two things that they didn’t really try at the scale that we’re trying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is giving their opinion on the actions of the Bank of Japan and comparing them to their own actions. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 85.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I have two-handers from Governor Kohn and President Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 86.
 MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Of course, if the banks lend it out, it doesn’t destroy the reserves. If they started lending it out, which would be great, their whole balance  sheet would rise, and an individual bank might see that it had substituted one asset for another.  But the banking system can’t get rid of the reserves.  My question is whether lowering the interest rate on excess reserves would help the process that President Lacker was talking about.  Part of the problem—well, maybe it is not a problem—so part of the phenomenon is that they can earn 25 basis points on a totally risk-free asset, so the incentive for them to look for alternative assets and set in motion the sort of traditional transmission mechanism that President Lacker was talking about is somewhat damped by that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and providing some background information.


Passage number 87.
 MR. MADIGAN. I think the question is how much.  Surely it goes in that direction.  In evaluating the risk–return tradeoff from holding reserves or making a commercial loan at LIBOR plus 200 or some other basis, there’s a big difference between those returns.  You wonder whether lowering the relevant rate of either 25 basis points on excess reserves or the federal funds rate from 15 basis points further down really is going to make a very big difference.  One of the costs you have to trade off in making that judgment is whether you are concerned at all about the market effects that would surely come about on the federal funds rate amid all the things we talked about previously regarding the possible impairment of market function.  Now, there are possible offsets to that.  Trish already mentioned the change in the new fails penalty, for instance, which might help deal with at least one of those issues.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different factors to consider in evaluating the risk-return tradeoff and mentions possible offsets to any effects on market function.


Passage number 88.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The given passage only states the name "President Yellen" without providing any additional context or information. Thus, there is no contention or disagreement evident in this statement alone.


Passage number 89.
 MS. YELLEN. Just a quick comment.  I’ve also been worried about the leverage ratio issue and whether or not it might mean that our long-term asset purchases have a perverse effect.  Looking at leverage ratios for various large banking organizations, they don’t seem very close to the regulatory minimums.  On the other hand, I thought you had reported to us that the major reason that interest on reserves had failed to provide a floor for the federal funds rate—after all,   the question is why banking organizations don’t borrow at the federal funds rate and then hold them and earn a higher return by keeping it in their accounts and earning interest on reserves— was concern about leverage ratios and leverage ratios beginning to bind. I thought that perhaps you mentioned—I can’t recall where I heard this—that large banks have been asked why they aren’t doing that. If I’m right that concerns about leverage was their answer, then it gives me greater concern about this issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a discussion about the concern regarding leverage ratios and whether they may have a negative effect on long-term asset purchases. There is no conflicting or differing opinion presented in the passage.


Passage number 90.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Trish.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 91.
 MS. MOSSER. One change in behavior, though, from the very first implementation of interest rates on excess reserves back in the fall, whether it was a learning curve, getting our systems up to date, or whatever—Chris can correct me if I’m wrong on this—the major downward pressure on the funds rate now is due to the trading by the GSEs, which don’t get the 25 basis points. They’re not eligible for it. In fact, the trading between banks is actually quite small right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that she may be corrected if her information is incorrect, but there is no opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 92.
 MS. YELLEN. Why can’t the large banks borrow in the funds market from the GSEs and hold the proceeds in their account and arbitrage that out.  I understand that the GSEs can’t earn interest on reserves, but it seems like a pure arbitrage opportunity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Yellen, is simply asking a question and expressing her understanding of a potential arbitrage opportunity.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 93.
 MS. MOSSER. They can simply buy it and hold it, but that doesn’t show up in the reported funds rate. The reported federal funds rate that you see every day is on the broker trading volume, and the vast majority of the people who bother to trade are the GSEs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Mosser, is suggesting that the reported federal funds rate does not accurately reflect the actions of those who simply buy and hold funds, as it only represents the broker trading volume. This implies that there may be a discrepancy between the reported funds rate and the actual behavior of those who hold funds.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 94.
 MR. BURKE. The GSEs are selling fed funds, and banks are buying them, holding them, and arbitraging the rate as you’re suggesting. But roughly speaking, 80 percent of the brokered volume that we’re seeing in fed funds is GSE sales.  So in terms of what we’re seeing as actual rates being reported and why those rates are where they are, I believe it’s a function of  GSEs  selling and banks buying, where banks buy at 15 and hold at 25 and make that arbitrage.  But that doesn’t answer the question of why more banks aren’t buying more and then lending and making an even bigger spread.  The anecdotal evidence that the Desk has gotten from the banks is that it’s a leverage ratio constraint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.
Explanation: There is disagreement in the passage regarding why more banks are not buying and lending to make a bigger spread. One person suggests that it is due to a leverage ratio constraint, while others may have different opinions on the matter.


Passage number 95.
 MS. YELLEN. And that’s what’s feeding my concern about this leverage issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Yellen is expressing her concern about the leverage issue without any indication of disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 96.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. This is a good issue for us to look at more carefully.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement acknowledges the importance and value of examining the issue further without expressing any conflicting opinions or viewpoints.


Passage number 97.
 MR. LACKER. If I could just comment on this—just two things.  First, President Yellen, the way I’d reconcile it in my mind is that the first part of your question sounded as though you were thinking about the leverage ratio with a fixed amount of capital as constraining your balance sheet and what I think Chris Burke replied was that the gist of what we’ve heard from banks is that they act as if there’s a shadow value that they have to earn on that arbitrage.  Imposed internally on their trading desk is the shadow price on their capital, and I don’t think that those two are inconsistent.   Then Governor Kohn talked about lowering the interest rate on reserves.  I guess I think about banks as choosing, taking the interest rate on reserves and a bunch of other interest rates as given, how much they want to hold; and for us to put more out there is going to require some interest rate other than the interest rate on reserves to adjust.  That’s different from the usual situation in which, when we increase reserves, you go down this demand curve, and the federal funds rate itself changes.  Here it’s essentially the price of substitutes.  So repo rates, reverse repo rates, and the yields on agency debt would be the first things that ought to change to induce them to want to meet their demand for liquid assets via reserve balances rather than agencies or what have you. I think that more insight into that would be really useful.  Let me just point out   that your work on the effect of large-scale asset purchases entirely ignores all of this.  It’s as if it doesn’t matter how we finance these purchases, whether by bank reserves, Fed bills, or what have you. That makes me a little uncomfortable in placing too much weight on them in these simulations. Let me finally mention that what motivates all of this is how we know we’re going to be doing enough—President Pianalto’s question.  How do we know if we’ve done too much.  How do we know, looking at this, when to reverse course.  And how do we know when demand by banks for reserves is pulling back and they’re about to try to lend them out to get rid of them and set off an expansion in M2 in lending.  These are tough questions, and I think, Mr. Chairman, supplementing your outline of work going forward with some analytical work on this issue that uses our insight into bank balance sheets and bank balance sheet management would be useful.  Thank you very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is offering his own thoughts and suggestions on the topic being discussed.


Passage number 98.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think those are solvable problems.  President Evans, you’ve been waiting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Both statements express the possibility of solving problems.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 99.
 MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have two questions, but first, I want to thank the staff for a very careful, thorough investigation of the role of inflation expectations in the simulations, and the simulations in general.  I don’t think this is a very important issue for today, but in terms of the modeling strategy, I was somewhat surprised about the way that you came out in favor of the adaptive expectations for modeling medium- or long-term inflation expectations.  Especially at a time when we’re concerned about the possibilities that our extraordinary monetary expansions might make some people uncomfortable with the expectations, I thought that you would at least have a channel in there that we could activate and see how that affectsthings. As I say, I don’t think it’s really very important for discussion today, but it will be as we start going forward on that.  I don’t know if you want to comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In this passage, Mr. Evans expresses surprise and disagreement with the approach taken by the staff in favoring adaptive expectations for modeling inflation expectations. He suggests that there should be a channel included in the modeling to test the effects of this approach.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 100.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I think we made a change, as you’ve said, this time.  We also said in the memo that we were continuing to work on it.  We are definitely leaving it open.  I hope it was clear from the memo where we are.  We’re very uncertain about it, and at the moment we have a number of people working on trying to figure out a new way.  There are a couple of things. First, I suspect that you probably will be changing things over time.  Where we locked it in this time is just for the moment. Second, I assume that, as we go forward, we will continue to do the sort of thing we’ve done in the past, which is to present you with alternative ways of thinking and alternative ways of how this might play out.  Even when we’re through the episode, we probably won’t be able to tell exactly what truth is.  But certainly as we’re going through the episode and we definitely don’t know what truth is, we’re going to provide alternatives.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is a contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions being uncertain, working on figuring out a new way, and presenting alternative ways of thinking. This suggests that there are differing perspectives or ideas being discussed.


Passage number 101.
 MR. EVANS. Right. I appreciate the effort, and I thought it was very well done, very careful. The second question, in terms of the Greenbook analysis—well, the forecast—is if you could clarify a bit the way that you make assumptions about the credit environment.  I know that you have special factors during this period—you have the principal components from a few different surveys—and I think that that’s very helpful.  It’s not a surprise that I would favor something like that.  I guess the question is, coming through the bank stress test and if there are concerns that the banks that are going to have to take the additional capital and they’re unhappy about this and they’d like to get out from under it, it’s not quite clear to me that they will try to lend a great deal on the basis of the additional capital.  It’s sort of insurance against future losses. So we might be facing additional credit squeeze conditions.  How important is that for thisGreenbook forecast.  How is it incorporated as a potential risk.  In thinking about the financial factors, I know the forecast has exogenous and endogenous components as to how they’ll run off, but I doubt that it incorporates that type of risk factor.  Is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is asking for clarification about how assumptions are made about the credit environment and how it is factored into the forecast. There is no argument or disagreement present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 102.
 MR. STOCKTON.  You are correct.  It doesn’t. We’re using several imperfect measures of financial stress to fix a misspecified model.  So the exact kinds of concern that you have about the bank channel into overall lending and spending are really missing from the staff’s large-scale model. What we’re trying to do is gauge some of these imperfect measures—first, from some measures from the capital markets and principal components of various measures of volatility, spreads, and so forth and, second, from the principal components of the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey.  We’re still going to have to apply a lot of additional judgment to the forecast going forward as we see bank lending conditions changing in ways that maybe those measures are not capturing. I just think this is just one additional area that we’re going to be struggling with going forward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that the model being used to gauge financial stress is imperfect and missing important concerns about the bank channel into overall lending and spending. They also mention the need for additional judgment and the possibility that the measures being used may not accurately capture changing bank lending conditions. This indicates a disagreement or contention about the effectiveness and limitations of the model being used.


Passage number 103.
 MR. EVANS. But it does seems likely that, if there were a less-than-positive reaction and the various spreads started to back up, we would see this in the indicators that you’re looking at, and that would have a natural type of damping effect on the forecast.  So some of it would be accommodated, and then some would be more judgmental.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining that if there were a negative reaction and certain indicators started to show this, it would have a damping effect on the forecast. This is a statement of possibility and reasoning, rather than expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 104.
 MR. STOCKTON. We’d be capturing more as it was happening, but I think that our ability to forecast what is going to happen is severely limited.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that their ability to forecast what is going to happen is limited, which does not involve any disagreement or conflict with others.


Passage number 105.
 MR. EVANS. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses gratitude by saying, "Thank you."


Passage number 106.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions President Fisher without providing any information or context that suggests a disagreement or contention.


Passage number 107.
 MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, my question is on a different part of the credit markets, and that’s the bond markets—private debt.  If I recall correctly in the Bluebook, we have had an impact—there has been a response or at least an action—and the spreads have narrowed somewhat.  Issuance is “robust” or such, relatively speaking.  My question is, Where do we think it’s going.  Obviously it’s not going to cap-ex.  I presume this is the question.  It’s going into paying down bank debt or replacing short-term debt.  Is that correct.  And if that’s correct, do we have a sense whether this is significant in terms of the impact on the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and seeking clarification.


Passage number 108.
 MS. MOSSER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Given that only the name "MS. MOSSER" is provided, there is no information or context to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 109.
 To the extent that it’s paying down higher-cost debt— MR. FISHER. Short-term debt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a fact, that to the extent that the company is paying down higher-cost debt, Mr. Fisher believes it is a positive thing.


Passage number 110.
 MS. MOSSER. Aside from paying down short-term debt, it’s reducing their liquidity risk and taking pressure off money markets.  To the extent that it is replacing more-expensive bank debt and loans with corporate debt that less expensive and long-term and so less expensive in the duration sense—then that’s additional cash for the corporation.  So it’s a pretty classic recession shift in composition in the corporate bond market, when cap-ex is usually declining.  I don’t know that what they’re doing now is particularly atypical given how slow economic activity is.  If and when the economy turns the corner, the composition of the corporate bond market will tend to be a follower, not a leader.  So cap-ex will determine the way out, rather than the ability to get funds determining cap-ex, at least at this point in the business cycle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any statements that suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 111.
 MR. STOCKTON. But in terms of the changes that we’ve made in the forecast, that lower cost of capital is implicit in the decline in corporate bond yields and is an important factor that we built in here. Now, that doesn’t prevent capital spending from continuing to contract, but it’s contracting more slowly because the cost of capital is lower than it otherwise would have been. So it is leaving an imprint in our outlook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining the impact of a lower cost of capital on capital spending.


Passage number 112.
 MR. FISHER. Thanks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude.


Passage number 113.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions. Okay. If not, it’s 4:00 p.m. I understand that coffee is ready. Why don’t we take a 20-minute break.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting a break and expressing gratitude.


Passage number 114.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. We’re ready to begin with our economic go-round.  Let me start with President Rosengren.  Eric, when you’re ready.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply setting the stage for a discussion or meeting.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 115.
 MR. ROSENGREN. There have been some initial signs that the recession may be approaching a trough.  It is too soon to tell whether the trough of the recession has truly been reached. Whenever we do reach the trough, the economic recovery is likely to be anemic.  Consumers have experienced significant wealth loss despite the rebound in the stock market since March, and consumption is likely to be restrained by further job losses.  The rising fraction of homeowners who find themselves underwater makes it difficult for them to move around, and unless job prospects improve, they are going to have a difficult time moving.  These continued constraints in the recovery have influenced my forecast for the economy.  I expect unemployment to peak somewhat higher than in the Greenbook and improvements in the labor market to be more gradual than in the Greenbook.  The significant slack in the labor markets will continue to place a lot of downward pressure on inflation, and there remains a significant risk that deflation will not be avoided. I continue to believe that the risks around this outlook remain on the downside.  My primary concerns are that the reaction to the stress test is unpredictable.  Contacts through the AMLF have noted that they are concerned that the stress test could lead to downgrades in asset-backed commercial paper to below the A1/P1, rendering them ineligible for the AMLF program.  In addition, they note that money market funds have been more transparent with their public holdings so that there could be another surge in redemptions for money market funds that hold   paper and for banks that perform poorly on the stress test.  Second, I have my own concerns about the results of the stress test. President Evans’s question highlighted that institutions undergoing the stress test may behave more as if they are capital constrained than they would in the absence of the stress test. I share that concern.  I think there is a very strong desire right now to avoid government capital infusions, and that desire seems to only be growing. Even banks that do not have the mandatory convertible preferred (MCP) are likely to be affected. Banks outside the 19 banks undergoing the stress test will pursue the same conservative asset-producing strategies, concerned that the same criteria might be applied to them.  Among the 19 that will not need the MCP, it may be rational to slow their own organic growth so that they can take advantage of asset sales or acquisition opportunities.  If I am right and the structure of the stress-test program discourages the expansion of lending, all business lending, particularly commercial real estate lending, could be adversely affected.  Contacts with insurance firms note that insurance regulators have not made clear how they will react to FASB rules on valuing illiquid assets. This uncertainty may cause insurance companies to further shrink their balance sheets at the same time that banks are doing the same thing.  Thus, although there have been some positive signs on the economy since the last FOMC meeting, I remain concerned that the financial headwinds may not have abated yet.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses concerns about the economic recovery and the potential negative impacts of the stress test on banks and lending.


Passage number 116.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage contains a statement of gratitude and the mention of President Plosser's name. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 117.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude.


Passage number 118.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Yellen.


Passage number 119.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "President Lockhart" is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 120.
 MR. LOCKHART. Mr. Chairman, I agree with the staff assessment that—to use their words—hints of stabilization in the incoming data and some favorable financial developments since the time of the March meeting have occurred.  But I also agree with their words that the evidence on this issue is by no means decisive.  I see the situation as quite ambiguous. I note a positive turn in business sentiment in my District.  I think it is best described as a waning of extreme pessimism rather than growing optimism.  Like President Fisher’s CEO, one of my directors said that “flat is the new up.”  [Laughter] My retail contacts advise that the weak retail spending numbers of March are more characteristic of what to expect in the second quarter than the strengths seen in January and February.  The nation’s largest home improvement chain announced that March sales are down sharply year over year, and they are further marking down their modest sales projections for the balance of 2009. Home sales have shown greater stability—around low levels, of course—in most parts of the Sixth District and are up year over year in Florida.  By most accounts, new home inventories continue to creep lower.  But there is still considerable downward pressure on prices, and builders do not anticipate any sustained increase in construction activity anytime soon.  A large backlog of foreclosures and other home inventory is likely to enter the pipeline soon.  A comment on condominiums, which represent a significant portion of my District’s real estate market:  They are under increasing pressure. That pressure has been exacerbated by the fragile  financial condition of homeowner associations, further distancing some otherwise creditworthy buyers from access to adequate credit.  In addition, serious concerns continue to be expressed about commercial real estate. One contact said that there is almost no financing available.  Even after accounting for weakening fundamentals, this source indicated that there is a serious lack of liquidity and predicted that commercial real estate will put major stress on financial institutions.  On balance, the attitude that the economy would bump along the bottom for some time is common among my business contacts and continues to be a factor affecting my outlook. The forecast I submitted is similar in some respects to President Yellen’s.  It is similar to the Greenbook over the balance of the year. Although I, too, see a recovery under way toward the end of the year, I expect that the expansion will be considerably slower than in the Greenbook. In my view, a slow restoration of credit market function, constrained consumer activity, and lingering economic uncertainty that restrains investment spending are likely to retard the recovery process. The general perception of improving financial and credit markets presented in the Greenbook was supported by my financial market contacts.  Like the Greenbook, I am hearing positive reports of improved access to capital markets for investment-grade nonfinancial corporations, and this has extended down to triple-B firms as well as some improvement in the high-yield and convertible bond markets.  But my contacts continue to describe financial markets as quite fragile. As President Rosengren commented on extensively, the bank stress tests are, unsurprisingly, seen as a critical event, and opinions on the subject were varied.  One contact predicted that the results are likely to be quite contentious and disruptive.  In contrast, another argued that tough and aggressive tests would be a positive sign that problems are being confronted. Concern was also expressed in some of these conversations about the state of the insurance sector. The insurance sector is more than triple the size of the investment banking sector, which in many respects was the source of some of our problems, and the view was expressed that the sector could deteriorate further if capital restrictions begin to bite. As to the restoration of the financial markets, we did a poll of some of our directors regarding the TALF, which they said was generating very little interest.  They cited a lack of demand from borrowers, insufficient detail about the program, uncertainty over future business conditions, and some community banks saying that the minimum of $10 million was too steep to participate. Regarding the balance of risks, my assessment of the risk to economic growth remains weighted to the downside. However, I have revised my assessment of the risk to inflation to being broadly balanced. Consistent with the ambiguous state of the outlook at this juncture, I remain concerned about and attentive to deflation risk while recognizing that our various actions to grow the balance sheet may stoke inflation expectations and bear upside inflation risk.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their own assessment of the current economic situation and expressing their own opinion on various factors.


Passage number 121.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Thank you" does not express any disagreement or controversy. It is simply an expression of gratitude. The phrase "President Bullard" also does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply a reference to a person's title.


Passage number 122.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by President Evans is a simple expression of gratitude with no opposing viewpoint or conflicting information.


Passage number 123.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. We can add to the statement, “Wait until next year.” [Laughter]  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage consists of someone expressing gratitude ("Thank you") followed by a statement that suggests they can add to an existing statement ("Wait until next year"). The laughter that follows indicates that the statement is probably seen as humorous or light-hearted.


Passage number 124.
 MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  During the intermeeting period, I heard from an encouraging number of contacts that business conditions were showing some initial signs of stabilizing at very low levels. Relatively large companies with deep pockets and access to credit seem prepared to wait out the recession, although many have to make some painful adjustments.  Others, especially small businesses, worry openly about running out of cash and time.  Some employers are still considering reductions in staffing, and it is rare to find companies engaged in any net hiring. Even hospitals, which are traditionally very stable employers, have been reducing staff where possible in response to declines in demand.  Public-sector and nonprofit employment continues to be under pressure as well.  Although most of the employment declines we are observing result from cyclical forces, I think that more than the usual share of employment losses also stem from structural factors.  After reviewing the declining pattern of job openings reported in the JOLTS data, as well as the relatively low levels of temporary layoffs that President Yellen commented on, my staff concludes that labor market reallocations are likely to be quite large and prolonged during this business cycle. Regarding inflation, I appreciate the concern about a continuing deceleration in our price measures.  However, I am struck by the number of people I speak with who worry that our policy   actions will cause inflation to accelerate in the future.  In fact, the people who worry about accelerating inflation far outnumber those who express concerns about future deflation.  So I am not overly concerned at this point about deteriorating inflation expectations. My view is that, with clear communication about our inflation objectives, our large-scale asset purchase will damp the decline of long-term inflation expectations, something that the Reifschneider–Roberts memo tells us is not captured in FRB/US.  In my projection, core PCE inflation remains in the range of 1 percent to 1½ percent through 2011, whereas in the Greenbook baseline, inflation falls below 1 percent. The anecdotal information that we collected, along with the data that we received, hasn’t led me to make any material changes to my outlook for employment and output since our March meeting.  My current output projection has some differences in timing of the recovery compared with the Greenbook baseline; however, I don’t consider them to be material.  My forecast for the unemployment rate does deviate more substantially from the Greenbook as a result of my interpretation of the persistent weakness that we are seeing in labor markets.  My baseline projection has more labor reallocation taking place than the Greenbook does, and that drives my forecast for unemployment to peak at a bit over 10 percent before it begins to decline.  The additional labor reallocation embedded in my outlook is another factor that puts my core inflation forecast on a higher path than that in the Greenbook.  That is, I see a somewhat smaller output gap than the Greenbook does because I see a somewhat lower level of potential output in my projection coming from the labor market reallocations that I commented on. It goes without saying that the level of uncertainty around my projection is unusually great, and there are many risk factors that could render it inaccurate.  One of the risks that looms large in my mind—and it has already been mentioned by several others around the table today—  is that announcing the results of the stress test could add to the fragility of the banking system, and it could result in a further pullback in bank lending, as others have commented.  At least that was the gut reaction I got from the bankers that I talked to as I was presenting the preliminary results of the test.  I hope that we will fully consider these concerns as we decide what information to release publicly.  Many of us are on record as saying that, in order to restore confidence in the banking system, we have to see private capital go back into that system.  I am concerned that announcing that a majority of the 19 bank holding companies need additional capital and that the additional capital can come from the government is going to scare private investors away.  So, on balance, I regard the risk to my outlook for both output and inflation to be weighted to the downside, especially taking into consideration some of the announcement effect of our stress test.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Pianalto is simply discussing her observations and concerns about the current state of the economy and the potential impact of the stress test results.


Passage number 125.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 126.
 MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  A bit of a shift in our District information is discernible over the last month or two.  First, the quantitative information.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that there has been a shift in the District's information over the last month or two. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 127.
  Our Fifth District manufacturing survey, which you will recall is released a few days later than the New York and Philadelphia indexes, but covers more manufacturing activity than both of those indexes combined—  [Laughter] MR. FISHER. But not as much as my District.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The mention of laughter does not indicate any conflict, but rather a light-hearted comment or remark.


Passage number 128.
 MR. LACKER. I believe more than the Dallas District as well.  The survey has moved sharply back to neutral over the last two months from the exceptionally negative readings we were seeing earlier, and the shipments and orders components have increased from around minus 50 in February to around zero now.  Interestingly, the six-months-ahead expectation measures for shipments and orders are solidly in positive territory, but the index for capital  expenditures remains negative, suggesting that excess capacity will be restraining business investment for a while.  So far we have not seen similar moves in our service sector survey.  Overall our surveys suggest a bottoming out in goods production but continued decline in services. Qualitative information from our directors and other contacts also suggests a shift in tone from uniformly dismal to mixed.  Some directors see signs of life for building lot transactions in some markets—North Carolina and central Maryland were mentioned.  There are scattered reports of an increase in residential real estate traffic, although contacts are not yet saying that this has translated into increased sales.  Even though this may just be the seasonal pickup you’d normally expect, people seem to be treating a normal seasonal pickup in real estate traffic as positive news, given the experience of the past few years. The Fifth District hospitality sector seems to have been hurt by a fear of adverse publicity. One director whose firm stages trade shows says that “fun” appears to be the new F word. [Laughter] A contact who runs a resort on the South Carolina coast reports corporations canceling bookings for which they have already paid in full.  People apparently don’t want to risk the bad publicity of showing up, which is puzzling because critics presumably object to the expenditure not the utility derived.  [Laughter]  In West Virginia, the coal industry is described as somewhat shell-shocked because of falling coal prices, although drilling rigs from western states have been moving east to take advantage of increased drilling activity in the Marcellus shale formation. At the national level, there have been some signals consistent with a business cycle trough sometime in the middle of the year, I think.  I put the tentative signs of stabilization in the housing sector chief among these since the return of some confidence on that front seems   important for restoring a broader willingness by households to resume discretionary spending.  Of course, we have been fooled by hints of housing market bottoms before.  So it is not hard for me to curb my enthusiasm.  Still, the recent consumer spending numbers also suggest that a broader household resilience may be emerging.  Consumers seem to have been cutting back in response to the general erosion in their confidence about future income and wealth; and the fact that consumer spending was relatively stable in the first quarter, despite ending on a down note, might reflect some households looking through the recession toward a return to sustained growth. Similarly, I think the weakness in business spending has been driven mainly by a dearth of foreseeable profit opportunities as opposed to being held back by credit constraints.  The tentative signs of stabilization on the durable goods front are welcome news, but I think it will take some evidence of a sustained improvement in consumer spending and, thus, revenue growth to bring business spending back to the table in a major way. Regarding inflation, the stability of long-term expectations has been notable and stands in contrast to the Greenbook’s forecasted expectations that inflation will drift steadily downward over the next few years. Personally, my outlook for inflation expectations is centered near 2 percent.  I think the inherent difficulties in projecting inflation expectations are significant, but there’s also at least as much of a chance that they will increase significantly during the recovery rather than decrease. I continue to worry about how we are going to know whether we are doing enough, too little, or too much and how we are going to know when to begin unwinding the expansion of our balance sheet. It seems like a daunting problem for us.  My sense is that credit spreads are going to be too ambiguous to act on, and I am leery of taking too much comfort from Japan’s experience. So I believe we could use a better understanding of the effect of our large reserve balances on the banking system.Finally, Mr. Chairman, down in North Carolina the bankers are distributing these lapel pins. They’re little round green things and they say “EGBAR.” Now I am not going to be able to do justice to a North Carolina drawl, but it comes out something like this:  “Everything’s going to be all right.” [Laughter]  I don’t know whether they believe it or whether they just want their customers to believe it.  But in any event, they don’t say when it’s going to be all right, so I’m not sure that we should put much faith in this either.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of the speaker, Mr. Lacker, providing information about various economic indicators and sharing anecdotal evidence from different industries. He also expresses his personal opinions and concerns about inflation and monetary policy. There is no direct disagreement or argument present.


Passage number 129.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any charge for the pins.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no apparent contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a straightforward statement about charges for pins.


Passage number 130.
 MR. LACKER. I got this one for free, and that means it is worth less than $20.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a simple statement expressing the value of an item as being less than $20 because it was obtained for free.


Passage number 131.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Your drawl will be reflected in the transcript. [Laughter] President Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The presence of laughter actually suggests a lighthearted and humorous atmosphere.


Passage number 132.
 MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, I’m in substantial agreement with the Greenbook forecast, for the next four or five quarters anyway.  As several people have noted, certainly there is a lot of uncertainty around, but it seems to me that there is a reasonable chance that recovery will get under way around midyear—June, July, or thereabouts.  I think it is worth bearing in mind that, if that happens, we probably won’t discern it for at least several months thereafter—August, September, or October—partially because of data flows and partially because, as I expect, initially the recovery will be quite modest, which means that the incoming data are going to be mixed at best and it will be possible to read some of it positively and some of it negatively. I think that this level of uncertainty is simply going to be part of what we’re going to experience. I do agree, as I said earlier, that the recovery will initially be quite modest.  President Yellen and others have done a good job of elucidating the reasons for that.  Nevertheless, I didn’t really revise my forecast from January, so I have almost all the same numbers.  If I were going to revise the forecast, I’d probably revise it up rather than down at this point—not by a lot and not trying to get to the typical recovery alternative in the Greenbook, which would be extraordinary if the economy produced something like that.  But it does seem to me that the variety of data that have come in have been better than anticipated, including improvement in credit market conditions. None of that may turn out to be durable, but on the other hand, I think we have been anticipating that some of this was going to improve and some healing would occur over time. I guess I don’t expect the stress test to lead to an increase in bank lending.  I thought the stress test was trying to address uncertainty about the conditions of banks, and I think it’s going to come down to whether the report is credible with regard to two large and very sick institutions. But I don’t think the rest of it is going to matter very much.  It is really whether the numbers associated with those institutions strike people in the financial markets as sensible, appropriate, and so forth. If they do, I think the stress test will probably have helped.  If not, I think we’re going to have potential chaos—I guess that’s the way I would put it. As far as inflation goes, I expect inflation to be low, but certainly the second-most-asked question I get when I’m out talking to people is, “Aren’t we going to see a burst of inflation with the expansion in your balance sheet and with the stance of fiscal policy.”  So it seems to me that discussing exit strategies, sterilization, and so forth in June is going to be important, and communicating with the public about this is going to be important, recognizing that we might have a bit of a timing issue on our hands.  I guess the way that I would put it is that we first want to make sure the fire is out.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing agreement with the Greenbook forecast and offering their own thoughts on the potential recovery, inflation, and the stress test.


Passage number 133.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "Thank you. President Hoenig" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Hoenig.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 134.
  MR. HOENIG. Let me start with the District, and I’ll be brief.  I have talked to several dozen people in the region, and I have not had a single one tell me that they think things are improving.  But what I do hear is that things are not getting any worse except for a couple of areas. One of those areas is natural gas production, which if those rigs are moving your way, I’d look at them pretty carefully before I put them in production, given the price of natural gas right now. The other is commercial real estate. There is a lot of angst about commercial real estate in the region. It is under pressure. Projects are on hold and have been stopped.  A lot of banks are holding this stuff, and a lot of them have pretty heavy concentrations of it, which gives me pause.  On the other hand, when they say things are not getting worse, there are some indications of manufacturing beginning to stabilize, some retail sales beginning to stabilize, and even some of the housing, even though it is down from a year ago, in the last couple of months has shown some stability as well in the region. About the national outlook—I think that, as we go through the rest of this year and into next year, we will see things improve.  There are a couple of positive forces and then one thing that I consider a real negative.  The two positives are that, as we see inventories and values adjust, people then will begin to move forward.  Complementing that is the fact that the stimulus package is starting to flow.  We’re seeing a lot of highway projects really getting going, especially in our region.  The one thing that I find interesting is the value of subsidies because, as the ethanol industry is collapsing, we are now in the wind tunnel—seeing enormous amounts of investment on wind energy being placed there.  There is no way to get it out yet, but they are building these towers by the thousands, and that is adding a lot of activity in the rural areas, particularly of our region.The negative is the credit and banking conditions.  There is a fair amount of capital in these banks, but when you see their asset issues and their uncertainty around those assets, they are conserving that capital and they are holding back on lending.  Another part of this is, as we have introduced each new plan—whether it was the PPIP or whatever—money has gone to the sidelines to see how that is going to evolve.  That has made things slower than they might have otherwise been, and I think we need to be aware of that. As you boil all of this down, I think the stimulus will be a big plus as we move through this year and into next.  As we stabilize, there’s a real upside, but the credit market banking level is a big risk going forward. I don’t think we’ve begun at all to address the commercial real estate problems that are just wreaking havoc.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker mentions both positive and negative aspects of the current economic situation, leading to a disagreement or differing opinions on the overall outlook. For example, the speaker mentions that manufacturing and retail sales are beginning to stabilize, indicating an improvement in the economy. However, they also mention the negative impact of credit and banking conditions and the commercial real estate problems, suggesting a more pessimistic view of the future.


Passage number 135.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, this passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude from the speaker to the Vice Chairman.


Passage number 136.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think the economy is going to do somewhat better over the next few months and, I hope, quarters.  A big swing in the rate of inventory liquidation is certainly going to help, and we have seen in the past that it can be very, very powerful quarter to quarter. A good example is the fourth quarter of 2001 to the first quarter of 2002—which was probably the worst forecast I ever made in my life—but I’m not going to be very impressed by that for several reasons. First, we still do not have the banking system on a sound footing, and that’s pretty damning, frankly, 20 months into this crisis.  If we can do a good job with the supervisory capital assessment program and get more capital into the banking system, then we have a fighting chance. In this regard, I think it is important for us all to be on message about this.  Next week is going to be really, really important.  The announcement will generate lots of criticism:  The stress test is not severe enough, the estimated losses are too low, and so on.  I believe that we should emphasize three points.  First, what is the purpose of the exercise.  To get more capital into the banking system and thereby to make the adverse outcome less likely.  It is important not to get lost in the fine print.  Second, the adverse scenario that was assumed is still considerably worse than the base forecast; and in the adverse scenario, banks would still be well capitalized.  We need to emphasize that.  Third, in assessing the loss figures, we need to make it clear that the losses that matter for commercial banks are credit losses, not liquidation losses.  Because banks have deposits, they can hold their assets to maturity.  This means that the liquidation value is mostly irrelevant. This is particularly important in the current environment, of course, because the illiquidity discount is unusually high.  This makes the value of the assets to those, such as banks, that are leveraged and have deposits that can fund and hold those assets much greater than the value of the assets to those, such as hedge funds, that have difficulties in this environment obtaining leverage. The second thing that I would stress about the economic outlook is that a lot of pain is still ahead, and I’ll echo some of President Hoenig’s comments.  Commercial mortgages and highly leveraged loans appear particularly vulnerable.  Commercial mortgages are suffering from a double whammy—a higher capitalization rate on mortgages and lower income.  This is pushing down commercial real estate values sharply.  The John Hancock Tower sold for half the price at which it was purchased in 2005, and that’s considered a prime property rather than a not very attractive property. I don’t see this ending very quickly.  On the corporate side, highly leveraged businesses are going to have trouble refinancing for the same reason.  The rise in the risk-adjusted return demanded by investors will significantly drive down the value of the underlying enterprises.  For many private equity deals, covenant-lite loans and PIK toggles will delay the  day of reckoning, but that just means that the resulting hole that must be filled will be bigger as a consequence. The third thing I’d say on the economy is that the big news is the large adjustment that households are going to have to make in terms of deleveraging and the offsetting shift that we’re going to have to see in foreign economies toward stimulating domestic demand and away from exports. That’s going to take quite a bit of time, and to my mind that process is just starting.  This is one more reason that I think the risks to the economic outlook, even expecting that GDP growth may resume by the second half of this year, are still very much to the downside.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 137.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only conveys gratitude towards Governor Kohn.


Passage number 138.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite thank-you message mentioning Governor Warsh.


Passage number 139.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude towards Governor Duke.


Passage number 140.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a friendly and polite statement without any conflicting information.


Passage number 141.
 MR. TARULLO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  While anchoring the last spot in the go-round has the disadvantage of addressing an audience that is weary, if not catatonic, [laughter] it does have the advantage of allowing me to endorse a consensus without having to repeat all of the reasoning that has generated it. So let me begin by agreeing with what I hear to be the prevailing view.  First, the pace of decline in the economy has slowed significantly since our last meeting.  Second, since our last meeting, we have seen some encouraging indications in the data, but, Mr. Chairman, I have to say here that the one thing you may regret from your “60 Minutes” appearance is the use of this phrase.  Third, there is considerable uncertainty whether these are green shoots promising blossoms to come or a school of red herring swimming across the sea of death. [Laughter] Within this broadly shared frame of reference, I would make two observations.  One, with an eye to history, relates to the uncertainty that I just noted.  The other relates to the likely duration of a recovery period once the bottom has in fact been reached.  As to history, we all know that serious recessions have their own idiosyncratic origins and run their own course.  However, in light of the mildly hopeful data in the intermeeting period, I thought it useful to ask the question whether similar signs have in the past converged in what turned out to be a false dawn and, if so, whether we can distinguish between signs of a false dawn and signs of true recovery. Looking at the last two serious economic downturns in the United States—the 1973–75 and the1981–82 recessions—staff members from Dave Stockton’s division provided some interesting answers. First, in both instances there was indeed a period during which hopeful signs converged that in retrospect were not harbingers of imminent stabilization and recovery but were instead followed by further deterioration.  In each case, housing starts, initial claims, PCE growth, industrial production, and equity markets all improved noticeably at approximately the same time.  That is, the signs were even more uniformly tilted toward the upside than they are at present. Second, a review of Greenbooks from the relevant periods reveals that the staff interpreted these data as indicating the end of cyclical declines. Third, what we now know to be the actual beginnings of recovery, however, were characterized by improvements in these same indicators at a pace not unlike that which had been seen in the earlier false dawn.  Needless to say, two cases do not a pattern make.  Moreover, further analysis of these and other examples might yield more finely grained conclusions.  For the present, though, this modest inquiry helps explain and, indeed, excuse our collective low levels of assurance in our assessments of current conditions. Let me now rehearse some reasons that I continue to tend toward the view that, even when a true turning point is reached, recovery may be much more gradual—even halting at times—than has been our experience with economic downturns since the Second World War.  First, as noted in a number of recent studies, most recently Rogoff and Reinhart, economic downturns that begin with a financial crisis can be expected to be more painful and to have longer recovery periods than other serious recessions.  Although it is very difficult to disaggregate the effects of reduced demand, asset value uncertainty, and capital impairment, it seems probable that this last factor is both important and unlikely to be remedied soon, the TARP notwithstanding.  With some notable exceptions, improvements in credit markets still seem generally associated, directly or indirectly, with government support.  Indeed, to a considerable extent, our financial institutions are all still fundamentally tethered to government guarantees or support. Second, as I suggested at the last FOMC meeting, in an unusual number of industries, structural changes that were insipient even before the onset of the financial crisis, have been accelerated with the potential for extended negative effects on employment.  At the same time, sources of financing for new businesses are likely to remain constrained for some time to come. Third, as many of you have already noted, there are significant headwinds that may partially offset any positive momentum that develops.  For example, again, as you have noted, it seems likely that the considerable damage to commercial real estate markets has only begun working its way through the financial system, with attendant negative implications for the balance sheets of many regional banking organizations.  A somewhat different example is suggested by the possibility that many foreign economies may be lagging the U.S. downturn.  Particularly with respect to the euro area, lags in employment reduction, bank balance sheet repair, and other factors lead me to a somewhat more pessimistic view of economic performance in the coming quarters than was suggested in the Greenbook, whose alternative scenario of lower foreign economic growth produces materially negative effects on U.S. economic performance. Fourth, and finally, the likely continued fragility of the economy makes it unusually vulnerable to shocks, which could, in effect, set the reset button on the recovery effort.  Some of these potential shocks are classically economic, such as a crisis in an Eastern European country or a former Soviet Republic.  Others, such as a swine flu pandemic or adverse geopolitical developments, are truly exogenous. Neither individually, nor as a whole, do these factors have salience for our decisions at this meeting.  However, they do suggest that policy challenges may extend for a considerable period—policy challenges, I should say, beyond that of the unwinding of our balance sheet.  Even when dawn truly breaks, it promises to be a very slowly clearing day.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a speech by Mr. Tarullo in which he agrees with the prevailing view and provides some observations and reasons for his own perspective. There is no indication of disagreement or argument.


Passage number 142.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. And thank you all for a very interesting set of comments. This is a good time for us to break.  There is a reception and dinner upstairs.  No business will be conducted, just for your convenience.  We will begin tomorrow at 9:00 a.m.  Thank you. [Meeting recessed]   5 The materials used by Mr. Stockton are appended to this transcript (appendix 5).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It mainly consists of expressions of gratitude, information about a break and social event, and a note about attached materials.


Passage number 143.
 April 29—Morning Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good morning, everybody.  I think we have some data to begin with. Dave.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply making a statement.


Passage number 144.
 MR. STOCKTON.5  Yes, Mr. Chairman.  I think folks should find the little GDP scorecard at their seats. The advance estimate for first-quarter GDP was released this morning.  The top-line GDP figure that the BEA is currently estimating, minus 6.1 percent, is very close to our estimate of minus 6.3 percent.  As usual, the offsetting errors were our friends.  [Laughter] I would point to two on the domestic spending side.  Personal consumption, as you can see, was stronger than we had estimated—2.2 percent versus the 1.1 percent we had projected.  At this point, we will have to see the details to know whether there is any signal that we should take from that.  The other area that I would note is nonresidential structures, which came in at minus 44.2 percent versus the minus 26.4 percent that we were forecasting.  I guess that won’t come as much of a surprise to many of you who reported incredible weakness in that area yesterday.  Some of that unexpected weakness came in the drilling and mining activity, so maybe some of those rigs that are making their way from Kansas City to Richmond got lost somewhere along the way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and sharing their observations on the GDP figures.


Passage number 145.
 [Laughter] MR. HOENIG. We hope so for Richmond’s sake.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a hopeful sentiment for the sake of Richmond.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 146.
  [Laughter] MR. STOCKTON. As you know, there are areas of missing data in this advance estimate.  In two areas, the BEA wrote down assumptions for the March missing data that are different from ours. One is imports, for which it wrote down a weaker figure for March than we are, and the other is inventories, for which it wrote down a weaker March figure than we are.  The GDP consequences of those two different assumptions, in fact, are just about offsetting.  We would be inclined to stick with our estimate at this point.  We don’t really think that the BEA  knows anything more than we do about those particular pieces of data.  But, sticking with our assumptions, the consequences for the top line would be roughly offsetting.  Finally, on prices, you can see that the BEA is a little lower on core prices—0.2 percentage point lower—than our Greenbook estimate.  I don’t think we would have any reason to second-guess them on that.  So that is the end of the report, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that the BEA's assumptions for imports and inventories are different from their own, and they do not believe that the BEA knows more about these particular pieces of data. They also mention that the BEA's estimate for core prices is lower than their own.


Passage number 147.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any questions. Okay.  I have the rare advantage of having had overnight to work out my summary of the discussion so it may be somewhat more coherent than usual.  Let me start with that.  The intermeeting period saw some tentative evidence of stabilization of real activity, or at least a slower decline relative to the earlier sharp contraction.  Indicators of possible stabilization appeared in data on consumption, housing, durable goods, regional manufacturing reports, and other areas.  Surveys and some anecdotal reports suggested a slightly greater confidence on the part of households and businesses.  Financial markets also generally improved.  Inventory decumulation has been brisk, suggesting possible increases in production in the medium term.  However, labor markets remained weak and global economic and financial conditions, adverse. Overall, participants were very cautious about taking too much signal from the incoming data, noting its tentative nature, particularly the improvement in the financial markets.  False dawns have occurred in previous recessions. To the extent that participants saw an upturn materializing, most thought that it would be relatively anemic because of factors such as financial headwinds, including ongoing deleveraging; the need for economic restructuring; slow global economic growth that may be lagging the U.S. cycle; and the high vulnerability of the fragile economy and financial system to shocks.  Further policy support, both in the United  States and abroad, would be constrained by the zero lower bound on interest rates and by the already high level of fiscal borrowing. Consumer spending shows some signs of bottoming out.  Fiscal stimulus will support consumer income going forward, and the rising stock market and possibly slower declines in house prices imply that wealth is no longer dropping so sharply.  There are at best, however, only the slightest indications of improvement in labor markets.  Unemployment claims and job losses remain high; firms are undertaking permanent reductions in labor force; and involuntary part-time work is unusually elevated.  Housing activity is giving some indications of stabilizing at a very low level, with affordability and buyer traffic up and inventories down.  However, prices are likely to continue to fall, in part because of the additions to supply from high rates of foreclosure. Production and investment remain weak, although firms’ attitudes are not quite as negative as they recently were.  Drilling and mining have been affected by commodity prices.  Export demand remains depressed.  Industrial production has continued to fall both here and abroad, and growth rates in both advanced and emerging-market economies have fallen significantly. China is somewhat stronger than other Asian countries, but perhaps not as strong as its official statistics imply; and like many other countries, it remains dependent on export demand.  Europe faces slow growth and potentially serious banking problems, including exposures to Eastern Europe. Financial market conditions generally had a better tone.  Stock prices rose, money markets exhibited better liquidity and lower spreads, corporate issuance of bonds and convertible securities is healthy, volatility is down, and other indicators of market functioning have improved.  Better financial conditions have helped confidence, even as indications of economic  improvement have reduced risk aversion in markets.  However, financial markets had shown signs of improvement on several previous occasions before worsening again.  Moreover, although banks generally reported good earnings in the first quarter and their share prices rose, confidence in banks—as shown in CDS spreads, for example—remains tenuous.  A number of people observed that the disclosure of the capital assessment results on Monday will be a stress test in itself for the banks and the markets.  Credit continues to contract because of declining credit quality and loan demand, capital constraints on banks that don’t want to base increased lending on government capital, and the unavailability of financing through securitization markets.  Lack of financing for commercial real estate remains a particularly serious issue.   Most see inflation as remaining low for the foreseeable future.  Slack looks to be high and increasing, as reflected in high unemployment and low capacity utilization.  Wages are growing more slowly.  With the slight improvement in the outlook and the incoming inflation data not particularly low, deflation risks have moderated but remain a worry for some participants. On the other hand, some expressed concerns about upside inflation risks, reflecting the possibility that the output gap is being overestimated and that forward-looking expectations may react to factors such as the Fed’s rapid balance sheet expansion and its purchases of Treasury securities. Effective exit strategies from Fed policies and good communication are necessary to maintain confidence that price stability will be achieved. So that is my overview.  Any comments or questions.  If not, let me make just a few comments, as usual. I am after Governor Tarullo, and so it is even more difficult for me than for him to come up with something new.  On the proverbial green shoots, [laughter] we all want to be cautious, but it is nevertheless better to see good news than to see bad news, and we have seen some nascent signs of improvement.  Although they are small, subject to revision, and so on, they do occur across a number of areas, and so that is a positive.  But, of course, I agree that we need to be very cautious about overinterpreting what are still relatively modest changes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker presents various indicators and observations about the state of the economy, acknowledging that there are some signs of improvement but also emphasizing the need for caution and noting potential challenges and risks.


Passage number 148.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Are there questions for Brian.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 149.
 MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, listening to your presentation and some of the discussions yesterday, I am a little confused about the way the policy options are presented. I know there will be a discussion about the rate of purchases, but it does seem as though the policies that we are implementing, as I was talking about with Vice Chairman Dudley beforehand, have a cliff-like nature to them in the sense that we have a pace for purchases and then we’re just going to stop under the current implementation by the Desk.  The Desk, I suppose, is charged with the responsibility of inferring a path that the Committee hasn’t really specified, and it feels very incomplete.  We are almost surely locking ourselves into a future action in order to smooth that cliff-like purchase behavior, which we just haven’t discussed.  I am not saying that I disagree with any of that, but it feels different from the way we have always talked about the funds rate policy in the past, when we could take an action and choose to not do that the next time.  There seem to be future ramifications from these actions.  So do we leave it to the Desk to infer how to implement the additional, say, $300 billion of Treasury purchases as opposed to telling them that, in addition, there is a plan that, if this is the entire amount to be done, it should tail off in some smooth fashion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses confusion and dissatisfaction with the way policy options are presented and implemented, specifically regarding the "cliff-like" nature of the purchases and the lack of discussion about future actions or ramifications.


Passage number 150.
 MR. MADIGAN. Well, of course, the Committee issues a directive to the Desk, and my understanding of the directive—and Trish may want to comment on this—is that the Committee has essentially instructed the Desk to carry out the purchases that are specified at rates that roughly average the amounts specified by the Committee but that also potentially take into account market conditions. Now, you are raising a separate issue, which relates to the questions that Presidents Bullard and Plosser have raised.  It is, What’s the longer-run path or the longer-run plan for the Committee’s open market purchases.  I agree that, in an ideal world, the Committee would articulate a fully blown plan for its monetary policy settings over the indefinite future.  I think that is difficult to do in practice.  One way to look at this is that the world will surely turn out differently, either better or worse, from the way we currently see it in terms of the baseline projection, and eventually the Committee will need to adjust its plans for large-scale asset purchases and other monetary policy settings like the federal funds rate.  That could conceivably mean that later this year, for instance, the Committee scales back its large-scale asset purchases or expands them.  So I do not think that the way that the Committee has already expressed its statement or its directive to the Desk rules out those adjustments at some point in the future.  It just doesn’t make clear at this point what those will be in the absence of information about how the economy and the outlook will progress.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It is primarily discussing the Committee's directive and the challenges of articulating a long-term plan for monetary policy. The speaker acknowledges that adjustments may be necessary in the future based on economic conditions.


Passage number 151.
 MS. MOSSER. I would agree with that. Two comments.  The first is that there really is no cliff-like expectation in the market right now.  The good news is that we have a lot of credibility that we’re not going to stop abruptly one day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker agrees with the statement and offers two additional comments.


Passage number 152.
 MR. EVANS. But we get all of that from your presentation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There does not seem to be any contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Evans simply acknowledges that they have received the information presented.


Passage number 153.
 MS. MOSSER. Right, and in fact, if you look at the latest primary dealer survey, to a firm practically, there is an expectation, regardless of the level effect, that the wind-down will be smooth.  The timing of that varies from respondent to respondent, but the expectation is that we will not all of a sudden stop buying on December 30 or 31 of this year, particularly in Treasuries on September 30. My second comment has to do more with the actual implementation.  Is “steady as she goes” the right approach versus some another approach to purchasing, given that we are uncertain about the endpoint and how slowly we might wind these down.  My comments here are really dependent upon the program we’re talking about.  The MBS program—purchasing MBS, the issuance of MBS—is very lumpy.  We could very well be well ahead of a steady-as­she-goes plan in purchasing MBS, given the current directive we have, in the next two or three months because there is a huge refinancing wave coming through and, if we don’t purchase, mortgage rates will rise or rise more than we want them to. If that is the way the market dynamics turn out, that is the Desk’s intent in terms of instructing our investment managers.  So we’re well prepared to be very flexible there and perhaps come back to the Committee with a warning at some point to say that we are well ahead of a steady pace, but our expectation is that purchases will taper off.  Or we could come back and say, if we want to keep this program going, then what is the Committee’s view about increasing the size.  As Brian noted, we don’t know which of those scenarios we may face, but those are the scenarios. The agency debt purchase program similarly, honestly, is very dependent upon the financing needs of the GSEs. It is possible that the program might actually pull back early, if their portfolios shrink and there is less debt out there and less need to support the market in order to support the agency market.  Then again, if the GSEs’ portfolios grow and our mandate is still to purchase, we may be lumpier in how we purchase those securities.  Treasuries are different because of the steady issuance. Because we know that the Treasury Department is going to be issuing just a huge amount of debt at a steady pace and we also know, particularly for Treasuries, that the announcement effect may be as important as anything else in terms of lowering the level of interest rates, we are more inclined toward “steady as she goes” in purchasing there.  So the problem that you’re worried about and the cliff effect may perhaps be more relevant from an operational standpoint to the Treasury purchase program than to the other two programs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different scenarios and approaches to purchasing in different programs, but there is no clear disagreement or argument.


Passage number 154.
 MR. EVANS. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude by saying "thank you."


Passage number 155.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 156.
 MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, I am sure that this is covered in some of the write-ups, but could you walk through how the number 450 billion was selected and what other numbers were considered.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply asks for clarification on how a specific number was selected and what other options were considered. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 157.
 MR. MADIGAN. I would see this in the context of the overall set of materials that the staff has provided to the Committee, especially at the last meeting and this meeting, and the various attempts that we’ve made to calibrate the different amounts of asset purchases to evolving economic conditions and their effects on the economy.  We didn’t look carefully or specifically at a whole range of options.  Basically these would be viewed as linear, and if the Committee were inclined to go with the smaller number, then the effects on the economy and interest rates would be correspondingly smaller, and vice versa for larger purchases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an explanation and discussing potential outcomes based on different levels of asset purchases.


Passage number 158.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any context or additional information. The phrase "President Fisher" alone does not provide enough information to make a conclusive judgment.


Passage number 159.
 MR. FISHER. Part of the cliff nature is that we’ve stated specific end dates, originally six months and now by autumn, and with regard to the mortgage-backed securities, we stated by the end of the year. I would just like some clarification on the comment you made, Trish, about understanding the lumpy nature of the mortgage-backed securities market and whether or not the agencies need more financing.  What caught my ear was your comment about Treasuries and that that is what the community expects.  We’re going to even this out since there’s constant issuanceover the time frame that we articulated.  In creating that cliff, we’re committed to that.  But was your comment that they expect us to do more when this is over.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward discussion about specific end dates and expectations related to mortgage-backed securities.


Passage number 160.
 MS. MOSSER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 161.
 The market expectation is absolutely— MR. FISHER. It will continue to grow this over time after we have run the course of what we previously stated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that the market expectation is absolute, meaning it will definitely continue to grow over time. The mention of "we previously stated" suggests that the statement aligns with something that was previously discussed or agreed upon.


Passage number 162.
 MS. MOSSER. In the Treasury program, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states that there is a Treasury program.


Passage number 163.
 MR. FISHER. And to what extent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement without any conflicting views or opposing opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 164.
 MS. MOSSER. I showed the average. Our dealer survey had an average of the program that the sizes total to approximately $500 billion, but their estimates there are quite skewed.  A number of individuals expect that the program will be $750 billion, along the lines of what it is in alternative A. In fact, I would also say that, in the dealer survey, we asked economists for their opinions. If we asked the Treasury traders for their opinions, I think we would probably get an average or a median expectation that the Treasury program would be even larger than $500 billion. But it is the one program that all market participants say will be both extended, partly because its terminal date is earlier than the mortgage and agency one, and expanded by a sizable amount.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that there are differing estimates for the size of the program, with some individuals expecting it to be $750 billion. Additionally, the speaker suggests that if Treasury traders were asked for their opinions, their expectations might be even higher than $500 billion.


Passage number 165.
 MR. FISHER. And that larger number would be what percentage of the expected issuance. I don’t have your charts from yesterday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, is simply expressing that he does not have the necessary charts from the previous day.


Passage number 166.
 MS. MOSSER. It would still be only about half.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by a person named Ms. Moser, without any conflicting opinions or arguments presented.


Passage number 167.
 MR. FISHER. In terms of the larger number that you gave.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 168.
 MS. MOSSER. Yes, even the larger number would be about half.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Mosser simply confirms that the larger number would be approximately half.


Passage number 169.
 MR. FISHER. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "Thank you" does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 170.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions "President Bullard" without providing any context or information that can be analyzed for contention or disagreement.


Passage number 171.
 MR. BULLARD. If I understand your comments correctly, the Committee has effectively committed to more than what we said, according to the private sector’s view of what we’re going to do, and probably more than what the Committee is going to do—because, if we don’t believe our own cliff, it’s just not credible.  It’s not a credible commitment to say we’re just going to stop all at once at a point in time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 172.
 MS. MOSSER. Yes, that’s correct.  In terms of cliff effects, because of the lumpiness, if the market conditions are appropriate, it will be easier, for example, to slow down quickly the purchases of MBS and, to a degree, the purchases of agency debt.  The Treasury piece will be the part for which, because of the smooth issuance and the expectations, from an operational standpoint, we would guess that a smoother slowdown would be a more advisable implementation strategy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 173.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I’d like to say, though, that I don’t see any reason that you couldn’t say that we’re going to extend this three months but we’re going to have a tapering off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and suggesting that it is possible to extend something for three months while gradually reducing or tapering it off.


Passage number 174.
 MS. MOSSER. Absolutely. Our recommendation would be that, if the Committee has been clear about their intentions that it’s not needed, we would put on a timetable—we’re now publishing a schedule two weeks in advance; we don’t put in the quantities, but we put in the section of the curve—and we would make clear that we’re going to diminish our purchases over time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting a recommendation without any conflicting views or opposing opinions mentioned.


Passage number 175.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions. Okay.  If not, we are ready for our policy go-round. Let me start with President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement indicating a transition to another topic.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 176.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I have just one small comment.  I appreciate your doing what I asked, which is to work in advance and provide a concrete alternative, which I think is very helpful. I have a question about B′′ versus B′′′—the 18 to 20 percent versus the $160 billion per month.  I think a problem with the 18 to 20 percent is, of course, that if we follow our plan, a week from now we’ll be announcing 15 to 18 percent or something, and that could be misconstrued as a change in our strategy.  It isn’t quite as transparent in that respect.  So in doing this, my inclination would be to go with the dollar number.  But I just raise that point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage regarding whether to use the percentage or dollar number in a certain context. The speaker expresses their opinion and raises a point about transparency.


Passage number 177.
 MR. PLOSSER. Well, that’s why the B′′′ was there. That was part of the discussion, to figure out what’s the best way to express that.  But, again, I think that’s a point worth discussing.  I don’t feel as strongly about that as I do some other pieces.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing a willingness to discuss and consider different viewpoints, indicating a lack of disagreement.


Passage number 178.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only states "President Hoenig." The statement does not provide any context or information that can be analyzed for disagreement or contention.


Passage number 179.
   MR. HOENIG. Thank you. I guess as we consider all the options, I do prefer alternative B and not the primes.  I guess I’m more concerned about and more interested in the fact that we are increasing our balance sheet by the extent that we are, and I’m not enamored of the idea of doing that and saying, “Here’s the path that we’re going to take.”  I’m more concerned about the amount than I am whether we have a path, because that’s the striking point.   I also like the wording in the sense that the Committee under any of these is prepared to adjust the timing and the amounts.  If you think about how much the projections have changed in the Greenbook, for example, from the last meeting to this meeting and if we are near the bottom, things could change, and I think the Committee would need to reconsider even the amounts at another meeting.  The wording in the B alternative allows us to do this. I did note and am very much appreciative of the work that the staff did on the projections on the balance sheet because I think it does point out that, if we go to these sizes, we have some real challenges ahead of us.  I think the June meeting is extremely important in terms of thinking about an exit strategy. That’s very important because, if we do achieve the total amount under the mortgage-backed securities, our holdings will be larger than those of either Fannie or Freddie, and that’s a striking statement as far as our role in the economy goes.  That gives me some pause.  So B is fine. I hope that the next meeting will show even more positive news and we can adjust these numbers going forward.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Hoenig, expresses his preference for alternative B over the primes and explains his concerns about increasing the balance sheet and the potential challenges ahead. However, there is no explicit disagreement or conflict with anyone else's viewpoint.


Passage number 180.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a polite expression of gratitude towards President Yellen.


Passage number 181.
 MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative A.  The Greenbook projection, with which I broadly concur, assumes no change from our announced asset purchases. It foresees unemployment remaining above 9 percent through the end of 2010 and  inflation well below our preferred rate for even longer.  I consider this unacceptable in light of our mandates.  I think we need to do more to get the economy moving forward. I think our actions at the last meeting provided compelling evidence that purchases of longer-term Treasury securities worked to bring down borrowing rates and improved financial conditions more broadly. Now that we’ve tested the waters, it’s time to wade in by substantially increasing our purchases of Treasury securities.  In fact, I could support increasing the amount beyond $750 billion and would consider including securities of durations down to one year.  The latter step would be aimed at bringing down one-year and two-year rates that are well above those consistent with our expectations for the future path of policy.  Now, we could wait until our June meeting to take this step, but the question to my mind is why we would wait.  As with the funds rate, I don’t see a reason to keep our powder dry.  So I prefer to take appropriate, bold action to stimulate the economy sooner rather than later. Regarding the best way to communicate our asset purchases to the public, I strongly support the approach that we have taken so far and see no reason to change it.  Our statements provide clear information on the expected size and duration of each of our asset purchase programs.  Economic theory suggests that it is the size of the cumulative asset purchase relative to the size of the market that affects the yield and, therefore, the stance of monetary policy.  In other words, it is aggregate purchases, not the growth rate, that matters.  This is an important point because it implies that our communications should focus on levels or, alternatively, on the shares of the outstanding stock that we hold and not on changes or growth rates.  A focus on growth rates or changes would confuse our message, and I therefore would consider it a mistake.  I also think it’s important to report the various types of asset purchases separately rather than as a sum because their effects on financial conditions and the economy may differ.Our statements do leave open the question of what we will do once the announced purchases have been completed, but this ambiguity is appropriate given the high degree of uncertainty about the outlook and the effectiveness of the asset purchases.  Indeed, we’re already far clearer about our projections of asset purchases than we have ever been about the future path of the funds rate. So perhaps the change we should be considering is how to better communicate the funds rate path we think is most likely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Yellen, expresses her support for alternative A and her belief that more action is needed to stimulate the economy. She also supports the approach taken in communicating the asset purchases to the public.


Passage number 182.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Since the passage is not provided, I cannot determine if there is contention or disagreement. Please provide the passage so that I can assist you further.


Passage number 183.
 MR. EVANS. Just to ask a question—would the Desk interpret alternative A as a greater pace of purchases or just pushing it out to the end of the plan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question being asked.


Passage number 184.
 MS. MOSSER. Given this size, it would be a greater pace as well.  It would be like the mortgage program.  We’re purchasing Treasuries at $50 billion per month.  The $500 billion that was in the dealer survey would be a steady pace, so to go to $750 billion would be increasing the pace.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It is simply stating different levels of purchasing Treasuries without any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 185.
 MR. EVANS. Would it be over the entire currently envisioned purchase time, or would some of it be pushed beyond that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is simply asking for clarification about the time frame of the purchase, without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 186.
 MS. MOSSER. It would depend on what the Committee asked us to do.  If the directive is to extend it through December, then we would spread it out over whatever time frame the Committee gives us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states the conditions necessary for spreading out a task over a given time frame.


Passage number 187.
 MR. EVANS. I am just asking whether or not further clarification would be required.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Evans is simply asking for clarification and there is no opposing viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 188.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Trish, on President Yellen’s suggestion of shortening maturities, that has the other benefit of making our exit strategy easier.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply states a potential benefit of shortening maturities as suggested by President Yellen.


Passage number 189.
 MS. MOSSER. Yes, it does.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply affirms that the statement or question mentioned does indeed have a certain characteristic.


Passage number 190.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Do you see similar market benefits of mixing in more one­to-three-year maturities, for example.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is asking for a comparison of market benefits when including different maturities.


Passage number 191.
 MS. MOSSER. There would probably be some market benefits at the front end of the curve. There’s no question that the one-to-two-year section of the curve reacted less than the section further out.  That’s probably because a lot more issuance is there, and so the quantity we’re buying relative to supply is a little smaller.  And if we did it pretty explicitly, particularly between one and two years, we’re guessing that it would steepen the yield curve; but we hope that, if it was announced, that additional purchases across the curve would have an announcement effect of bringing the whole curve down.  So for that portion of the curve we think that it would be useful in bringing yields down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is describing their analysis of the yield curve and discussing the potential market benefits of implementing a specific strategy. There is no indication that there is any disagreement or conflicting views among the speakers.


Passage number 192.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a polite expression of gratitude.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 193.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. It would do less, though, to bring down mortgage rates.  So it really depends a little on why you are purchasing the Treasuries. Are you purchasing the Treasuries to bring down mortgage rates, or are you purchasing Treasuries to steepen the yield curve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: There is contention in this passage as it presents two different possibilities (bringing down mortgage rates or steepening the yield curve) and suggests that the effectiveness of purchasing Treasuries depends on the intention behind it.


Passage number 194.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: To accurately answer whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage, it is necessary to have the complete passage. Without the accompanying passage, it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement in President Rosengren's statement or in the surrounding context.


Passage number 195.
 MR. ROSENGREN. The same logic could apply to mortgage-backed securities, though, because you could do 3-, 5-, and 7-year mortgage-backed securities, and that has the opposite story. Those would not be as deep, and so you might have a bigger impact if you did the shorter maturities.  Unlike changing the maturity on the Treasuries, arguably you’d have a bigger impact if you changed the maturities and bought ARMs rather than the 15- and 30-year fixed.  That’s also something that might be worth thinking about because the ARM rates haven’t come downvery much.  So if you’re looking at a 30-year fixed, a 15-year fixed, and a 7-year ARM, the 7-year ARM hasn’t moved all that much, for example.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply presents a statement and discusses different options without any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 196.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 197.
 MR. LACKER. Yes, but the relative depth of the market matters in only a habitat kind of view, in which case the spillover to other markets is commensurately lower even if you’re having a higher effect. I think that is what was troubling Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, is explaining his viewpoint on a topic and it is stated in an explanatory manner. There is no indication of any conflicting opinions or arguments being presented.


Passage number 198.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage "President Stern." This is because the passage only mentions a person's title or position without providing any additional context or information that could involve conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 199.
 MR. STERN. I’m sort of lost as to how this might work.  I thought you said earlier that the people in the marketplace anticipate that we’re going to buy more Treasuries than we’ve announced so far anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 200.
 MR. FISHER. After the time frame is over or during the time frame, just for clarification.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply a request for clarification.


Passage number 201.
 MS. MOSSER. They are expecting both an extension and an expansion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Mosser states that someone is expecting both an extension and an expansion, without expressing any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 202.
 MR. STERN. Okay. So if we officially announce an expansion, are they simply going to mark everything up from here, or are they going to say, “That’s what we expected—end of story”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 203.
 MS. MOSSER. That depends upon the size. The size they’re expecting now is smaller than what has been proposed in alternative A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Mosser is simply stating that the size of something depends on the specific dimensions they are expecting now, which is smaller than what has been proposed in an alternative plan. There is no argument or conflicting views being expressed.


Passage number 204.
 MR. STERN. So if we do something bigger, presumably they’re going to say that’s probably it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a hypothetical situation without expressing any opinion or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 205.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. No, I don’t think that’s right.  I think doing it means that you like what you’ve done. You want to do more, and it opens the door for doing even more at subsequent meetings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "No, I don't think that's right" expresses a disagreement with a previous statement or assumption. Furthermore, the following sentences present an alternative viewpoint, indicating a difference in opinion.


Passage number 206.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Let me just say that, although we have to manage expectations, we’ve made a commitment to what we’ve made a commitment to, and with the federal funds rate, we have surprised markets, and if we have to surprise markets, we’ll do it again. So there is no commitment to do anything other than what we’ve said.  We have the right, as we say explicitly in the statement, to adjust the timing.  We could, for example, phase out by extending the period but not the amount in order to go out more slowly.  There are other things we can do. So let’s not jump the gun here.  But I do want to ask you—just because this came up earlier—to think for the next meeting a bit about the idea of whether shorter maturity MBS would have benefits because it would, in addition, have some exit benefits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is mostly explaining the commitment of the speaker and the potential actions they could take in the future.


Passage number 207.
 MS. MOSSER. Yes, and we are going to study purchasing ARMs, which we had not purchased.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Mosser responds affirmatively and mentions studying purchasing ARMs, indicating agreement and a willingness to participate in the activity.


Passage number 208.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Not just ARMs but also seasoned MBS with shorter duration.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The sentence is stating that both ARMs (Adjustable Rate Mortgages) and seasoned MBS (Mortgage-Backed Securities) with shorter duration are important or significant.


Passage number 209.
 MS. MOSSER. Yes. I don’t want to leave the impression that we’re not buying any seasoned MBS.  We are.  In fact, the purchases that we’re making in the dollar roll market are actually exclusively the higher coupons because that’s where the liquidity in the market was most affected. So from a balance sheet, month-to-month perspective, we actually are purchasing them.  We’re simply then rolling those purchases for the following month and lending them out, if you like, through the financing market.  But we could definitely investigate increasing the share of higher coupon MBS as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply explaining their approach to purchasing and rolling over mortgage-backed securities. They mention that they are buying higher coupon MBS, but also suggest that they could potentially increase the share of higher coupon MBS in the future.


Passage number 210.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Were there other two-handers.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is simply asking a question and there is no indication of conflicting opinions or views.


Passage number 211.
  MR. EVANS. Well, I’m at a loss to understand how to interpret the market’s  expectation. You talk to people in the markets quite a lot.  During that conversation, do they  understand this path better than everyone else.  I mean, we don’t communicate this in our statement.  I guess the question is, If in our own commentaries we go out in public, would you be relatively indifferent toward our describing it.  We said we would do $300 billion, and I have interpreted this that, as we get closer to $300 billion, we would smooth this down and finish up.  That is how this reads. It’s a $300 billion program.  But others in the market have an expectation that it’s going to go on to another $100 billion or something like that.  What is the right amount of information to communicate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing confusion and seeking clarification on how to interpret the market's expectation.


Passage number 212.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It says we will adjust our magnitude and timing according to the information as it comes in.  So we could expand the program, we could reduce it, or we could spread it out. All of those things are options.  I don’t think it’s fundamentally different from other monetary policy decisions, which involve both communication and responding to new information that comes across the transom.  Trish.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is explaining that they are open to various possibilities and options in adjusting their program, and they mention that this is similar to other monetary policy decisions. It is a statement of flexibility and adaptability rather than contention.


Passage number 213.
 MS. MOSSER. I don’t think the communication challenge is any different than it is with discussing the swap lines or the 13(3) programs.  They all have deadlines. Markets participants understand that it is path dependent.  Their view is that, if the economy gets significantly worse, the probability that the Board of Governors will extend the 13(3) programs and that the FOMC will extend the swap lines and the purchase programs is much higher.  The better that things get, the less likely that is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the understanding of market participants in regards to the communication challenge, swap lines, and 13(3) programs. They are stating that market participants believe that if the economy worsens, there is a higher probability of the programs being extended, and vice versa. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 214.
 MR. EVANS. That dependence suggests a change in the path other than what we’re currently expecting. So as I think about this, there’s an outlook; there’s an option chosen.  If the outlook stays the same, then we’ve said $300 billion, and it could be closed down, not just a recurrence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the possibility of a change in the current path and the potential consequences.


Passage number 215.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes, that’s right.  A two-hander from the Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Yes, that's right" simply confirms something previously mentioned and the phrase "A two-hander from the Vice Chairman" suggests that the Vice Chairman is involved in some kind of performance or activity. There is no indication of disagreement or contention between the speakers.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 216.
   VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I think part of the confusion here is that we do a program and the market is also evaluating whether the program is effective, and then how are we going to react to the perception of the effectiveness of the program.  So if we do a program and the market responds in the way that we want the market to respond, the market participants are going to assume that, gee, it worked pretty well for the Federal Reserve, so of course the Federal Reserve is likely to want to do more of it.  Their view is conditioned not just on the macroeconomic outlook but also on how the markets respond to the program.  In this particular case of the Treasury securities, I think that the market expects that the program is going to be expanded because (1) we did expand the MBS purchase program and so they’ve already seen that, when the market seems to get the desired response, the Fed has responded by increasing the size of the program and (2) they’ve seen that the Treasury program seems to have worked in the desired way that we intended. So all of those things point to an expectation that they expect the program to be expanded.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting that the market expects the program to be expanded based on their perception that it has been effective in the past. However, it is not clear if this is the opinion of the speaker or if they are presenting it as a widely held belief. Therefore, there could be disagreement among different individuals or groups regarding this expectation.


Passage number 217.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. But it also depends on the economic outlook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presenting a condition ("it also depends on the economic outlook") without arguing or contradicting any previously stated information.


Passage number 218.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Oh, sure. But it’s not just the economic outlook; it’s also how the program seems to work in practice because we don’t have any track record on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any specific viewpoints or opposing ideas. It is discussing two related aspects without presenting any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 219.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only states the name "President Lockhart" without providing any context or information that would suggest contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 220.
 MR. LOCKHART. By emphasizing, as the Chairman just did, the ability to increase, slow down, extend, and so forth, it sounds to me like a very tactical approach.  The directives that come every six or seven weeks from the Committee, are they a mode of guidance to the Desk that’s going to be enough for you to interpret how to make those adjustments, or are we talking about a more frequent consultation with the Committee in order to be able to respond tactically.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates contention or disagreement. Mr. Lockhart expresses doubt about whether the current mode of guidance from the Committee is sufficient for making adjustments or if more frequent consultation is needed.


Passage number 221.
   MS. MOSSER. From a tactical standpoint—and I’m using the word “tactical” literally— I think we have plenty of direction from the Committee.  We obviously need, particularly given how unusual and new these programs are, to communicate back to you to let you know what our tactics are, and we’ve tried to be clear with you. In fact, particularly in the case of the Treasury program, we’ve tried to be very clear with the market what our tactics are because transparency seems to make it more effective rather than less.  Now, if I can re-interpret your question just a bit, should either financial or macroeconomic conditions change dramatically, would we like to have more strategic instruction from the Committee.  Yes, on a more frequent basis.  But barring that, I don’t see that we need a lot more direction on the day-to-day tactics, which I think we tried to lay out for you in broad terms.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 222.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the phrase "President Bullard." It simply states the title or position of an individual.


Passage number 223.
 MR. BULLARD. The fact that the private sector has some expectation about what we’re going to do doesn’t tell you anything.  They’re always going to have an expectation about what we are going to do, even if we’re a completely silent Committee.  The point is that it is not optimal policy as we’ve come to understand it over the last 25 years.  You want to be in sync with the markets, and a lot of that is that the measure of success is not announcement effects.  If you say that you’re going to buy a new category of assets that you have not talked about before, you’re going to surprise the market.  You’re going to get some effect on that day.  It might have nothing to do with optimal policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion about optimal policy and the relationship between the central bank's actions and the market's expectations.


Passage number 224.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Let’s go back to our regularly scheduled program.  [Laughter] President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 225.
 MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m comfortable with continuing on the path that we laid out at the last meeting—expanding our balance sheet.  We did pretty well against  objectives over the intermeeting period.  Asset purchases added $215 billion, and the net runoffs in other lending, the reduction in the Treasury’s general account, and some other miscellaneous wiggles in our balance sheet meant that currency plus reserves increased by $146 billion, virtually all of that in reserves.  So I’m happy with how we did over the last intermeeting period. This last discussion has been fascinating against the backdrop of our not having a clear sense of exactly why and how expanding our balance sheet affects the world.  I think about all the experience we’ve had with tracing the course of the fed funds rate through a recovery and out again, and I look at the graphs of our balance sheet and the timing of the recession, and I’m thinking, Why should our balance sheet peak in December or whenever it does.  Do we have an analytical sense that that’s the right timing for the magnitude of the stimulus.  Are there announcement effects.  Maybe it doesn’t matter.  Maybe it’s just the time path cumulatively summed. But this habitat theory doesn’t say that there are announcement effects; I’m not sure you get any announcement effects in that.  And is it the assets or the liabilities. Is it the base.  I think we’re really groping in the dark here.  I think we need to recognize that. I’d like to see the Desk pay some attention to the base and accelerate its pace of purchases a little if the credit programs are running off faster than we seek.  Similarly, if the credit programs don’t run off as fast as we think, maybe the Desk could lighten the pace and respond accordingly. I think it’s going to be really hard to think about adjusting this over the year. As I said yesterday, it’s not likely to happen next week, for sure, but what if banks’ demand for liquidity, protection against adverse market events, falls or rises.  That could shift the effect of what we’re doing. It could shift us toward a much more stimulative effect or a much less stimulative effect pretty suddenly, and I think we need to be alert for that.As for the statement, something B-ish would be good for me.  [Laughter] I guess I like the general structure of B′′′, as it’s being called here—it’s simple.  But I could go with any of them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses satisfaction with the path laid out in the previous meeting and discusses their thoughts and questions about the timing and effectiveness of expanding the balance sheet. They also suggest potential adjustments based on the pace of credit programs and banks' demand for liquidity. The speaker further mentions their preference for a certain type of statement but notes that they are open to any of the options presented. Overall, there is a thoughtful evaluation and consideration of various factors, but no clear disagreement or contention.


Passage number 226.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply acknowledges the presence of Governor Kohn without expressing any opposing views or conflicts.


Passage number 227.
 MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m in favor of the action and language of alternative B with no primes.  I think we don’t need to take additional action today.  We need to get further along in implementing what we’ve done.  With a less negative outlook, I think the need for an additional, immediate reaction is less pressing and, given the high level of uncertainty, it argues for being a little more gradual in our actions. Having said all that, I agree with many of the points that President Yellen made.  The outcomes we predicted are just not satisfactory from the perspective of the objectives that the Congress has given us. The lowest unemployment rate we have in 2011 is 6½ percent.  Now, I think the NAIRU may have risen in the structural changes, but whether it has risen 2 full percentage points, I think even President Plosser—let the transcript show that President Plosser shook his head “no.” [Laughter] So even at the end of 2011, we have an output gap.  We can discuss how big it might be, but something is there.  And inflation in most of our forecasts—not all of them, but most of them—is still on its way down.  So this is not a satisfactory outcome, and we need to think carefully about what we can do about it, consistent with what the Congress has told us to do as the objectives of monetary policy. There are a number of potential things we could do.  One is more purchases of long-term securities, as President Yellen suggested.  I’m not comfortable at this point with the suggestion that President Rosengren was making yesterday—that we set a long-term interest rate and aim for that. I think that would complicate the exit strategy tremendously.  But my mind is open to   these things. I’d like to hear further arguments on this, and if the situation does fail to improve, I think we ought to be open to all those alternatives.  As I said yesterday, I would consider lowering the rate on excess reserves.  It’s not a big deal, but it moves in the right direction at some point.  And we’re talking about possibly being more explicit on two kinds of paths.  One is the path for future purchases, and the other would be the path for the federal funds rate.  So President Bullard is right. Optimal policy kinds of discussions say that you ought to tell people what you’re going to do in the future.  The Canadians have now moved to that.  I don’t think the uncertainty about the future path of purchases is any different qualitatively from the uncertainty about the future interest rates.  So if we’re going to start specifying the future path of purchases, we need to think about whether we should also be specifying future interest rates. The Committee has had trouble with doing that because of the sense of commitment, but it needs a thorough discussion before we go down that path. I also have an issue with the cliff effect.  I, too, thought that the major effect came from reducing the stock of debt in the hands of the private sector, not necessarily the pace at which we do it. I can imagine that the pace matters some, but it’s mostly a stock thing.  I don’t know how important the cliff effect is. How do we know when we’ve done enough.  It’s going to be really hard, and as President Lacker said, we are in territory that we’ve not been in before.  We don’t know what the metrics are.  We’re just going to have to factor everything through the forecast, discuss where the path of financial conditions is going and what the implications for the forecast are, and decide when we need to tighten. It isn’t going to be easy.  It never is. I hope that President Plosser is right and we come to that decision sooner rather than later.  But my expectation right now,  looking at the projections that we submitted today, is that we are not going to be there any time soon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 228.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "President Plosser" is just a name and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 229.
 MR. PLOSSER. Just to clarify the unemployment rate discussion, Governor Kohn, I think the difference in the language that you and I would use on this particular issue has to do with the fact that, even at 6½ percent unemployment, which was my forecast for the outyears, is above what I would consider the steady state.  But that does not necessarily mean that monetary policy has some ability either to speed up that convergence or to alter it, and that’s the difference between the models and the assumptions that we’re talking about.  That’s the distinction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Plosser is clarifying a difference in language and assumptions regarding the unemployment rate, but there is no clear contention or disagreement between him and Governor Kohn. They are simply discussing different perspectives and models.


Passage number 230.
 MR. KOHN. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any proposition or statement that can be disagreed with or contested. It simply expresses gratitude.


Passage number 231.
 MR. LACKER. And this is related.  Governor Kohn, you described the forecast as unsatisfactory with respect to our mandated objectives.  Is it unsatisfactory because a preferable outcome is feasible or because the feasible outcomes make us really unhappy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show contention or disagreement. It is a question posed to Governor Kohn asking for clarification about the reasons behind calling the forecast unsatisfactory.


Passage number 232.
 MR. KOHN. I think we could move.  There are actions we can take to move us toward preferable outcomes.  I agree that monetary policy at the zero bound is really difficult, and we’re not quite sure what the outcomes are for the levers we push.  We’re never sure when we push the federal funds rate lever, what the outcome is going to be.  But I haven’t given up on the possibility that monetary policy, even at the zero bound, can favorably affect the outcomes and get us closer to our legislative objectives. That is basically what we’ve been trying to do since December, and I think more of the same and maybe some innovations along several lines might be helpful. But, no, I think there are feasible actions we could take that would at least move us in the right direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing agreement and potential solutions to move towards preferable outcomes in monetary policy at the zero bound. There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage.


Passage number 233.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions President Bullard without providing any information about any potential contention or disagreement.


Passage number 234.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Just for clarity, backstop pricing is part of our thinking on exit that we’ll be talking about, Brian.  Yes. President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about a topic that will be discussed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 235.
 MR. ROSENGREN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I had hoped that the actions taken at the last meeting would have had a larger impact on long-term rates, particularly the 30-year fixed mortgage rate. Our rates may fall further as the backlogs at mortgage brokers subside.  I’d like to encourage the Desk to consider what additional institutional feature might facilitate pushing mortgage rates down further faster using markets in which we don’t have much experience.  As Trish highlighted in yesterday’s discussion, there are a number of things that we don’t directly affect, but we may be able to affect them indirectly.  In fact, that may be more efficient than increasing purchases—to think about some of those institutional features and whether we can help adjust them. In terms of the policy options, I prefer alternative B.  I’d like to understand better the effect of existing programs before deciding what additional actions are necessary.  If our mortgage-backed-security purchase program is successful in significantly lowering mortgage rates, that may have the stimulative effect we desire.  However, even if that program is successful, the Bluebook simulations as well as those done by my staff make it clear that the optimal policy simulation would indicate that further actions are necessary.  Like President   Yellen’s, my forecast remains far from the goal for either inflation or unemployment.  So the question for me is, What is the most effective way to try to get closer to achieving those goals. It’s not clear to me right now what the most effective use of our balance sheet is if the goal is to reduce borrowing costs to consumers and businesses.  I’m a little uncertain whether that’s through more large Treasury purchases, whether that’s more actions in the TALF, or whether that’s doing something different in the mortgage market.  Thinking that through might be more useful than expanding our balance sheet further at this time.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses dissatisfaction with the impact of previous actions on long-term rates and suggests considering alternative methods to push mortgage rates down further and faster. They also express uncertainty about the most effective use of the balance sheet and the need for further actions.


Passage number 236.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a simple expression of gratitude towards President Fisher. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 237.
 Chairman CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The Chairman is thanking President Evans, suggesting a sense of agreement or camaraderie between them.


Passage number 238.
 MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  At our last meeting, I favored the large-scale asset purchase option that was offered to the Committee.  In fact, I asked for a little more.  The reason was that I thought that we should get to the most appropriate policy and provide the support to the economy and the outlook so that we could plausibly stand pat if the outlook stabilized. I thought we should get to the best feasible outcome that we could support, and so at that time I understood $300 billion to be $300 billion unless the outlook or the markets changed  or something like that.  Coming in, I thought that our action in March was close enough.  We also have the TALF expanding and other support.  With those actions, I thought that this pushed the burden for future policy actions to be based upon something in the outlook that was not currently anticipated, and in fact, I think the current Greenbook outlook is pretty stable.  It has improved a bit and is consistent with this view. So I favor alternative B, which I interpret as no change in our policy. If we decided that we thought we could do more to improve the outcome and we wanted to do more, I think that we should find the right level as quickly as possible today on the basis of what we know so that we can stand pat. I worry that meandering policy is not confidence inspiring.  When we trigger a policy action, it should be on the basis of something we have learned about how the economy is evolving differently than we thought or there is actually news that normally would be interpreted as requiring that type of action.  I am just concerned about how the public is going to gauge our policy changes in this most complicated environment. Lastly, I do think there is a difference between our large-scale asset purchases as a policy instrument and our funds rate changes.  It is not just future expectations of the fed funds rate.  With the funds rate action, when we could do that, we could do it today or tomorrow.  Markets understood that to be implemented by the Desk, and we were in that environment.  Markets had more experience with that, and so they knew how to form expectations about policy, our response function. Now it’s more difficult when it’s unclear and there are reasons that it’s unclear. We don’t always agree exactly on how the transmission mechanism works in general and especially now. But with large-scale asset purchases, it takes up to six months for the action to be implemented because it takes place over a period of time.  We ourselves don’t really have good expectations of how those programs might change, and the public is even more challenged  in that way. The faster that we can get to the position that we think is best to support the best outcome that is feasible, the better off we are.  So I think that alternative B at the moment is the right choice. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's opinion and reasoning.


Passage number 239.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right.  I’ll ask President Pianalto to go ahead, but then maybe we can take a coffee break.  How about that.  Go ahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting that President Pianalto can proceed with whatever they were going to say and then suggesting a coffee break afterwards.


Passage number 240.
 MS. PIANALTO. I’ll be brief. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Given the high degree of uncertainty about the outlook and the uncertainty around how to size the quantity and composition of our asset purchases, I think the best course of action today is not to add any more uncertainty to this environment.  I hope that our meeting in June will be helpful in reducing some of the uncertainty around our asset purchase program.  So today I prefer making only minor changes to our statement, and I support alternative B.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker does not express any disagreement or contention in this passage.


Passage number 241.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Very efficient. Thank you. Why don’t we take a 20-minute coffee break. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of expressions of efficiency and gratitude, followed by a suggestion for a break.


Passage number 242.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right. Why don’t we recommence.  President Lockhart, whenever you are ready.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple request to continue a meeting or discussion.


Passage number 243.
 MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It is a challenge to be as succinct as President Pianalto.  B. [Laughter] Actually, I am a little bit ambivalent, quite frankly, coming into this decision. As I said yesterday, I think that the economy is in an ambiguous state and there is a lot of uncertainty.  I have sympathy for the arguments that President Yellen made that alternative A could actually tip the balance to better outcomes and improve on the forecast, which really isn’t acceptable over the longer term.  A negative, which President Fisher mentioned, is the likelihood that alternative A would be interpreted as closer to deliberate  monetization. So, as I said, I am supporting alternative B, and I favor adopting the language that helps establish a clearer understanding of policy conditionality over time. I thank Presidents Plosser and Bullard for all their efforts because I think they drove that point home very strongly.  So I strongly support the alternative B language that says that the Committee is prepared to make further adjustments in timing and overall amounts “as appropriate, in view of the evolving economic outlook and conditions in financial markets.”  The full impact of March’s policy decision on real economic activity hasn’t yet been realized, and there is fiscal stimulus in train that is yet to be fully reflected.  So as many others have stated, I would like to wait and see how the financial and economic environment evolves.  That is it. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author expresses ambivalence but ultimately supports alternative B and agrees with the language proposed by Presidents Plosser and Bullard.


Passage number 244.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. The given statement "President Stern" is simply an identification and does not indicate any disagreement or controversy.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 245.
 MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, on the consideration of A versus B, I prefer B for several reasons, which I will try to summarize quickly.  First of all, I do think the economic outlook has improved a bit.  Maybe it will turn out to be a false dawn, but maybe it will continue to improve.  We will just have to see how that goes.  More important, I think that policy has already done a lot, if you take a broad range of things that we have been engaged in and have introduced since the fall of ’07. That is not to say that we can’t or shouldn’t do more, if appropriate, but I think we need to bear in mind that we have been aggressive and reasonably timely, certainly over the last year or more.  And I am not sure that there is all that much more we can do with regard to the outcomes associated with the dual mandate between now and the end of 2011—two and a half years. I am just not persuaded that a lot more activity on our part is going to have a major effect on how those numbers are going to look over that time frame.  I also am a little concerned, or I wonder, whether we would continue to get a lot of bang from increased asset purchases along the lines that we seem to think we have had so far.  This can’t be a free lunch. At some point, there have to be both a diminishing response in the market and increasing risks of adverse consequences for inflation or other things going forward.  I think we need to bear that in mind, if and when we decide that we want to scale these things up even further. So for those reasons, at this time, I favor alternative B.  As far as language is concerned, I would be equally happy with B or B′′′. I think either of those is fine, and I do think that tying our policy more explicitly to our inflation objective, along the lines that President Fisher or President Plosser suggested, would be constructive for the reasons they suggested.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement with the idea of increasing asset purchases and argues for scale alternative B instead. They also express skepticism about the effectiveness of further monetary policy actions.


Passage number 246.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or information that would indicate contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude and mentions Governor Warsh.


Passage number 247.
 MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Just a quick intervention.  First, I was extremely uncomfortable with the Treasury purchases when we last met.  I continue to be extremely uncomfortable with them.  I won’t relitigate that here for the reasons I articulated last time; plus, I don’t like losing.  I don’t want to lose again.  [Laughter] So as Sun Tzu said, I will step back from that.  It is no surprise, then, that I oppose an increase in our Treasury purchases beyond what we did last time.  In terms of the discussion about markets and their expectations that we had earlier in this round, Mr. Chairman, I think we should not be surprised that markets want more; and the more we give, the more they will want.  Having a strong, large, and credible buyer of Treasury securities is all to the good for a Treasury desk, and so I don’t think we should be surprised by that at all. With that large caveat, I favor alternative B.  I think that we should be patient. I think we should be the adults in town.  We should favor as much policy certainty as we  possibly can have. We have an opportunity here not to be lurchy, not to be jumpy, and I think alternative B captures that. I have one other area of discomfort with alternative B that I would raise.  In paragraph 3, Mr. Chairman, after we denote in detail the numbers of our purchases, which really are just a restatement of what we did previously, we then go on to say, “The Committee stands ready to adjust the timing and overall amounts of its purchases . . . in view of the evolving economic outlook.” I think that the markets are unlikely to view that language neutrally.  The sentence is new from what we said in March, and it looks to me as though, when last time we said that we stood ready to do something, we were standing ready to buy Treasuries if circumstances evolved, which we ultimately did.  I view that as being quite forward leaning.  In fact, it probably does match market expectations, which Trish rightly described.  But it tends to pre-judge that outcome.  At least if I am properly hearing our colleagues around the table, it is not a judgment that we want to make.  And I continue to think that the last sentence in paragraph 3—where we say, “The Committee will continue to carefully monitor the size and composition”—certainly gives us that flexibility. That is the same sentence that we used in March, which gave us that flexibility. So I must say that I don’t really understand the rationale for including this new sentence about standing ready, particularly the reference to overall amounts of those purchases, until we have gone much further.  So that is a particular area of discomfort on alternative B. Finally, in the debate that is brewing about the limits of monetary policy in this cycle, I think I would associate myself with President Stern and suggest that we have accomplished much. On balance, what we have done over these past 18 months has been remarkable.  If the next 18 months force the same kind of innovation and creativity by the Federal Reserve, we can almost guarantee that those projections we have submitted here in April aren’t coming to pass.   So this might be a proper time for us to be a bit more patient and to be a bit more hesitant to continue to push the envelope, and we will see whether or not the projections come to pass.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses discomfort with Treasury purchases but does not directly argue against them. They also express some discomfort with certain aspects of alternative B, but do not explicitly oppose it.


Passage number 248.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude directed towards Governor Duke.


Passage number 249.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you. I am going to support alternative B.  Although I agree with President Yellen that the forecast outcome is not desirable, I also agree with a number of others that I am not sure I understand right now the effectiveness of which programs.  We are also in a situation where we are dealing with numerous programs, some of which we control the size and others of which we do not control the size, particularly if we look at the TALF and the expectation of the TALF going anywhere from $100 billion to $1 trillion, depending on what the take-up is. Right now, as we add the CMBS and we put it out there at five-year terms, we are going to limit the five-year terms to $100 billion.  It is not clear whether we would get additional growth on the three-year terms, so I would rather wait and see how that works out. On the language, I think it is very difficult to come up with language that indicates a steady set of purchases for very different programs.  If you look at the lumpiness that Trish pointed out in the mortgage markets—but even if you look at our statements—the $300 billion purchases going to autumn versus the mortgage-backed securities going to the end of the year don’t translate into even purchases from now until the end of the year.  The mix would change.  So, for those reasons, I would prefer the language in alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their support for alternative B and discussing their understanding of the effectiveness and control of various programs. They also mention the difficulty of coming up with language to indicate steady purchases for different programs. There is no mention of any opposing viewpoint or disagreement with others.


Passage number 250.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Thank you" and the mention of Governor Tarullo do not indicate any conflicting opinions or contradicting statements.


Passage number 251.
 MR. TARULLO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I believe the problem with which we are confronted, as many of you have already noted, is fundamentally one of communication.  I would elaborate that a bit to say that I think the problem may be in no small part our ability to communicate to ourselves, individually and collectively, why we are doing what we are doing.  I regard that as important because of what I said yesterday and what the Chairman mentioned this morning in the conclusion to his wrap-up, which is that we may be faced with a suboptimally performing economy for some time to come in which the policy challenges will extend beyond the challenge of readjusting our balance sheet over a number of years.  Under these circumstances, it becomes more important that we have a clear sense of what policy instruments we think are available and why and how we are going to deploy them in response to a given set of conditions. Based on listening to the March meeting discussion and this meeting’s discussion, I do not feel that we are actually in a position to articulate a standard that is roughly comparable to what is articulated when normal monetary policy is being done.  Under those circumstances, I favor saying the least because my concern is that saying more will lead to inferences that we don’t actually want people to draw. So, for example, by adopting a more forward-leaning strategy such as alternative A this morning, I fear that a message would be sent as to how exactly we are reading the green shoots versus the red herrings debate.  I fear that there would be an inference drawn that we have concluded that we know how the Treasury purchases are actually functioning and we have some reason to believe that they will respond to what we think the most important problems in the economy are.  Like Governor Warsh, I do fear a bit that an inference will be drawn as to our being more willing to accommodate the fiscal policies that are being pursued right now, which I think is not something that any of us has decided we want to communicate. This is not to say that I would be opposed to increased purchases of Treasuries or, indeed, any other number of policy instruments, but only once we are in a position to communicate with enough specificity, either in our statements or through other means of communication, so as to guard against those kinds of inferences being drawn. On the merits, I think that President Yellen stated the economic conditions better than I could, and I subscribe to her analysis. On the outcomes, I favor alternative B, and I should say I guess that I favor alternative B with as little change from the March policy statement as is possible, given that we are now in a later month, precisely to avoid any of the inferences that I suggested could be wrongly drawn being in fact drawn.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing his beliefs and concerns about the topic at hand, but there is no direct argument or disagreement with other individuals.


Passage number 252.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple expression of gratitude and acknowledgement to the Vice Chairman, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 253.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have some sympathy with President Yellen’s case for expanded purchases, but I think that we have to recognize that these purchase programs have costs as well as benefits.  Speaking for myself, I would really feel more comfortable if we had a more formal evaluation of what those costs and benefits were regarding what we have done up to now. One cost that I don’t think we have ruminated on very much is the interest rate risk that we are actually taking on the Fed’s portfolio.  One thing I have wondered about is, if the balance sheet were to get $6 trillion and most of that was Treasuries and MBS, what would happen if short-term rates rose above the yield on our portfolio.  What would happen if we were asking the Treasury to pay us money because we had negative interest.  In a way, we are turning ourselves into a kind of S&L in terms of our balance sheet structure, and we really need to think about what the implications of that are for the medium and longer term.  So I would encourage the staff to do analysis on those kinds of issues for the June meeting. The second reason that I don’t think it is appropriate to do it right now is that it would send an odd signal to the market.  We are saying that things are better, yet we feel the need to  expand our purchase programs in a way in which the market was not anticipating us to do.  So I think it would be a little confusing to the market.  I think the market is expecting us to do something in June about Treasuries because of the cliff question.  In other words, what happened.  It is a six-month program.  The market is going to start looking ahead to what happens at the end. We need to do more to get clear on how we think about these cliff effects.  It is not quite the same as the federal funds rate because you could argue that ending the purchase program is de facto tightening.  You are taking away something that is pushing down rates, so I don’t think it is quite the same as specifying the federal funds rate path.  It is a lot different, too, because there is so little experience with it.  We have had many, many economic cycles in which to get a sense of the federal funds rate—you know, market prices, futures expectations, et cetera—but I think we need to do some more work on this whole cliff effect.  I think the market implicitly assumes that we are going to taper off and smooth the rough edges.  I notice that, in the balance sheet simulations that were put forward yesterday, it went to the end and just ended abruptly. I don’t think that is really what the market expectation is.  I think they expect us to round those off. But we haven’t really discussed that formally as a group, and we need to come to some conclusions on that. As far as the choices for the statement, I favor the B alternatives—you know, B′, B′′, and B′′′. I am not sure what is gained by the added details.  The market participants can already calculate the monthly purchase rates by just taking what we have announced about duration and magnitude.  I also think that writing down specific monthly purchase rates implies that the growth rate of the balance sheet is the prime metric driving our thought process.  I don’t really think that is right. We are really thinking more about the effect on financial conditions.  And I don’t think a dollar of Treasury purchases is necessarily the same as a dollar of agency purchases   or agency MBS or some other things that we are doing with our balance sheet.  So I don’t want to suggest that a dollar of the balance sheet is created equal across all our different facilities.  Finally, if we added some more detail, it would be a little confusing to people because they would say, “Well, why are they telling us this now.  Why didn’t they tell us this a meeting ago, two meetings ago, or three meetings ago.”  So I think it would be more confusing than illuminating to the markets.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses disagreement with the idea of expanded purchase programs and suggests that the costs and benefits need to be evaluated. They also express concerns about the interest rate risk and the implications for the medium and longer term. Additionally, the speaker disagrees with the idea of including specific monthly purchase rates in the statement and suggests that the market expectation is different from what has been discussed.


Passage number 254.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. All right.  Well, I again have benefited from a good discussion. I think the policy discussions—don’t take this the wrong way—are getting better. [Laughter] I think they are getting more informative and more interesting as we go along. And I do appreciate it. On the substance there is a good bit of consensus—not complete consensus—on standing pat. We have seen a bit of improvement, but it is very tentative, and other factors, like the bank assessment program and fiscal policy, are in train.  So there is some benefit in watchful waiting for a time.  We have, of course, taken very strong actions in the last few meetings, including a December move to zero and the large asset purchases that we announced last time.  Also, before substantial increases in our balance sheet, I think many of us—certainly, I—feel that we need to get further advanced in our understanding of the exit strategy and the tools we will have and what we will be doing as we go forward.  So understanding that more stimulus would be good, as suggested by the Taylor rule, for example, I think that it would be better to stand pat on the purchases this time. With respect to the statement, I appreciate very much the discussion on alternative B′′′ and so on. I think the consensus for the group was to stay with what we have.  The issue here is that we haven’t quite figured out how to express the state contingency.  If we had a Taylor rule   that would tie the monthly purchases to observables, as President Bullard was suggesting, I think that would be right and good. Unfortunately, the only way to establish such a rule is through a long period of experience, unless we are prepared to write it down, which I am not quite sure we are. Another issue related to that is—the analogy is not perfect—whether it is the flow of purchases or the stock of purchases that matters.  That is a question. Given our inability to write down a contemporaneous Taylor rule, another alternative approach that one might use in an interest rate context would be to specify a path and then to change that path as new information comes in.  That is part of the debate between instruments and target rules, for example. So as I said, I very much appreciate the insight and discussion of this issue, and I hope we will continue to make progress.  I would take some exception to the view that we are making up numbers entirely, because we have done our best—and the staff has certainly done its best—to try to assess the market and interest rate effects of these actions and feed them into the model.  Obviously, there is a lot of uncertainty, but being uncertain doesn’t mean you do nothing.  It means you do the best you can, given the information that you have. On state contingency, Governor Warsh raised the concern about the new sentence, three from the bottom, that “the Committee stands ready to adjust the timing and overall amounts of its purchases of securities.”  Governor Warsh, is your concern that this signals that we are going to increase.  My thought about this was that it would in fact signal that we are being state-contingent and that this would be equally likely to induce us to decrease as to increase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 255.
 MR. WARSH.  In light of our behavior and the language around our behavior historically, I think that markets would read this as going in one direction and the one direction is far more likely up.  Again, I think the overall amount certainly triggers it.  And I must say that I don’t understand what that sentence does that isn’t accomplished in the final sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their belief that the market would interpret the situation described as having a positive effect, resulting in an upward movement. The sentence mentioned is questioned for its necessity and redundancy, but it does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 256.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, the way I thought the two sentences were different is that the first one speaks specifically to the securities purchases, which is the topic immediately before it, and it creates for us the flexibility to adjust the timing, for example, to taper off or, for that matter, to adjust the size of the program.  I view the last sentence as addressing the static overall size and also, when we say “composition,” as implying that we are looking at the mix of programs and so on as well as the securities purchases.  So that was the intent. Are others uncomfortable with that sentence.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not express contention or disagreement. It is simply describing the speaker's interpretation of two sentences and asking if others are uncomfortable with a specific sentence.


Passage number 257.
 MR. LACKER. I am, too.  I made the mistake, when I initially read it, of reading the plain language version as symmetrically contingent.  But I think Kevin is fairly persuasive that, in the context of our statement, it is likely to be read as pointing toward the possibility of expansion. Now, there are times in which the appropriate contingency ought to be asymmetric, but I don’t think we intend to communicate that here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Although Mr. Lacker initially misunderstood the passage, he now agrees with Kevin's interpretation that it is likely to be read as pointing toward the possibility of expansion. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 258.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions the name "Governor Kohn" but does not provide any information or statements that could indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 259.
 MR. KOHN. Governor Warsh had a point about the words “stands ready,” which we did use before. Suppose we soften those words a little and say, “The Committee will consider adjusting the timing and overall” so that it sounds like something we will consider in the future rather than we are poised to do it. I don’t know whether that would help, Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It presents a suggestion made by Mr. Kohn in response to a point made by Governor Warsh.


Passage number 260.
 MR. WARSH.  Yes, I do think that helps.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses agreement with the statement that was made.


Passage number 261.
 MR. PLOSSER. How about just “evaluate”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a suggestion or alternative word choice for evaluation.


Passage number 262.
 MR. LACKER. “May consider”. “Adjusting somewhat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "May consider" and "Adjusting somewhat" suggest that the person is open to the possibility of making changes but does not express any disagreement with the current situation.


Passage number 263.
”  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. “Will consider”—was that what you said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The mention of laughter and the phrase "Will consider" does not indicate any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 264.
 MR. KOHN. That is what I said, and President Plosser said “will evaluate”—“the timing and overall amounts of its purchases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Kohn, restates what President Plosser said without adding any conflicting opinions or objections.


Passage number 265.
”CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. But get rid of “as appropriate.”  “The Committee will evaluate the timing and overall amounts of its purchases in view of the evolving economic outlook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 266.
” MR. KOHN. Everything we do is appropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement made by Mr. Kohn is definitive and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 267.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The "laughter" indicates a sense of amusement or something humorous, but it does not suggest any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 268.
 MR. FISHER. I think that is an improvement, but I still think—and I regret not mentioning this myself—that Governor Warsh makes a key point.  Given what Trish told us in terms of expectations, even though I don’t like being driven because, as it was pointed out earlier, the markets and the dealers are never satisfied.  But even with softening language like that, it is new, and you are opening up the door.  I don’t think you should put it in here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is solely expressing the speaker's opinion and agreement with Governor Warsh's point.


Passage number 269.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Are there any defenders of that sentence.  All right. Seeing none—yes.  No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The conversation seems to be progressing smoothly without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 270.
 MR. PLOSSER. I kind of like it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Plosser, expresses his positive sentiment towards something.


Passage number 271.
 [Laughter] MR. EVANS. I kind of like it, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The laughter suggests that both the speaker, Mr. Evans, and possibly others find something enjoyable or amusing, but it does not indicate any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 272.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, I am prepared to strike it, if that is the will of the group.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker states their willingness to strike something if that is what the group wants, indicating a willingness to go along with the group's decision rather than expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 273.
 MR. HOENIG. I kind of like it as well, but I thought it gave us some flexibility to say, “We won’t go as far.”  If this doesn’t serve that purpose—and I think I would defer to you, Kevin, on this, because I hope that conditions evolve so that we don’t have to go to the total— then I would back away.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing agreement with a previous statement and deferring to someone else's expertise.


Passage number 274.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I agree with Governor Warsh that the market thinks that the prospect of taking down the size of the facilities is extremely low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is stating a personal agreement with Governor Warsh's viewpoint about the market's perception of the likelihood of reducing the size of the facilities. There is no mention of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 275.
 MR. HOENIG. Okay. So then I would strike it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they would "strike it," indicating a decision or action to be taken, without any conflicting opinions or arguments being presented.


Passage number 276.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The statement "President Bullard" does not indicate any disagreement or contention as it only presents a title and does not imply any conflicting perspectives or opinions.


Passage number 277.
 MR. BULLARD. Mr. Chairman, I liked your explanation that you thought you had two bases covered here. That is the way I read it.  I didn’t read it the way Governor Warsh did.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard is expressing agreement with the chairman's explanation and stating that he did not interpret it in the same way as Governor Warsh.


Passage number 278.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. I am going to propose a modification, and then we are going to take a straw vote.  Okay.  The modification is, “The Committee will continue to evaluate the timing and overall amounts of its purchase of securities,”—get rid of “as appropriate”—“in light of the evolving economic outlook and conditions in financial markets.”  Is that an improvement, Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is proposing a modification and seeking feedback from Governor Warsh.


Passage number 279.
 MR. WARSH.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is yes. In the passage, the speaker, Mr. Warsh, responds affirmatively to a question or statement that is not mentioned, indicating that there is some level of disagreement or contention in the conversation.


Passage number 280.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right.  So let me ask all participants, all 1 people, for a “yes” or “no”—or feel free not to vote. [Laughter]  All right. So how many would like to retain that sentence as amended.  One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine.  Ten.  Okay. Well, that is a majority then.  So the sentence will be changed to, “The Committee will continue to evaluate the timing and overall amounts of its purchases of securities in light of the evolving outlook and conditions in financial markets.” As for the other suggestions that were made for paragraph 1, President Fisher made a suggestion close to this, and I was thinking how to respond to President Plosser’s concern about balancing our concerns about growth and price stability.  I am not quite sure that President Fisher’s suggestion of saying “without sacrificing” quite works because the causal factors in that last sentence in paragraph 1 include not only the Fed but also fiscal and monetary stimulus, market forces, and a whole variety of things.  What if we add to the end of alternative B, paragraph 1, the words “in a context of price stability”.  So it would say, “The Committeecontinues to anticipate that these various factors will contribute to a gradual resumption of sustainable economic growth in a context of price stability”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is summarizing the votes and making amendments to a sentence based on the majority vote. They also bring up different suggestions made by other participants and propose an additional amendment to the sentence. However, there is no disagreement or argument present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 281.
 MR. PLOSSER. My concern was that we wanted to link our policy actions that we believe are consistent with our objective of price stability.  Mr. Chairman, your suggestion doesn’t link the two necessarily. It just places it in a context.  I am struggling a bit with what the right language might be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. 

The speaker, Mr. Plosser, expresses his concern about linking policy actions with the objective of price stability. He disagrees with the suggestion made by the chairman and even struggles to find the right language to address the issue. This disagreement indicates contention in the passage.


Passage number 282.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. But the first sentence of paragraph 3, though, says, “Will employ all available tools to promote economic recovery and to preserve price stability.”  So that links our tools.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence explains a specific point in the text but does not express any conflicting viewpoints or contradict previous statements.


Passage number 283.
 MR. PLOSSER. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The passage is a response to a prompt and does not contain any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 284.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Is this last phrase helpful to you, President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase is simply asking President Fisher if the last phrase is helpful to them without expressing any disagreement or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 285.
 MR. FISHER. I agree with your point because it does talk about fiscal and monetary stimulus.  I appreciate the fact that we at least make some reference to price stability, and I think that is the important point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, expresses agreement with a point made by someone else and appreciates the mention of price stability.


Passage number 286.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "All right" does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement, giving permission or agreement.


Passage number 287.
 If everybody is okay— MR. PLOSSER. So you are going to add that sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "If everybody is okay" does not indicate any disagreement or conflict. It suggests a hypothetical scenario or condition.


Passage number 288.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I am going to add the phrase at the very end of paragraph B1, the words, “in a context of price stability.”  All right.  The last thing that came up, President Fisher suggested in the third sentence of alternative B, “Weak sales have led businesses to cut back on” then, instead of “inventories and fixed investment,” have “inventories, fixed investment, and staffing.”  I think that is fine substantively.  The only thing I would note is that we do reference job losses in the previous sentence.  So does anyone have a view on that.  I am happy to make the change.  All right. Shall we go ahead and make the change.  Is that okay.   All right. So “inventories, fixed investment, and staffing.”  Do you have all of those changes now.  Are there further comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is seeking input and suggestions, but everyone seems to be in agreement and willing to make the suggested changes.


Passage number 289.
 MR. LACKER. Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states "Mr. LACKER. Mr. Chairman." without providing any context or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 290.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes. President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 291.
 MR. LACKER. The word “somewhat” in the first sentence just snags my brain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. Mr. Lacker expresses disagreement or confusion about the use of the word "somewhat" in the first sentence.


Passage number 292.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We don’t want that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "We don't want that" expresses a clear preference or desire, but doesn't involve contention or disagreement.


Passage number 293.
  [Laughter] MR. LACKER. “Somewhat” is great the way we usually use it—you know, somewhat higher, somewhat lower.  That is a long and honored tradition in central banking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 294.
  [Laughter] But “slowing somewhat”— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. How about “appears to be somewhat slower”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "slowing somewhat" is slightly modified to "appears to be somewhat slower," but it does not provoke any disagreement or contradict the original statement.


Passage number 295.
 MR. LACKER. That would be much more direct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by MR. LACKER suggests a more direct approach or solution to a certain situation, but it does not involve any conflict or disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 296.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I guess that pace requires an adjective—appears to be somewhat slower, the pace is slower.  Isn’t that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any signs of contention or disagreement. It is merely posing a question and seeking confirmation.


Passage number 297.
 MR. LACKER. I am not a good enough writer to know why.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply states that the speaker does not possess enough writing skills to determine the reasons behind something.


Passage number 298.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Isn’t that right, Brian.  Okay. “The pace of contraction appears to be somewhat slower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists of agreement and acknowledgement rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 299.
” MR. LACKER. Perfect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states "Perfect," which does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It seems to be a neutral response without any further information.


Passage number 300.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any grammarians with concerns.  You know, this is actually kind of fun here.  [Laughter] I have always enjoyed it.  Other comments.  All right. Debbie, do you think you are able now to read the statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of an individual expressing enjoyment and asking for other comments.


Passage number 301.
 MS. DANKER. I will give it a shot, and the eventual vote will be on both the alternative B directive from the Bluebook—I don’t think it is affected by this language change— and the statement that I am about to read.  Please correct me if I don’t have it right. “Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in March indicates that the economy has continued to contract, though the pace of contraction appears to be somewhat slower.  Household spending has shown signs of stabilizing but remains constrained by ongoing job losses, lower housing wealth, and tight credit.  Weak sales prospects and difficulties in obtaining credit have led businesses to cut back on inventories, fixed investment, and staffing. Although the economic outlook has improved modestly since the March meeting, partly reflecting some easing of financial market conditions, economic activity is likely to remain weak for a time.  Nonetheless, the Committee continues to anticipate that policy actions to stabilize financial markets and institutions, fiscal and monetary stimulus, and market forces will contribute to a gradual resumption of sustainable economic growth in a context of price stability. In light of increasing economic slack here and abroad, the Committee expects that inflation will remain subdued.  Moreover, the Committee sees some risk that inflation could persist for a time below rates that best foster economic growth and price stability in the longer term. In these circumstances, the Federal Reserve will employ all available tools to promote economic recovery and to preserve price stability.  The Committee will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and anticipates that economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period.  As previously announced, to provide support to mortgage lending and housing markets and to improve overall conditions in private credit markets, the Federal Reserve will purchase a total of up to $1.25 trillion of agency mortgage-backed securities and up to $200 billion of agency debt by the end of the year. In addition, the Federal Reserve will buy up to $300 billion of Treasury securities by autumn.  The Committee will continue to evaluate the timing and overall amounts of its purchases of securities in light of the evolving economic outlook and conditions in financial markets.  The Federal Reserve is facilitating the extension of credit to households and businesses and supporting the functioning of financial markets through a range of liquidity programs.  The Committee will continue to carefully monitor the size and composition of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet in light of financial and economic developments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and there is no conflicting viewpoint or argument present.


Passage number 302.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. That is what I have as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given statement. The speaker is expressing agreement with the information or opinion mentioned.


Passage number 303.
  MS. DANKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 304.
Chairman Bernanke Yes   Vice Chairman Dudley Yes   Governor Duke Yes   President Evans Yes   Governor Kohn Yes   President Lacker Yes   President Lockhart Yes   Governor Tarullo Yes   Governor Warsh Yes   President Yellen  Yes CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much.  We have a couple of other items here—one substantive item.  We have, as you know, a Transparency Committee, which has been very actively investigating all aspects of our programs, our institutional structure, and everything else to try to find whether there are opportunities to provide more information to the public about our activities that would not compromise our legitimate need for confidentiality of our policy objectives. I asked Governor Kohn to report to us briefly on progress in that committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the names of individuals and their roles within a committee, as well as mentioning a Transparency Committee and their investigations.


Passage number 305.
 MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me begin with a bit of a sidebar, which is that the work of the Transparency Committee of this group is to decide what should be public and what needs to be confidential. In that regard, I found an article in the Financial Times, in which somebody seemed to have seen a staff paper, to be troubling.  So I think we need to decide as a group what information gets out and what doesn’t and preserve that confidentiality.What we’ve been doing is considering a number of possible steps to improve transparency for our liquidity programs.  We’ve been concentrating on the collateral side.  What can we say to reassure people that we are behaving in a responsible way and that we are not putting the public’s money at risk.  We were embarked on this for a couple of weeks, but I would say that congressional pressure on this issue has stepped up.  Also in recent weeks we have had requests for detailed data on individual borrowers, and the budget resolution had two amendments related to us.  One was a Dodd–Shelby amendment, which called on the transparency side for the reporting of the amount and nature of collateral in the liquidity facility; the extent of losses on the Maiden Lanes and other special purpose vehicles due to collateral revaluations; information on the number of borrowers under various programs, including measures of concentration; and then information on contracts that we have with private-sector firms involved in design, pricing, management, and accounting of the lending programs.  We are addressing all of those points, and I think our proposal, when it finally gets done, will satisfy the Dodd–Shelby amendment.  In addition, Senator Sanders asked for the identity of firms receiving liquidity assistance and the value of the assistance each firm had gotten and what they were doing with the assistance.  We are less inclined to do that because our view is that it will undermine the effect of the program.  So we can come back.  I would be interested in the views of other members of the FOMC on that. We are preparing tables on the number of borrowers and the amounts of discount window borrowing by type of institution at the discount window for banks divided by banks (and maybe by size) and then thrifts as a separate line—for example; the number of borrowers and amounts borrowed under the other facilities, PDCF, TSLF, all of that sort of thing.  Trying to get some sense of the concentration and those things, like the top five borrowers, the top ten borrowers, what proportion of the total they account for, a table showing the percentage of the collateral pledge by depository institutions being used to secure loans by different types of institutions.  We do have a breakout of the types of collateral now, but we would break out things a bit further, particularly on the security side, where we will give the ratings of the securities that are used as collateral. And we’re working on this business of how much we spend on the private-sector firms. We published a lot of information about the Maiden Lanes and the commercial paper facility in the annual report that just came out a couple of weeks ago, and one thing we’re looking into is whether we could update that information quarterly.  So when the Maiden Lanes are marked to market on a quarterly basis, perhaps some of the additional information that appeared in the annual report could also be done on a quarterly basis.  It wouldn’t be subject to the oversight of an outside auditor, but we could generate it in the same way we generate that. Now, as I said, we’ve discussed the congressional request about detailed information on individual borrowers, and we looked at different ways of cutting that.  So could we not do it for the discount window for banks but do it for the unusual—the 13(3)—facilities.  Could we not do it for the regular discount window but do it for any unusual facility, which might include the TAF. Could we do it for some facilities but not for others because of our concerns about stigma, particularly for the TALF, for example.  It just seemed impossible to cut this thing in a clean way that would satisfy the people who want information and wouldn’t discourage the use of the facilities in such a way as to undermine the effectiveness in promoting financial stability.  But I would be very interested in other people’s views on this.  Another problem that we saw was that most people, especially banks and probably others, have used our facilities under the assumption that their names wouldn’t be released to the public.  So going back and releasing those names  struck me as particularly problematic.  If we were going to release any names and we decided that was okay, I think I would advocate doing it prospectively and giving people warning.  We’re aiming at getting something done that the Chairman can talk about in his JEC testimony next week. Is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is mainly discussing the need for transparency and potential concerns about releasing certain information.


Passage number 306.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Tuesday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 307.
 MR. KOHN. Next Tuesday. So at least have an outline of what we’re trying to do—we are getting close; we’ve been mocking up tables—and then get those tables out within the next week or two after your testimony, Mr. Chairman. That’s the summary of where we are.  One idea that the Chairman had was whether, instead of just adding all of this stuff to our web site, we could embody it in a report to the Congress on a monthly basis.  Our web site is sort of by function.  So there’s a risk-management function, and then there are some other, different functions.  We could re-cut it so that it was by facility instead of by function. Under each facility we could talk about the risk-management characteristics, how we value the collateral marked to market, do the margins, and then give all the information on that.  That might be a more user-friendly way to present things to the Congress.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing potential ideas and suggestions for presenting information to Congress in a more user-friendly way.


Passage number 308.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. We have time now for questions and comments.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 309.
 MR. LACKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context about Mr. Lacker, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 310.
 If we elect not to reveal names, would these tables be constructed the way that the Census does it, where if there are fewer than n firms, where n is a number like— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Three.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the possibility of constructing tables in a similar manner to the Census if names are not revealed.


Passage number 311.
 MR. KOHN. Right. I think the way that we have generally released data in the past, if there were three or fewer, we would consolidate that category with another category.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining a previous practice of consolidating data categories if there were three or fewer entries.


Passage number 312.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 313.
 MR. FISHER. I am concerned about the releasing of names and Don’s point, that you can’t renege on assumptions and promises made earlier.  Tactically, I don’t know what you’re planning to say next week, but I would rather be viewed as being forced to do this rather than suggesting it terms of releasing names prospectively going forward because one of the great concerns is—we’ve seen this with the TALF and with the PPIP and everything else—the rules keep changing. I don’t want to be viewed as one of the agents of changing the rules in a way that upsets people who have banked on us to be a steady institution.  I would just suggest that we be very careful about that and think that through.  Now, the Congress has its prerogatives.  I’m not sure we want to feed that one. I would rather almost be in a responsive mode. I am a little worried that, if we don’t respond sufficiently, they could be extremely harsh, and maybe—Don, you summarized an awful lot there.  We were talking about feeding the monsters of the market earlier.  Feeding the monsters of the Congress is also saying that you can never really satisfy them.  I’m not calling them monsters for the record, but they have a voracious appetite. I would be really careful on this business of suggesting that we release names.  If we’re viewed as the one who suggested it, it might upset the people whom we serve and who are important to our ability to function.  So I’d just ask you to consider that. The other obvious trap—and I saw this on the visiting committee overseeing Harvard’s investment debacle—whenever you talk about what you’re spending on something in the private sector, it’s always going to be too much.  So just get ready for that one because you can’t satisfy people very easily on that. It is always too big a dollar amount.  But that’s obvious.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, is expressing his concern about releasing names and suggesting that it could upset people and harm the institution's reputation. He also mentions the concern about changing rules and the potential harsh response from Congress.


Passage number 314.
 MR. STERN. But some of those fees are in the annual report, aren’t they.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is a straightforward question and does not involve conflicting viewpoints or opinions.


Passage number 315.
MR. KOHN. I don’t know. I don’t think they’re aggregated.  I mean, they must be implicit in the expense categories, right.  But they’re not broken out by the fees that we’re paying for servicing these special facilities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a lack of knowledge and expressing uncertainty about whether the fees for servicing special facilities are broken out separately or included within expense categories.


Passage number 316.
 MR. WARSH.  I think except for the audit fees.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is a statement from Mr. Warsh expressing his opinion without any opposing views or argument.


Passage number 317.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Except for the audit fees.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that all the expenses were covered, except for the audit fees. There is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 318.
 MR. LACKER. I thought they were for the Maiden Lanes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Lacker's thought about the topic without any opposing views or conflicting opinions being mentioned.


Passage number 319.
 MR. STERN. Yes, I thought they were for the Maiden Lanes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The person speaking is simply expressing their thoughts about something.


Passage number 320.
 MR. LACKER. Not individually, but for each Maiden Lane I thought there was an expense line.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 321.
 MR. KOHN. But we’ve hired outside help—right, Bill—for a lot of the other facilities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 322.
 MR. LACKER. Right, but that’s varied.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement confirming that the situation or data mentioned before (which is not provided in the given excerpt) has varied.


Passage number 323.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The given text, "President Hoenig," is insufficient to identify any potential conflicts or debates.


Passage number 324.
 MR. HOENIG. Just to add to that, we should not release the individual names.  You will undo half of what you have tried to do so far. As open as we should be, we also have a responsibility to make sure this thing is managed in an orderly way, and if we release names, I think the stigma will be back in a flash and lots of issues around it.  So I agree with those comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Hoenig, expresses agreement with the previous comments about not releasing individual names.


Passage number 325.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Stern, did you have your opportunity.  Yes. President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that President Stern had an opportunity and President Lacker is mentioned without any indication of disagreement between them.


Passage number 326.
 MR. LACKER. If the Congress wants to make us release names, we could insist that the names of Home Loan Bank borrowers also be released.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MR. LACKER is simply proposing a condition or suggestion to Congress.


