
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 0

At the last meeting, I thought the problem was an oil shock.
<START>While I still think the economy is suffering the effects of an oil shock, I’m beginning to think that more is going on.<END>
If one goes back to our forecast earlier in the year or looks at the Greenbook forecast revisions or the Blue Chip forecast revisions lately
—and this is the point that Don just made
—both inflation and output forecasts are down.
Perhaps this suggests that we may have a plain old demand shock out there mixed in with the oil shock.
<START>Whatever the shock is, there also seems to be a strong international dimension to it.<END>
Taking the International Finance Division’s forecasts of yesterday, if one could imagine the world economy without the United States and China, domestic demand would be deficient in country after country.
The countries that are doing well are those that trade a lot with the United States or China or both.
And in general they are doing well because of exports, not anything related to domestic demand.
<START>It is too strong to say that there would be a world recession without the U.S.<END>
and Chinese economies, but there would certainly be global sluggishness.
And this sluggishness would be greatly magnified, as we discussed a minute ago, if the dollar started September 21, 200465 of 100 slipping, which it might do at any point.
As I am told, John Connelly once said, “Our dollar, your problem.” [Laughter] So what do we do about all of this?
<START>With weakness emanating from some unknown source, seemingly on the demand side, do we continue our program of gradually raising or re-equilibrating rates?<END>
I would say “yes” for this meeting, but I’m getting much less certain about future meetings.
To rationalize my vote for continuing to re-equilibrate, my own personal view is that up to now the re-equilibration process has gone very well.
<START>Since we began raising rates in late June, the funds rate has risen 50 basis points, yet ten-year bond rates have fallen 65 basis points over this span, and even the TIPS long-term rate has fallen 30 basis points.<END>
A 35 basis point decline in long-term nominal rates would be fully explainable within the context of orthodox macro theory;
<START>that is, either the Fed showed it was concerned about inflation, or inflation just plain dropped and the inflation premium in long-term bonds was reduced.<END>
As for the 30 basis point drop in real interest rates, there are technical explanations, but the most likely cause is that the real economy has weakened.
Whatever the explanation, why fight it?
We have an opportunity to bring the financial system closer to equilibrium.
<START>We can lessen the chances that we’ll be caught with inordinately low interest rates should inflation suddenly speed up, and we most likely can do this with minimal effect on real long-term rates, perhaps even a negative effect if there is some sort of expectations effect.<END>
This win–win situation can’t go on indefinitely.
If it were to do so, lots of macro textbooks would have to be rewritten.
But it does seem a likely result for today and, again, why not take advantage of it?
One broader point should also be kept in mind. Re-equilibration means re-equilibration in several different markets more or less simultaneously.
The funds market is now something like 3 percentage points out of long-term equilibrium, as defined mechanically according to past September 21, 200466 of 100 averages.
The long-term market may be about half or perhaps a little more than that out of equilibrium, defined the same way.
I don’t know that there is any theorem that re-equilibration will happen at an equal pace in different markets, and maybe it shouldn’t puzzle us much if the pace of re-equilibration is different.
So my judgment on what we should do today is clear.
We seem to have a situation where we can restore equilibrium a bit without damaging the economy, at least for a stretch.
This is a good horse to ride, and we ought to keep riding it for now.
When we get to the next meeting, it may be time for the “pause that refreshes,” or it may not be.
Markets seem to be responding to the data, and perhaps we should as well.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Bernanke.
MR.
BERNANKE.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
<START>In reviewing developments so far in 2004, it’s useful to characterize the economy as having faced a medium-sized aggregate supply shock during the first half of this year.<END>
This composite shock comprised various effects associated with the decline in the dollar, the increase in broad indexes of commodity prices, and the especially sharp rise in energy prices.
The mixture of the supply shock and the ongoing cyclical expansion made the economic data particularly hard to interpret this spring.
<START>This Committee was generally more willing than outside forecasters or market participants to link macroeconomic developments to the influences in this composite aggregate supply shock, particularly the energy cost component.<END>
We argued on that basis that both the rise in inflation earlier this year and the soft patch in economic activity in June were likely to prove transitory.
<START>Both of these forecasts have worked out pretty well, supporting the view that shocks to aggregate supply were indeed the principal reason that inflation in the first half was higher and growth lower than had been expected.<END>
September 21, 200467 of 100 Arguably, at this point, the effects of the supply shock may be, to a substantial degree, behind us.
The dollar has been roughly stable all year, and the rise in import prices accordingly has decelerated.
Broad indexes of commodity prices peaked in March.
Oil prices are still rising, and their volatility as well as their level may have a damping effect on the economy.
However, about three-quarters of the increase in near futures crude oil prices since late last year had already occurred by last May, and refinery margins have fallen.
The waning effects of the supply shock can be seen directly in the moderation of core inflation and the rebound in spending in the third quarter, as we’ve already noted.
Of course, further rises in oil prices or declines in the dollar are always possible.
If no such development occurs, however, the ebbing of the supply shock will afford us increasingly greater clarity about the underlying strength of this expansion.
My own very tentative assessment is that the recovery at this stage is proceeding at a pace that is solid but somewhat less vigorous than we had hoped or expected.
In particular, expansion at the current pace seems unlikely to create new inflationary pressures.
Looking forward, the jobs data will be crucial.
<START>If job growth continues at the pace of the past few months, I think we would have grounds for concern about both business confidence and the prospects for household spending.<END>
<START>Overall, I think our strategy of removing accommodation at a measured pace has worked out well, not only in providing support to the economy and avoiding nasty surprises in financial markets but also in allowing us time to assess ongoing developments.<END>
I support our current plan of measured withdrawal of emergency stimulus.
We surely can raise the funds rate today without doing damage to the recovery.
I also see no need to change the basic framework of our statement.
As we go forward, however, we should remain flexible in slowing or speeding up the September 21, 200468 of 100 process as dictated by incoming data.
Financial markets are well prepared for this type of flexibility, and I believe it fits well with our declared strategy of removing accommodation at a measured but not mechanistic pace.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Olson.
MR.
OLSON.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
<START>I’ve again had some discussions with contacts in the banking sector in preparation for this meeting, but they tend to reflect the comments that we’ve heard around the room, particularly Governor Bernanke’s observation that the economy’s growth is solid but less vigorous than expected.<END>
Certainly, nothing I’ve heard from those I’ve talked with in the banking sector would be different from that.
As the one member of the FOMC who has spent a lot of time as a political operative, I couldn’t help but think about today’s meeting in the context of the fact that the upcoming presidential election is six weeks from today.
I was reflecting on the concerns that have become issues in that contest and those that haven’t and the implications they might have for the economy.
The deficit levels and spending restraints have not become issues.
We didn’t expect that they would.
Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid also have not become political issues, but I think concerns about them have been elevated during the course of the campaign, not by either party but by interested observers
—not the least of whom is our Chairman as well as Pete Peterson and others.
<START>Just as we were talking earlier about our prospective role in discussions about the dollar, I would suggest to members of this Committee who have concerns about deficit spending, Medicare/Medicaid issues, and certain tax policy issues, that the time to elevate those discussions is immediately following the point when it becomes clear who the next President will be.<END>
I hope that will be right after the election this time!
<START>[Laughter] September 21, 200469 of 100 To the extent that James Carville’s admonition that “it’s the economy, stupid” is correct, there seems to be minimal differentiation of the economic issues this time.<END>
The most aggressive protectionists were given early exits from the process.
We do hear talk about tax policy and about outsourcing, but the one issue that seems to resonate is economic uncertainty.
<START>The solution for that is not clear, which does not suggest that it isn’t a problem just because a solution is not evident.<END>
But, importantly, monetary policy has not been a political issue.
For the three years that I’ve been either on this Committee or thinking about being on this Committee, I’ve wondered about the extent that it would be as we moved into this time frame and came into this meeting.
The question to my mind was never whether the FOMC would allow political pressure to interfere with its decisions on the appropriate monetary policy
—I was certain it wouldn’t
—but the opposite.
The question was whether the implementation of appropriate monetary policy would become a political issue.
Mind you, today’s statement will be examined very carefully for political advantage, and attempts to gain that advantage will be made.
But almost certainly there will be none, I think for two reasons.
First, the general sense of the appropriate implementation of our policy ensures our credibility, and second, there is the clarity of our communication.
Now remember, the communication can work only if the first part is accurate.
During the last several years, we have gone from being accommodative, to being accommodative for a considerable period, to a time of patience, to removing accommodation at a measured pace.
<START>And moving from accommodation toward a return to neutral at a measured pace is not only the appropriate policy, but it will be, in my view, not at all a political issue.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Ferguson.
September 21, 200470 of 100 MR. FERGUSON.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As others have indicated, the U.S.
economy appears to be poised to pick up gradually from the soft patch that afflicted it over the late spring and early summer but, as others have also said, perhaps more gradually than we had thought at the last meeting or earlier this year.
<START>In response to that reality, the Greenbook has undergone another makeover, with the new forecast pointing to a more subdued growth outlook while still featuring stable inflation.<END>
The staff has extended the forecast period, and we now see that the output gap does not close until late 2006.
<START>I have no strong objections to this new forecast, and unlike the last two meetings when I was very anxious about the downside risk to the baseline, the risks around this baseline seem to me somewhat more balanced, although the range of uncertainty is still quite large.<END>
<START>I might give a litany of the risks or list why I buy into the forecast, but I’d like to move on to the question that Janet and others raised:<END>
Why, with all the stimulus in the pipeline, is the economy facing a prospect of very low inflation and a resource utilization gap that closes only at the end of 2006, when the so-called recession was extremely mild and so many years behind us?
I, of course, don’t have the answer to that question, but I’m going to offer a few hypotheses.
One I’d like to reject is the oil price spike.
I think Governor Bernanke and others have it right that that seems to have been part of the negative supply shock in the early part of the year.
But with oil prices waning, I think that seems unlikely to be the real source of the problem that the economy is facing.
Let me mention two or three more likely options.
One is that the bursting of the asset bubble and the series of shocks that have hit the United States since early 2001 may have been more problematic than we originally thought.
And here I disagree a little with the tone that Ned took.
As we’ve learned from the Japanese experience, it can take many years to counteract the September 21, 200471 of 100 fallout from the bursting of an asset bubble.
<START>And it may be, even with the better policy mix we’ve had here than in Japan, that it still could take longer than anyone originally expected to deal fully with the fallout of both the bursting high-tech bubble and the series of subsequent shocks, all of which I think have been fairly significant.<END>
We’ve seen this reflected in the phenomenon that’s being called “business caution.” I, maybe more than others, think that there’s something to this.
As I’ve read the views of Reserve Bank directors that you have communicated in your letters relating to their discount rate decisions, a number of boards of directors have at least some members
—in several Banks, many members
—who buy into the view that there’s a sense of caution among businesses.
If one looks at various surveys such as the NFIB survey and the survey from Duke University of 200 CFOs, they all talk about a malaise story.
The survey of CFOs indicates that they expect growth to be only 2.8 percent over the next four quarters, noticeably lower than even our staff forecast.
I think this business malaise issue is very important to watch and, as firms go into their capital planning cycle, I believe we’ll get some more information on it.
But I do not think it’s something we can reject quickly.
A second factor affecting our economy is what has been described as “global imbalances.” But the imbalances are not between this country and the rest of the world.
I think the imbalances are within the other economies, and Ned picked up on some of this.
First, we’ve seen that the financial indicators in almost all of the major industrial economies have been marked down or have shown some expectation of slower growth going forward, just as ours has.
Market participants in Japan, the euro area, the United Kingdom, Switzerland, Australia
—in the industrial economies around the world
—have been marking down their forecasts of economic growth.
The second point to make about the rest of the world is that domestic demand has been incredibly weak in almost all of those economies.
I think Ned covered this quite well, and I September 21, 200472 of 100 won’t take the time to repeat all of it except to note something that no one else has observed
—namely, as was pointed out very clearly in the Greenbook Part 2, domestic demand in the euro area was growing only 0.6 percent.
Net exports there accounted for almost all of the growth.
And obviously we’ve seen a marking down of growth expectations in Japan, which again has been driven primarily by net exports.
So we really are the only engine of economic growth in the world.
And we are in this interesting dichotomy with China and the rest of the world, which may in fact play into some of the issues that Karen was talking about earlier.
The third possible explanation is that investment in new capital goods, such as high-tech goods, be less urgent than we had thought.
may One is that there may be a deeper pool of productive capital than we had envisioned and one that is also longer lived than we had originally thought.
This could be for two actually quite different reasons.
<START>The combination of both more-productive and longer-lived capital would support highly productive and profitable businesses, which we have seen, but would also reflect an environment in which demand for new investment is not so great.<END>
One important finding in this regard is from some work that two staff members, Rochelle Antoniewicz and Erik Johnson, did at my request.
I asked them to divide up the entire Compustat data base into six or seven non-overlapping industry groups and to examine the financing gap in each.
They found that the gap in each industry group except oil and gas has declined over the 2000-04 period.
The overall drop in the financing gap in this analysis was $291 billion, which is really quite a big swing across the industrial sectors they looked at.
So it may well be that businesses view their existing capital goods as fully adequate to deal with the outlook that they see.
<START>The other aspect of this possible explanation is that the slow growth in capital expenditures may indicate that the new high-tech investments now coming on board are not September 21, 200473 of 100 nearly as attractive as the prior generation of such equipment.<END>
One piece of evidence that supports this theory is that both our staff and the BLS have estimated that the deflators for various classes of high-tech equipment, such as desktops, servers, and laptops, have all fallen relatively little since 2001.
For example, our staff estimates that the deflator for desktops has shown only a 10 to 20 percent decline year over year from 2002 to 2003.
That seems like a fairly large decline in the deflator, but in fact if one goes back to 2000 and 2001, that number was 50 percent.
All of this suggests that there may not be, as I’ve said many times, a “killer ap” out there.
In more technical terms, there’s not a technological advancement that might catalyze new investments.
<START>So we may be confronting a phase where some of the positive supply shock that we experienced before has worn off and businesses see that and aren’t so eager to invest.<END>
That may explain why one of the areas of weakness that we are dealing with is equipment software.
So those are two or three different hypotheses.
But whatever the explanation that ultimately proves true
—and it may not be any of those
—I think the macroeconomic result is the same.
In a textbook sense, the IS curve seems to have shifted down toward the origin, which gives both a lower effective equilibrium real interest rate and lower income.
<START>Overall, we seem to be confronting a new, less attractive set of interactions or dynamics that include growth in final demand but relatively slow growth compared with potential, low investment in both high-tech equipment and perhaps inventory, and some slowing of growth in the demand for labor and in hours worked.<END>
While all of this is still positive, it’s slower
—more punkish if you will.
How should we handle this range of outcomes?
I think here the Greenbook and the new interest rate assumptions the staff has made may give us the appropriate hint.
I’ll just pick up on the same words others have used by saying that I’m “quite comfortable” with moving rates up September 21, 200474 of 100 25 basis points at this meeting.
But going forward I think we should be more “pragmatic”
—if I can use a word that’s not so attractive in this community
—or more “flexible,” to pick up on Don’s word.
We have to let the data and changed outlook lead us going forward.
That may imply a pause at some point in the not-too-distant future, or it may imply a pickup in the pace of our policy moves at some time in the foreseeable future.
It also may imply some change in language
—not at this time, but at some point in the not-too-distant future.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Bies.
MS.
BIES.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The economic indicators, as others have said, have been variable in the last few months.
But on net they show continued expansion, though at a slower pace than in the second half of last year and the beginning of this year.
<START>And as Governor Ferguson just mentioned, recent surveys show that business attitudes, both at large companies and small businesses, while still positive, are a little less optimistic than they were last quarter.<END>
I’d like to use a couple of anecdotes to throw on the table a few more hypothetical explanations for what may be happening here.
One is that CEOs, even in meetings with stock analysts, sometimes are mentioning that their management teams have shifted their focus since June, when the final rules came out for Sarbanes–Oxley, to implementing audit adaptations and internal controls by year-end in order to be compliant with that legislation.
Those activities take time that management normally would use to make decisions on business expansion.
<START>They don’t know what to expect with regard to their ability to comply with Sarbanes–Oxley, and we’re already beginning to see in some 10Q warnings by some companies that they may not be totally compliant by year-end.<END>
The reputation risk here is very significant for these companies.
September 21, 200475 of 100 Second, another interesting development
—and I will cite the same Duke survey that Governor Ferguson did
—is that while CFOs of large companies are expecting GDP growth to moderate to only 2.8 percent in the next twelve months, they still are anticipating earnings growth at their own companies of 13.4 percent on average.
This gets back to a comment I’ve made in the past, which is that, in talking to CFOs, I realize that they still live in nominal worlds.
<START>And one of their reasons for caution in both spending and hiring is their concern about how they can deliver double-digit earnings growth to the Street when they see modest sales and very moderate inflation in the months ahead.<END>
The only way to get that bottom-line growth is to control expenses.
The other comment I’d like to make is that, overall, companies are stronger.
One of the indicators I look at is the pattern of changes in corporate debt ratings.
Worldwide, this will be the first year since 1998 that we’ve seen more debt ratings rise from below investment grade up to investment grade than we’ve seen go down from investment grade to below it.
It has taken six years for that to happen, and it’s one of the reasons we’ve seen credit spreads come in.
<START>The latest inflation data continue to show that inflation is moderating from the rates recorded in the spring<END>
—again with health care a notable exception.
<START>That moderating rate of inflation is one of the things that make me feel that the expansion is likely to continue, though at a modest pace.<END>
Therefore, I feel that the position we have taken
—that policy accommodation can likely be removed at a measured pace
—is still the appropriate signal to send to the market.
That signal, I think, has helped to extend the expansion because it has helped the long-term debt market.
As several of you have already noted, long-term debt rates have come down even though we’ve been raising the funds rate.
And I think our credibility, as we move along this September 21, 200476 of 100 2The materials used by Mr. Reinhart are appended to this transcript (appendix 2).
path, will keep capital within easy access and affordable to companies when they do have the confidence to make additional business investment.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Reinhart.
MR.
REINHART.2 Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
<START>With the help of the first exhibit in the material distributed at the break, I want to begin by pointing out several notable features in financial markets over the past six weeks likely bearing on your policy deliberations.<END>
As shown by the solid line in the top left panel, short-term interest rate futures indicate that market participants currently expect the Committee to tighten gradually over the next year and a half, with the funds rate reaching 2⅞ percent by early 2006.
Compared with the interest rate sentiment prevailing in the markets at the time of the August meeting (the dotted line), this path is a little firmer in the near term and shallower later on.
Apparently, investors read recent statements by policymakers as confirming a desire on your part to continue to remove accommodation and interpreted data releases
—especially subdued readings on inflation
—as indicating that a lessened cumulative amount of firming will be required to deliver satisfactory economic performance.
The shift over the intermeeting period was small relative to that in the run-up to the August meeting, when the weak employment report for July was released between the publication of the August Greenbook and your last meeting.
Current market expectations relative to those at the time of that Greenbook (the dashed line) are about ½ percentage point lower one and one-half years from now
—similar to the revision to the staff’s policy assumption from Greenbook to Greenbook.
The top right panel focuses on near-term expectations by plotting the policy path that is consistent with the futures curve and assumes that the Committee will move only at regularly scheduled meetings.
Those expectations indicate a near certainty of a ¼ point hike today
—which is also what dealers told the Domestic Desk in its regular survey
—and put the funds rate near 2 percent at year-end.
Thus, market participants expect you to pause sometime soon in the process of removing policy accommodation
—probably in December.
These expectations seem to be held relatively firmly, in that implied volatility on near-term Eurodollar futures rates (given in the middle left panel) has trended lower, a phenomenon not unique to this market.
Despite subdued readings on interest rate volatility, market prices have responded forcefully to key data releases.
The middle right panel compares the change in the ten-year Treasury yield (plotted on the vertical axis) in the half-hour surrounding the release of the employment report with the surprise in the nonfarm payrolls (or the actual value less a survey measure), which is given along the horizontal axis.
As shown by the red regression line, the average response to employment surprises in the last year has been considerably more marked than in the prior ten years.
As President Geithner noted, one possibility linking the two middle September 21, 200477 of 100 panels is that the explicitly conditional nature of your statements has lowered uncertainty about your actions and focused attention on a few indicators.
The arrow in the figure points to the observation corresponding to the release of the August employment report on September 3, which is a bit of a puzzle.
The monthly gain in payrolls was a touch weaker than market participants expected, yet rates rose considerably.
You might rationalize this as owing to backward revisions to the employment data, but I think it also shows the market’s judgment that the data were not soft enough to halt your process of removing policy accommodation.
The net effect of other data over the intermeeting period, however, more than offset this one-day rise in rates.
The downward revision to policy expectations was associated with a considerable relaxation in financial conditions, in that, as shown in the bottom panel, corporate yields are lower, equity prices posted sizable gains, while the exchange value of the dollar moved sideways.
How you interpret this easing no doubt influences your decisions today both on the funds rate target and on the words of the statement.
Members might view the decline in yields and the concomitant rise in share prices as the dawning recognition among investors that a lower track for the real risk-free rate of interest will be necessary to support economic growth.
<START>As discussed at the top of exhibit 2, a decision to hold the funds rate at 1½ percent would no doubt encourage an even more substantial revision to the outlook for policy.<END>
<START>While the Committee may be convinced that a sustainable economic expansion is in place, it may be concerned that the pace of output growth will not be sufficiently vigorous to ensure satisfactory progress in reducing economic slack.<END>
As shown in the middle left panel, the advance in payrolls has been fitful in recent months and perhaps indicates a lingering hesitancy on the part of businesses to make commitments, which several of you have already mentioned.
If that hesitancy continues for too long, then it may also be reflected again in capital spending and begin to dent consumer confidence.
Persisting slack has also rolled back a portion of the turn-up in inflation of the first half of the year.
As can be seen in the middle right panel and as noted by President McTeer, the three-month change in the CPI has dropped back to the levels of last year, when worries of the possibility of deflation surfaced.
And market participants apparently have lowered their expectations for inflation going forward.
<START>For instance, as plotted in the bottom left panel, the nominal one-year forward rate ten years ahead, which has been quite sensitive to longer-run inflation sentiment, has edged down to just below 6 percent.<END>
If resource slack persists, inflation could fall to levels that the Committee might find uncomfortably low, given the limits to conventional policy maneuvering posed by the zero bound to nominal interest rates.
I’d add that the “measured pace” language would not seem to pose an obstacle to pausing in the process of firming, in that futures rates indicate that financial market participants already anticipate inaction at one of the next three meetings
—although September 21, 200478 of 100 evidently not at this one.
Indeed, a pause at this time might be seen as having the benefit of ensuring that market participants do not come inappropriately to view the “measured pace” language as a promise to firm policy 25 basis points at every meeting.
There is, however, an important obstacle to putting the process of tightening on hold at this meeting:
The universal conviction in markets that you will not do so implies that the reaction to inaction could be sizable.
A pickup in mortgage hedging flows could magnify any initial downdraft in yields.
The rally in fixed-income markets in recent weeks has pulled down the thirty-year mortgage rate to 5¾ percent, which is shown as the vertical line in the bottom right panel.
According to an estimate of the cumulative distribution of rates on outstanding mortgages, about 35 percent of them could be refinanced economically given current pricing.
Because of the wave of refinancings last year, outstanding mortgages are tightly clustered at rates not much lower than the prevailing level.
As a result, further reductions in longer-term yields would likely lead to substantial prepayments of mortgages.
The experience of last year suggests that the resultant shortening of the duration of mortgage-backed securities would prompt purchases of other longer-term securities, amplifying the decline in rates and elevating volatility.
Deviating from the currently expected path of measured firming would seem to risk a considerable easing of financial conditions, which may not be judged as appropriate at this time.
But the most compelling reason not to opt for alternative A is that you see merit in tightening, the subject of exhibit 3.
The Committee may believe that the economic expansion will remain on a desirable track under current financial conditions, which incorporate market expectations of gradual policy firming.
In such circumstances, it would seem appropriate to validate those expectations by tightening 25 basis points at this meeting, as in the B and C alternatives presented in the Bluebook.
As can be seen in the middle left panel, even with the two tightening steps that the Committee has taken to date, the real federal funds rate is still close to zero and near the bottom of the range of equilibrium values estimated by the staff.
A modest boost to the nominal funds rate would also be consistent with a number of monetary policy rules shown in the middle right panel.
And given the forces likely to impinge on aggregate demand in coming quarters
—including the efforts by households to rebuild savings, the swing from fiscal impetus to restraint, and the intensifying drag of net exports
—the Committee may find a quarter point move to be a sufficient step in removing policy accommodation at this time.
As to the wording of the statement
—which is the only distinction between alternatives B and C
<START>—if the Committee put much weight on the possibility that growth will rebound sharply, it may believe that the scope of its future action is unduly constrained on the upside by the “measured pace” language and may prefer to drop the last two sentences from the statement.<END>
<START>That may be especially so if you interpret the decline in risk spreads and increases in the price–earnings ratio shown in the table at the bottom left as evidence of an increased appetite for risk-taking.<END>
<START>In that case, you may be concerned that the spur to spending of a lower cost of funds and higher wealth poses the risk that the growth of aggregate demand would quickly September 21, 200479 of 100 outstrip that of potential output.<END>
While such an outcome may be welcomed if the output gap were as large as in the staff forecast, you might share President Guynn’s fear that the prospects for aggregate supply were described not by the Greenbook baseline but by the “less room to grow” alternative simulation.
In that alternative, the NAIRU is higher, and the labor force participation rate does not rise any further to augment labor inputs going forward, putting inflation on an upward march toward 2 percent, as shown in the bottom right panel.
Removing the last two sentences would certainly surprise market participants, who would presumably build in expectations of more-substantial action to come.
Therefore, you probably would not want to consider acquiring the flexibility associated with alternative C unless you also desire an immediate tightening of financial conditions.
Alternative B would provide the comfort of aligning your decision with prevailing expectations while giving only limited and highly conditioned guidance on your future actions.
<START>Retaining the risk assessment of August would seem appropriate if you believe that you will have to be cautious about the extent and speed with which policy accommodation should be removed.<END>
After all, it is not yet firmly established that the economy has exited its soft patch, and you may prefer to await more information on that score.
Your last exhibit updates table 1 from the Bluebook in light of comments received since its distribution on Thursday.
In particular, as shown in bold, it seemed clearer to link the description of the performance of output and the labor market in the rationale paragraph by writing, “After moderating earlier this year partly in response to the substantial rise in energy prices, output growth appears to have regained some traction and labor market conditions have improved modestly.” That concludes my prepared remarks.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Thank you.
Questions for Vincent?
MS.
MINEHAN.
I see that you made a slight change in B5 where the proposed language is “to be roughly equal” as opposed to “are roughly equal.” MR. REINHART.
That was at the suggestion of the house grammarian, who complained about the wording in the August and previous meeting statements.
MS.
MINEHAN.
Okay.
So that really is unchanged, so to speak, from the current statement?
I was reading it and wondering, What am I reading here?
MR.
REINHART.
I don’t think my maneuverings are that subtle!
[Laughter] September 21, 200480 of 100 MS. MINEHAN.
One never knows.
Another change, which I had submitted as a suggestion and I guess no one likes it but I’ll raise it anyway, is whether or not we want to make B6 look more like A6 by referring to sustainable growth as well as maintaining price stability.
Now, maybe I should leave that to the Chairman to recommend.
That may be a subject for the next part of the meeting.
MR.
REINHART.
I would note that some market analysts have pointed to such a possible inclusion as an explicit signal that policy will pause.
MS.
MINEHAN.
We would stop?
MR.
REINHART.
Yes.
So that would have more import than just aligning the statement to the goals in the Federal Reserve Act.
It would be taken as a market signal.
MS.
MINEHAN.
Okay.
I sort of figured that, but I also thought that might not be a bad thing.
But, again, that’s a subject for our discussion a few minutes from now.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Further questions?
If not, let me make just a few short remarks.
The general outlook, as best I can judge, has been fairly well described around this table, and I don’t have anything significant to add.
I do want to respond in a way to President Minehan’s last remark.
<START>The only thing that I think should be, and probably is, on the table, is whether we should encourage lower ten-year interest rates, given how close they are to levels that would prompt a lot of mortgage refinancings and a significant drop in duration in the mortgage market, with the potential cumulative effects of such a development that others have pointed to.<END>
We have to be careful largely because, while there’s no question that some softening has occurred in the overall expansion of the economy, the numbers in the Greenbook, if they materialize, are really quite strong, and in that regard it’s quite credible to forecast much more September 21, 200481 of 100 rapid growth in employment than we have experienced in recent months.
<START>That’s largely because the standard error in the payroll series is quite large, and other indicators of employment have been quite a bit stronger than the payroll series.<END>
<START>For example, in recent months the net difference between hires and separations in the private sector has shown strength, job openings have increased, and initial claims have been remarkably low.<END>
So it is by no means out of the question, especially since productivity growth is probably slowing at this stage, to come up with some outsized employment number.
And if we take seriously the scatter diagram that Vincent has shown with respect to the response to employment surprises, we could get a fairly dramatic change in financial conditions in this particular market.
One concern in the latter regard is that the carry trade has come back.
<START>If duration falls on top of that, we may end up with a situation that, in the event of an employment surprise, could create some significant collateral damage in the balance sheets of American businesses, with negative repercussions on the economy.<END>
<START>Remember that a surprise in which interest rates fall and, hence, create capital gains in balance sheets, never caused anybody to go broke.<END>
There’s an asymmetry here relating to the speed of adjustment.
So it strikes me that, even if it is our opinion today that we will pause at the November meeting, we should not convey that message at this point because we would be taking risks that I think are unnecessary and could be quite costly if we are wrong.
On the other hand, the risk of fostering a presumption at this meeting that we will increase rates further in November and even in December leaves us in a position where we can pause in either of those two months or in both, if we choose to do so, without significant consequences.
If we do decide to pause later in the year, we will end up with lower long-term rates, higher bond prices, and presumably higher asset prices on the balance sheets of a number of financial institutions.
<START>September 21, 200482 of 100 In sum, I think we have to lean against conveying the presumption that we will pause or essentially bring to an end our current policy course, which I think has been more successful than we generally expected when we initiated it.<END>
Keeping our press statement essentially unchanged but obviously leaving open the possibility of a policy change therefore strikes me as the best thing to do.
Accordingly, I recommend a 25 basis point increase in the federal funds rate and a basically unchanged statement as in alternative B. Remember that we have a seven-week interval before the next meeting, and a lot can happen one way or the other in that period.
Before we take a vote, I’d like to have copies of the proposed statement distributed.
Why don’t we all read the draft release, and the floor will then be open for discussion.
[Pause] President Poole.
MR.
POOLE.
Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation for increasing the intended funds rate by 25 basis points and for the statement as written.
I’m reminded of something my mother used to say when I was a child.
I grew up in a family of four children with lots of cousins around, and she would often say, “Children are to be seen, not heard.” And I think that’s true of monetary policy today.
We should be as quiet as we can possibly be.
<START>In fact, as a general rule, I think one of our goals should be to make policy very noncontroversial and predictable, and we should not raise issues that don’t have to be raised.<END>
So I support this proposal completely.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Bernanke.
MR.
BERNANKE.
I support the recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Moskow.
MR.
MOSKOW.
I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Stern.
September 21, 200483 of 100 MR. STERN.
I, too, support your recommendation, and I would largely echo Bill Poole’s remarks.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
I support the recommendation and the press release.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
I support your recommendation as to the policy change.
I take your point about the language of the statement.
As I said in my comments
—and other people have mentioned it as well
—the big unknown is how much employment is going to grow.
I certainly hope your predictions are on the mark.
I’m rooting for us to be successful.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Let me put it this way, if the Greenbook projections actually turn out to be right, that would be extraordinary.
MS.
MINEHAN.
Oh, yes.
I’ll buy the Greenbook employment projections.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Lacker.
MR.
LACKER.
I support your recommendation, particularly about the last sentence of the statement.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Pianalto.
MS.
PIANALTO.
I support your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Santomero.
MR.
SANTOMERO.
I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Kohn.
MR.
KOHN.
I support your recommendations, Mr. Chairman.
I think the current structure of rates is close enough to what we need, and I would hesitate to do something that would cause a lot of fluctuations in expectations.
If we get to the point in November or September 21, 200484 of 100 December where we pause, I think rates will go down.
It will trigger some of that refinancing we’ve talked about.
I’m not really worried about the financial system in that situation;
it’s pretty robust.
It proved that in the summer of ’03.
There wasn’t that much collateral damage, but we don’t have to inflict it until we have to.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Ferguson.
MR.
FERGUSON.
I support your recommendation.
I would note that if we get to the end of this year and feel we have to take a pause then, we actually may want some of that refinancing if that’s going to help consumers.
So let’s not be afraid of getting all the help we can get to keep the economy growing as long as inflation is under control.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
I support the recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Olson.
MR.
OLSON.
I support the recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Yellen.
MS.
YELLEN.
I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President McTeer.
MR.
MCTEER.
I support it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Guynn.
MR.
GUYNN.
I support it as well.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Bies.
MS.
BIES.
I support it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Mr. Secretary, will you read the appropriate language?
MR.
GRAMLICH.
I support it, too
—even though you didn’t care!
[Laughter] September 21, 200485 of 100 CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Sorry, I didn’t mean to skip you.
I realize that silence would not have been your position.
MR.
BERNARD.
Let me begin with the directive wording, which is on page 15 of the Bluebook:
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.
To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with increasing the federal funds rate to an average of around 1¾ percent.” With regard to the wording in the press statement that is formally voted on, the second full paragraph of the draft statement:
“The Committee perceives the upside and downside risks to the attainment of both sustainable growth and price stability for the next few quarters to be roughly equal.
<START>With underlying inflation expected to be relatively low, the Committee believes that policy accommodation can be removed at a pace that is likely to be measured.<END>
Nonetheless, the Committee will respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to fulfill its obligation to maintain price stability.” CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Call the roll.
MR.
BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan Yes Vice Chairman Geithner Yes Governor Bernanke Yes Governor Bies Yes Governor Ferguson Yes Governor Gramlich Yes President Hoenig Yes Governor Kohn Yes President Minehan Yes Governor Olson Yes President Pianalto Yes President Poole Yes September 21, 200486 of 100 CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Vincent Reinhart, you wanted to mention something about the minutes?
MR.
REINHART.
I just wanted to give a quick report on the experiment with the expedited minutes.
Once again, we got the Committee to indicate its inclination to approve the minutes in time to meet our deadline.
That is, we would have been able to publish the minutes two and a half weeks after the August meeting.
Once again, it was a close call.
The Chairman has asked me to put a discussion of the minutes experiment on the agenda for December.
I’ll brief you then on some of the lessons we’ve learned and ask for guidance going forward.
Now I think the Chairman has a report on other developments relating to the Secretariat.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Not at the moment.
I want to put the FOMC meeting on pause, as we like to say, and ask that the Board members proceed to my office.
MR.
BERNARD.
Let me mention that, as soon as the Board members come back, there will be a picture-taking session.
And unless there is a change in plans, you will be asked to move to that end of the room.
MS.
MINEHAN.
When is this?
Today?
MR.
BERNARD.
Yes, before lunch.
[Recess] CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Would everyone be seated please?
I would like to report that by unanimous vote the Board of Governors accepted the requests of the twelve Reserve Banks for an increase of ¼ percentage point in the discount rate
—much to everybody’s surprise!
<START>As we close today, I would like to take a moment to recognize and to thank the gentleman sitting on my right because this is Normand Bernard’s final meeting as Deputy Secretary of the Committee.<END>
He has announced his intention to retire from the Federal Reserve September 21, 200487 of 100 effective at the beginning of November.
It is the end of an era.
Norm has worked at the Federal Reserve for more than forty-two years.
As far as we can tell, today’s meeting is the 345th that Norm has attended in serving this Committee, and I want to emphasize the word “serve.” His dedication, his integrity, and his willingness to do whatever needed to be done have meant that Committee members could always count on him.
His institutional memory, as you well know, is prodigious, as of course are his files!
[Laughter] From a personal perspective, he and his team have been a pleasure to work with throughout our meetings and in the preparation of the minutes and transcripts.
And Norm always has an amusing story to contribute.
I have here in my hand a piece of paper, which is a bit yellowed, signed in 1962 by William McChesney Martin, granting Norm access to the minutes and other confidential material of the Federal Open Market Committee.
As the fourth Chairman of the Federal Reserve since then, I regret that I am the one to witness the end of Norm’s extraordinary forty-two years.
Today, Norm, we hope you will consent to join us in having a group picture taken because we would like to have it inscribed and presented to you as a token of our sincere appreciation.
Moreover, I understand that there is a cake in the next room prepared for us as part of the celebration.
It has the number “345” outlined on its frosting.
That, I can assure you, is not the calorie count.
[Laughter] It’s commemorating the record number of FOMC meetings that you have attended.
I know I speak for the entire Committee when I express our deep gratitude for your hard work, your good humor, and your steadfast support over the years.
We wish you the very best in the future.
MR.
BERNARD.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
[Applause] Well, this is a surprise.
I don’t know what to say.
Obviously, I’ve stayed on about a dozen years beyond the September 21, 200488 of 100 time when I could have retired because I liked the work.
I joined the FOMC Secretariat in 1968 and have enjoyed the experience immensely ever since.
I’ve especially liked the work atmosphere and the people I have been working with.
In some cases, I’ve known you for quite a long period.
For example, as I look around the table, I’m reminded that two of you were fellow staff members in the 1960s
—President Poole and Governor Gramlich.
And several of my former colleagues from the 1960s became members of the Board of Governors, including Nancy Teeters, Martha Seger, Lyle Gramley, Chuck Partee, and Bob Holland.
Governor Kohn came somewhat later.
[Laughter] Presidents Yellen and Minehan worked here at the Board as well.
The one constant was the high quality of the staff and the Committee members with whom I have worked.
I’ve enjoyed my association with all of you over these many years, and I thank you for the friendship that you have expressed and you, Mr. Chairman, for your very kind words this morning.
Again, thank you all very much.
[Applause] END OF MEETING September 21, 200489 of 100
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 47
