Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeDecember 15-16, 1986A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Monday, December 15, 1986, at 3:30 p.m. and continuingon Tuesday, December 16, 1986, at 9:15 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. Corrigan, Vice ChairmanMr. AngellMr. GuffeyMr. HellerMrs. HornMr. JohnsonMr. MelzerMr. MorrisMs. SegerMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, Keehn, and Stern, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco,respectivelyMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, R. Davis, T. Davis,Kohn, Prell and Siegman, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, SystemOpen Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, SystemOpen Market Account12/15-16/86Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMrs. Loney, Economist, Office of the Staff Director forMonetary and Financial Policy, Board of GovernorsMr. Simpson, Deputy Associate Director, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMr. Oltman, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bankof New YorkMessrs. Broaddus, Lang, Scheld, Rosenblum, and Ms. Tschinkel,Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks ofRichmond, Philadelphia, Chicago, Dallas, andAtlanta, respectivelyMessrs. Beebe, Fieleke, and Miller, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco, Boston, andMinneapolis, respectivelyMr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply lists the attendees of a meeting.


Passage number 2.
 Guentner, Securities, Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofDecember 15-16, 1986December 15, 1986--Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need to approve the minutes. Noobjections. Foreign currency operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply reports that there were no objections to approving the minutes of the meeting.


Passage number 3.
MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.] Mr. Chairman, I haveno transactions [to be approved].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a statement by Mr. Cross and his lack of transactions to be approved.


Passage number 4.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any questions or comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is a neutral statement that does not express disagreement or contention. It is simply asking for questions or comments.


Passage number 5.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Mr. Cross was so clear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply describes Mr. Cross as being clear about something.


Passage number 6.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With all this silence, we'll go todomestic open market operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 7.
MR. HELLER. One quick question: You mentioned the Japanese-U.S. agreement. So far, has all of that been holding together on theexchange rate side just by the market perception that there could beintervention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking for clarification on whether the Japanese-U.S. agreement has been holding together on the exchange rate side through market perception.


Passage number 8.
MR. CROSS. No, I think there have been other factorsinvolved. There is the feeling that the yen really had moved quitefar in terms of the situation in Japan. I think there is anexpectation that further movement could lead to some developmentswithin Japan that would cause more problems there. I don't think ithas been done just with smoke and mirrors. I think there has been adifference in the actual impact of the exchange rate changes that haveoccurred in Japan vis-a-vis the effect of the exchange rate changesthat have occurred between the United States and the Europeans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their own perspective and explaining their reasoning without contradicting or challenging any other viewpoints.


Passage number 9.
MR. HELLER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but without the passage or any information about Mr. Heller, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement. Can you please provide more context or the actual passage?


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 10.
 You don't see, say, capital flows into theUnited States now to a greater extent because there is greaterconfidence that there would be--MR. CROSS. We are still seeing capital flows into the UnitedStates from Japan; we have seen them all along. The one factor thathas changed is the extent to which these inflows are offset, ineffect, by measures in the exchange market to hedge against furtherexchange rate changes. But we are still seeing the inflows.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The first speaker suggests that capital flows into the United States are not visible due to increased confidence, while the second speaker disagrees and states that capital flows from Japan to the United States have been ongoing but have been offset by measures in the exchange market.


Passage number 11.
MR. HELLER. Do you see that hedging more or less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. The statement is a simple inquiry about whether hedging is seen as increasing or decreasing.


Passage number 12.
MR. CROSS. The hedging. Well, going back to when the dollarwas considerably higher, there was a lot of hedging taking place. Wedon't really have very good information on all of this, so what I amtelling you is what we deduce and what the Japanese tell us. Justafter the middle of this year, when the exchange rate had changed agreat deal--the dollar was, say, at 150 yen as compared to 260--therewas a change in their attitude about hedging against this, and theywere taking some of their profits. Now it is a little uncertain as towhether they are still investing on a hedged basis or whether they aretaking some risks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing the practice of hedging in relation to the exchange rate between the dollar and the yen. They mention that there is limited information available and that what they are stating is based on deduction and information provided by the Japanese. They also mention that there is uncertainty regarding whether the Japanese are still investing on a hedged basis or taking risks. However, there is no direct disagreement or conflicting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 13.
12/15-16/86MS. SEGER. What about looking ahead on swap lines. Onereads a lot about Brazil, Argentina, and the Philippines. Do weanticipate being asked by them for swap lines.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 14.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's never impossible. The Philippinesare not actually asking for money--just refinancing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply suggests that it is not impossible to achieve something and clarifies that the Philippines is not seeking money, but rather refinancing.


Passage number 15.
MS. SEGER. Is there still quite a bit of activity in theforeign exchange markets around the year-end by multinationalcorporations. I remember that used to be the pattern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a question that seeks information and does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 16.
MR. CROSS. There are still some purchases of dollars bycompanies to kind of balance off their balance sheets at the end ofthe year. That is one of the factors that seem to have caused thedollar to show some strength recently because, as I was saying, asthese corporations buy dollars the banks don't really seem to want tochange their positions very much. So it goes right through the marketand tends to have an impact on the rate and to send the dollar up alittle. That has been a factor tending to strengthen the dollar sofar as we can tell in the last couple of weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating some observations and factors that have caused the dollar to show strength recently.


Passage number 17.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's go back to this swap question, justto avoid any misunderstanding. I answered on behalf of the UnitedStates; The Federal Reserve hasn't done swaps with anybody exceptMexico anyway. The United States has, the Treasury also--it's kind ofa division of labor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is clarifying information and mentioning the division of labor between the United States, the Federal Reserve, and the Treasury in relation to swaps.


Passage number 18.
MR. MORRIS. We don't even have a swap line with Brazil.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris simply states a fact about not having a swap line with Brazil.


Passage number 19.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They have agreed to a lot of Mexican ones.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement indicates that there is a lot of agreement between the parties involved regarding Mexican ones.


Passage number 20.
MS. SEGER. Did the other banks sign on yet for the Mexicancredit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 21.
 Or is that still a--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have reached that critical mass, butstill haven't got the uncritical mass. A lot of significant banks arenot in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any explicit contention or disagreement. It discusses the current state of reaching a critical mass but not yet achieving an uncritical mass in the banking industry.


Passage number 22.
MS. SEGER. But the uncritical is still out there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "But the uncritical is still out there" is a statement that does not involve any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 23.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There are a lot of these LDC things comingtogether. The Philippines has just been hanging there; that's just arefinancing. Brazil, Argentina, Chile, Ecuador, and Venezuela haveall come together and the mood is not good. It depends on how oneinterprets it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is simply stating facts about the current situation of LDCs (Less Developed Countries) without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 24.
 Paying off some--MR. JOHNSON. What is the feeling about Brazil. Is there agrowing feeling that they need a significant amount of new money.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 25.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it is impossible to judge. Theyran into a very bad time. The story of Brazil is they have to[unintelligible] for a while; instead of saying inflation went away,it was frozen out of the system. They have had very rapid [inflation]growth this year. Furthermore, there was a great loss of confidencein the weeks before the election. People knew they were going to havea program. They had capital flight and their trade position went tothe devil, partly because of leads and lags and partly just becausedomestic growth was so bad. They lost a lot of reserves over the12/15-16/86course of the month, or 6 to 8 weeks. So when they finally took themeasures--and I think they haven't lost any reserves since then andthey probably have regained some--they were pretty well depleted, inthe sense of what they think they need anyway. So their confidencethat they can get through next year without significant new moniesfrom the banks has evaporated. But how much they really need depends.The IMF patted them on the back on their program; there is no formalway [unintelligible] Paris for rescheduling. Rescheduling is fullyanticipated but no money which is [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is mainly providing information about the economic situation in Brazil without expressing any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 26.
 Whether this newmoney is $2 billion or $4 billion--MR. JOHNSON. But they don't anticipate any furtheradjustments to meet the financing as conditions [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the amount of new money is either $2 billion or $4 billion, and there are no further adjustments anticipated.


Passage number 27.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They may have some [unintelligible]measures growing out of this program but they don't want to agreespecifically to part of this rain dance--kabuki dance, I guess, is amore apt description--where they took these millions that they more orless thought would be approved by the international [unintelligible].It is quite a big program; it is very disturbing and it is mostlyexcise taxes, what little excise taxes apply. You stick a 100 percenttax on automobiles, and I guess a 70 percent tax on some other items,so you get this tremendous price distortion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is providing information and describing a situation without expressing opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 28.
MR. JOHNSON. They devalued a couple of times.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 29.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, a small devaluation. They did asmall devaluation to keep up with their own inflation, which is risingagain. They manipulated the price indices so that these things thatare really whacked will not be so heavily weighted in the price indexfor poor people so they won't have to raise wages. But it is a bigprogram in terms of the budgetary impact, if they can carry itthrough--if people don't stop buying cars, which is one of the risks[given that] so much of the revenue comes from cars and otherdurables. They really whacked these out of sight in terms of thetaxes; other things they didn't tax at all and continue to subsidize.Some internal distortions in the program [unintelligible] that just insheer budgetary magnitude may be 4-1/2 percent of the GNP; I guessthey already said 3-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 30.
MR. HELLER. The sad thing is that they are going back toindexation, at least partially.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact that the subject is going back to indexation, without any contradictory opinions or opposing arguments mentioned.


Passage number 31.
 If you didn't weight--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the big thing in this program, ofcourse, was to pretty much get rid of it and then they took anotherstep to try to get rid of the last debts. And that is what they areback on, informally. They took a massive step to get rid of it, soyou wonder whether they will do some more backsliding. That is right.The actual backsliding compared to what they had is very small.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information about a program and the steps taken to address debt.


Passage number 32.
MR. TRUMAN. The latest measures didn't include any newindexation. In fact, they took off [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the latest measures not including any new indexation and potentially removing something (unintelligible).


Passage number 33.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you will find they put somethingback on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a belief or prediction without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 34.
MR. HELLER. I think they allowed bank deposits back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states the opinion of Mr. Heller that bank deposits were allowed back.


Passage number 35.
 Dothey link back to--12/15-16/86MR. TRUMAN. Well, they changed the taxation of certaindeposits so you didn't get taxed on inflation--on a portion of theinterest rate. Look at that as just not taxing the inflation portionof the interest base. Taxation limited [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a factual statement about changes in taxation.


Passage number 36.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Sternlight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only provides the name "Mr. Sternlight" without any additional information or context that suggests disagreement or contention.


Passage number 37.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement expressing gratitude.


Passage number 38.
]MR. JOHNSON. Mr. Sternlight does have a sense of humor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply suggests that Mr. Sternlight has a sense of humor, without any conflicting opinions or conflicting viewpoints being presented.


Passage number 39.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any questions.SPEAKER(.). Peter, [do you see] any shift in the maturitiesthat the Japanese in particular seem to be buying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple inquiry asking for Peter's observation on a specific topic.


Passage number 40.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I heard more about them coming into themarket after that Baker/Miyazawa agreement that Sam referred to. I amnot aware of any great shift in the maturity area. They certainlyhave been interested in the intermediate and longer end and I guess ifanything there perhaps has been a little renewal of interest in thelonger end. Early in the year they were in the long end, and thenwere more in the intermediate area, and have shifted back somewhat tothe long end, or a mixture of different areas anyway now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing their observations and opinions about the changing interests and activities of a certain group.


Passage number 41.
MS. SEGER. Could you just educate me on a rather basicpoint. It seems to me that when CRR was introduced--almost threeyears ago or whenever it was--that one of the points made at the timewas that it would give the Fed the opportunity and the ability tobetter control reserves and the money supply. And yet as I heardiscussions on an ongoing basis it sounds as if we [still] haveproblems forecasting or estimating required reserves, etc. So, did Iget the message wrong almost three years ago or has something changedbetween then and the implementation of this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage shows one person seeking clarification and asking for an explanation regarding a perceived discrepancy between the initial promises of CRR and the current state of affairs. It does not depict any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 42.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think there was probably a mix ofviews at the time as to how much improvement we would get.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there might have been different opinions or views at the time regarding the level of improvement that would be attained.


Passage number 43.
MS. SEGER. I probably read some propaganda from somebody.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this statement. The speaker simply mentions reading propaganda without expressing any positive or negative stance on the matter.


Passage number 44.
MR. STERNLIGHT. From the very start, CRR meant that we hadto live with ongoing revisions of required reserves as we went througha reserve period. That's been something we have had to cope with.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact and there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 45.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends upon what you are interested incontrolling. The rationale for CRR was to get a very [unintelligible]between M1 and reserves. If you are interested in evenness in thefederal funds rate and predictable nonborrowed reserves andpredictable excess reserves, then it's [unintelligible].SPEAKER(.). It is ironic that as soon as the Board approvedCRR, its interest in Ml declined precipitously.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker is suggesting that the Board's interest in M1 declined drastically once the CRR was approved, which contradicts the rationale for implementing CRR in the first place.


Passage number 46.
MR. ANGELL. So we continue to learn to live with the worstof both worlds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "we continue to learn to live with the worst of both worlds."


Passage number 47.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the given passage without further information.


Passage number 48.
]12/15-16/86MR. JOHNSON. [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Not enough information is provided in the passage to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 49.
]MS. SEGER. Well, there are some people in banking whoremember when [the reserve requirement] was contemporaneous the firsttime. It has changed and changed again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about some people in the banking industry.


Passage number 50.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] quick control over M1.No more questions on this. We will turn to Messrs. Kichline andTruman, [but first we need to ratify the open market] transactions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 51.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Move it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: "Move it" is a direct command or instruction, so there is no contention or disagreement indicated in this statement.


Passage number 52.
MS. SEGER. I'll second it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Seger is expressing agreement or support for something that was previously mentioned.


Passage number 53.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No objections. We will hear precise,careful, thoughtful estimates of the internal and external outlook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement indicates that there will be no objections and that the estimates given will be precise, careful, and thoughtful.


Passage number 54.
MR. KICHLINE. Thank you. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is a statement of gratitude or acknowledgement from Mr. Kichline, so there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 55.
]MR. TRUMAN. [Statement--see Appendix.]SPEAKER(.). Ted, one question: Maybe I misunderstood youwhen you spoke of the third-quarter net export number being $151billion. In the Greenbook, I believe--oh, the trade deficit. I begyour pardon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is seeking clarification on a specific point mentioned by Mr. Truman.


Passage number 56.
MR. PARRY(.). [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 57.
]MR. KICHLINE. Around 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 percent. So in terms ofwhat we have for 1987, we are essentially growing a half point fasterthan that; given our translation, it is really worth 1/2 point or so.What, indeed, is the trend growth of productivity. The more recentnumbers have been rather disappointing, closer to 1 percent ratherthan what we had thought--1-1/4 percent or even higher. So I think itis an open case at the moment. I don't view this as terribly out ofline with our sense of potential growth in the economy. I suspectthere are folks who have numbers all over the lot. Some outsideforecasts [show unemployment] down to 6-1/2 percent; others have 3percent growth and unemployment rates rising. So there is a good dealof variability.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker mentions that the recent numbers for productivity growth have been disappointing and lower than expected, which suggests disagreement or discrepancy between the projected and actual growth rates. Additionally, the speaker mentions that there are different predictions and forecasts from different sources, indicating a variability and disagreement in opinions on unemployment rates and economic growth.


Passage number 58.
MR. ANGELL. Jim, how much different does productivity lookif you differentiate between the service sector and the goodsproducing sector.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question posed by Mr. Angell, seeking information or clarifying a concept.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 59.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, we don't really have good data, as youknow, for well over a year. The evidence that we have suggests thatmanufacturing productivity is probably rising 3-1/2 to 4 percent.Service sector productivity is just really quite poor. So, we aregetting strong productivity gains; that is important in this forecast.In terms of potential growth, we are trying to look at trendproductivity for the economy in total, but there is a great deal ofvariation among sectors.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents a disagreement or contention regarding the productivity levels in different sectors. The speaker states that manufacturing productivity is rising while service sector productivity is poor. This suggests a difference in performance and raises the issue of variation among sectors.


Passage number 60.
MR. ANGELL. Then it is possible that we really don't measureproductivity in the service sector and don't measure the value ofoutput in the service sector. We just assume productivity is going tobe zero in the service sector, and lo and behold it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. Mr. Angell is expressing a possible scenario or assumption about productivity in the service sector.


Passage number 61.
12/15-16/86MR. KICHLINE. No, I think there is a little more informationthan that. Let's say it is open to question but there is a littlemore information than an assumption of zero.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion that there may be some information available, but it is open to question and not solely based on the assumption of zero.


Passage number 62.
MR. PRELL. That wouldn't enter into President Parry'squestion because, as you know, it would affect the GNP growth as well.It wouldn't affect our estimate of the likely effect of the growthnumbers that we have on unemployment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact and explaining that the estimated effect of the growth numbers on unemployment would not be affected by the mentioned factor.


Passage number 63.
MS. SEGER. Jim, could you supply me with some dollarnumbers. It helps me to think of the real GNP change--to look at thetotal dollar change expected fourth quarter over fourth quarter andthen to look at the specific contributors. Mr. Truman just said thatnet exports are expected to provide about a third. If I am readingyour numbers correctly, the fourth quarter over fourth quarter changein real GNP is expected to be about $102 billion. On the right line,you say about a third of that would be supplied by an improvement innet exports.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification and confirmation of the numbers being discussed.


Passage number 64.
 Where do you--MR. KICHLINE. $28.2 billion is the dollar amount [for netexports]. Ted's one-third is roughly focused on the growth rate ofreal GNP fourth quarter over fourth quarter. We have a growth rate of2.8 percent, and if you take out net exports it is something like 1.8percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information and there is no evidence of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 65.
MS. SEGER. Okay. Looking at the $102 billion, where is itgoing to come from.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It seems to be a straightforward question.


Passage number 66.
MR. KICHLINE. [Our forecast has]: $60 billion in personalconsumption; $7-1/2 billion in business fixed investment; virtuallynothing in residential construction; nothing, or perhaps a billion ortwo, in business inventories; $28 billion in net exports; and $5billion in government purchases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating different forecasted numbers for different sectors of the economy. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 67.
MS. SEGER. Okay, thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 68.
MR. BLACK. I think Martha has a good point; you used tosupply dollar figures [in the Greenbook] and then removed them awhileback. Sometimes [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply acknowledges Martha's point and refers to the fact that dollar figures were previously included in the Greenbook and later removed. The mention of "unintelligible" does not provide enough context to determine any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 69.
MR. KICHLINE. You would like those sort of numbers in thegreen sheets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement made by Mr. Kichline is a neutral statement expressing a preference for certain numbers.


Passage number 70.
MR. BLACK. I would and I gather that Martha would.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black simply expresses his agreement and assumes that Martha would agree with him as well.


Passage number 71.
 I don'tknow--MS. SEGER. It is hard for some of us who are notmathematical whizzes to take the rates of change and to equate them tospecific numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that it can be difficult for individuals who are not strong in mathematics to understand rates of change and how they relate to specific numbers.


Passage number 72.
MR. STERN. Jim, I continue to have problems getting a realhandle on the budget outlook. I see in the Greenbook that you have a$180 billion deficit for the current fiscal year. That is very closeto the current CBO baseline, which I guess is $184 billion. I canthink of a number of things that are likely to push that deficit up,starting from the CBO baseline, and not a heck of a lot that arelikely to push it down. So it seems to me that the deficit is likelyto exceed that $180 billion, perhaps considerably. I am having12/15-16/86trouble reconciling that with what you mentioned might be the latestOMB projections.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Stern is expressing his difficulty in understanding the budget outlook and his observation that the deficit may exceed the projected amount.


Passage number 73.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the latest OMB projection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is a straightforward question about the latest projection from the OMB (Office of Management and Budget). It does not involve any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 74.
MR. KICHLINE. The number floating around that is stillpreliminary, I think, is $163 billion for the current fiscal year.That's still subject to change but it's in the $160-$165 billion area.Keep in mind: that is the same number that just a matter of a fewmonths ago was $143 billion; so they have added $20 billion. It's acase of how much you want to up the ante. We have added another $20billion. I think there is a danger of going too far in thatdirection, because there were legislative changes enacted that willbegin to bite. One of the issues relates to defense. We had a lot ofdefense spending in the second and third quarters of last year. It isour sense that the level of that spending is now quite high. We havehad major weapons systems deliveries that are now coming in; they areproducing these things at a very rapid rate. But we don't expectdefense spending to continue to grow in real terms at a fast clip.Rather we expect, as we get into the first part of next year, that wewill probably have constraints on defense spending--in part becauseappropriations were cut back at the Administration's request. I wouldsay that if we are wrong, I would probably add more; that is the safeway to go now. A big question mark is the agricultural area; we havesubstantially more dollars in there than does the Administration. Myexperience over the years is that even when we do that we are alwayslow. It looks sort of outrageous but basically it turns out to be areally important issue. I think it is too pessimistic to say thatthings weren't done. I think they were done. And I think they willbegin to show up as time goes on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kichline expresses concern about going too far in increasing spending and mentions that defense spending may be constrained in the future. He also suggests that there may be more funding needed in the agricultural area, which differs from the administration's position.


Passage number 75.
MR. JOHNSON. One of the problems with the defense budget isthat when you initially have a defense build-up and add to authority,you build up a lot of authority in the system; then, as you startcutting back that budget authority, the actual outlays start to speedup because you have a lot of backlog in the system. And that can goon for quite some time. It is a strange anomaly: when you areactually cutting budget authority you see outlays increase. But thatcan happen; I know that has happened a few times before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining a phenomenon they have observed with defense budgets.


Passage number 76.
MR. STERN. There was something in the news today about theAdministration requesting some additional defense funds for thecurrent fiscal year as kind of the quid pro quo for a modest increasein 1988.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the Administration requesting additional defense funds.


Passage number 77.
 It adds to that--MR. HELLER. You have a nice chart on the effect in theGreenbook. I can't find it right now, but it is kind of startling:the authority goes down and the outlays are going up. I don't knowwhat page it is on, but it really makes the point nicely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that there is a chart in the Greenbook that illustrates a point effectively, but the speaker is unable to locate it at that moment.


Passage number 78.
MR. PRELL. Page 17.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine without the specific passage.


Passage number 79.
MR. JOHNSON. It really does happen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The excerpt simply states a statement made by Mr. Johnson without any opposing views or conflicting opinions being expressed.


Passage number 80.
MR. HELLER. Page 17.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: As an AI language model, I am unable to directly access specific page numbers of a document or passage. Therefore, I cannot provide an accurate answer regarding the content or disagreement in the specified passage. Please provide more context or the actual content so I can assist you better.


Passage number 81.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What do you make of the decline inunemployment insurance claims.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is simply asking for the reader's interpretation or opinion on the decline in unemployment insurance claims.


Passage number 82.
12/15-16/86MR. KICHLINE. We had a lot of employment growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a fact about employment growth.


Passage number 83.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not as much as in some earlier months,when unemployment claims didn't do anything, if I remember correctly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that there is not as much contention or disagreement as in some earlier months, and also expressing a slight uncertainty about their memory.


Passage number 84.
MR. KICHLINE. Over the last two months or so, they have beenaveraging about 20,000 to 23,000 per week under what they had beenrunning during the summer. In October-November we did have increasesin manufacturing employment; and that is the circumstance where youoften see the [effect on] initial claims showing up very promptly.The employment growth for those two months is very strong. It hasbeen a reliable leading indicator and I would say it is supportive ofa strengthening labor market. That is what I would make of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating facts and providing their interpretation of those facts.


Passage number 85.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You'd make something of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that someone would make something out of a situation.


Passage number 86.
MR. PRELL. Another facet of the recent data is that thehousehold employment series is not showing gains as strong as thepayroll series. If there were some catch up, as there might well be,we could see the unemployment rate tick down and be more consistentwith this pattern that we have seen in the claims recently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the recent data and proposes a possible explanation for it.


Passage number 87.
MS. SEGER. How is it handled statistically when these massesof people who are in middle management get pink slips and are given aseverance package or are given psychological treatment for two monthsor something to help them adjust.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It simply asks for information about how a certain situation is handled statistically.


Passage number 88.
 Do they show up in the unemploymentstatistics immediately or do they have to wait to apply for--MR. KICHLINE. I don't know the answer to that question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply admits that they do not know the answer to the question being asked.


Passage number 89.
MR. PARRY. I think on the payroll survey they wouldn't showup, because many of the companies that do this actually keep them onthe books for maybe a three- or six-month period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a statement, there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 90.
MS. SEGER. I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not include any statement or indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 91.
MR. PARRY. So I don't think they would show up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing doubt or a personal opinion.


Passage number 92.
MR. PRELL. I gather, though, that once they have beensevered, even if they have gotten some payment, you can expect to seethem listed as unemployed and eligible for unemployment insurance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact about individuals being listed as unemployed and eligible for unemployment insurance after being severed and receiving some payment. There is no contention or disagreement present in this statement.


Passage number 93.
MS. SEGER. Okay. We may be seeing some of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It appears to be a statement or acknowledgement made by Ms. Seger.


Passage number 94.
MR. JOHNSON. I have another question. There is a further 10percent depreciation of the dollar built into the 1987 forecast. Howimportant is it if that does not come about. Or is the lag longenough that it doesn't affect 1987.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and there is no conflict or opposing views presented.


Passage number 95.
MR. TRUMAN. That is a very difficult question to answer. Ican really only answer within the context of the way we think aboutthese things. The way we put this together it has quite a significantimpact on the forecast--not on the export side itself, because therethe price lags and the quantity lags are longer and, in some sense, wehave already constrained that forecast to be less ebullient than onewould think would come from the current pace of exchange rate changes.But you get a faster move on the import side; you would get more andmore import growth if things stayed unchanged. And you get a quite12/15-16/86rapid impact on gross investment income from abroad; we still get aconsiderable amount of investment income from abroad and that getstranslated very directly into higher dollar value. In the way we puttogether our deflators and price indexes, you get quite a rapidincrease from a 10 percent depreciation over this period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is an explanation of how the forecast is affected by various factors.


Passage number 96.
MR. JOHNSON. On the import side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only mentions Mr. Johnson and does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 97.
MR. TRUMAN. On the import side. The bottom line, if Iremember correctly, is that if you kept things at the current levelmaybe about two-thirds of the improvement would go away.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Truman is simply stating a fact or his recollection of a situation.


Passage number 98.
MR. ANGELL. Do you have import prices moving up this year by5-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 99.
MR. TRUMAN. Actually, we have had it at a little above 5percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement of a fact.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 100.
MR. ANGELL. And you have import prices moving up in 1987 at10 percent. Now, let's posit that they would turn out not to be thatstrong. Let's suppose that import prices were to move up next yearmore like they do this year; I presume that means that the real tradedoesn't improve as much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Angell, suggests that import prices may not be as strong as expected, while the implication is that the person they are speaking to believes import prices will continue to improve.


Passage number 101.
MR. TRUMAN. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Truman simply agrees or acknowledges the previous statement.


Passage number 102.
MR. ANGELL. Real GNP isn't as favorable, which would alsomean slightly better on the inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement about the real GNP and its potential impact on inflation.


Passage number 103.
MR. TRUMAN. I think, on net, things would deteriorate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not show any indication of contention or disagreement. It is a statement about the speaker's opinion that things would deteriorate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 104.
MR. ANGELL. On balance it deteriorates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The phrase "on balance it deteriorates" suggests that there may be disagreement or contention regarding the overall effect or outcome being discussed.


Passage number 105.
 If you do that,then in the scenario in which the foreign exchange rates remain aboutconstant, rather than depreciating 10 percent, that together weakensthe entire--MR. TRUMAN. Right. I would emphasize, in answer to GovernorJohnson's question, that there are a number of ways to view this--thathonest men and women get different results from essentially the sameset of initial conditions, including what might or might not be in thepipeline. That is partly just a function of the fact that you have somuch relative price change already. If you thought imports were goingto be much more responsive to the price change you have already had,and you stopped the depreciation where it is, then you are going toget significant improvement on the real side. And you would likelyget an improvement on the nominal side because, essentially, you havehad most of the price change and the quantity change, by hypothesis,coming down a lot. But as I said, to get the $28 billion that Jimmentioned earlier we stabilized things at the fourth-quarter level,and we get, in real terms, about $21 billion. About $12 billion ofthat is on the trade side and $9 billion is on the services side--mostof it from higher real imports.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is providing an explanation and analysis of different possible outcomes.


Passage number 106.
MR. ANGELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions "MR. ANGELL" without providing any further context or details.


Passage number 107.
 Do you have any interest rate assumptions forthe United States vis-a-vis--MR. TRUMAN. Not built into that scenario.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about interest rate assumptions.


Passage number 108.
12/15-16/86MR. ANGELL. The interest rate assumptions are built in orare not built in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that the interest rate assumptions are either built in or not built in without expressing any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 109.
MR. TRUMAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without knowing the specific content of the passage.


Passage number 110.
 In running that kind of experiment, we didn'tchange the--MR. ANGELL. So U.S.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement about the process of running an experiment and does not involve any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 111.
 interest rates--MR. TRUMAN. They were lower; U.S. interest rates probablyfell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there was a decrease in interest rates. However, there could be disagreement or contention regarding the statement "U.S. interest rates probably fell." Different individuals may have different opinions or evidence that could contradict or support this claim.


Passage number 112.
 You still earn more--MR. ANGELL. I didn't quite understand you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The response from Mr. Angell suggests confusion or a lack of understanding rather than disagreement.


Passage number 113.
MR. TRUMAN. The question is: How does the lower interestrate affect our net payments. It affects how much we receive ininterest payments. And [unintelligible] stocks are such that a lowerinterest rate--leaving aside dividends and those kinds of things--[unintelligible] still gives you less net receipts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about how lower interest rates affect net payments.


Passage number 114.
MR. ANGELL. Are there any corporate profit assumptions thatare explicit in this forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention or imply any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking about corporate profit assumptions in a forecast.


Passage number 115.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, just on the international side, as I said,most of that $9 billion at an annual rate does add up to corporateprofits; it is real. At least in the accounting it is a consequenceof exchange rate changes. Those numbers are very large.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is explaining the accounting implications of exchange rate changes and stating that the numbers involved are significant.


Passage number 116.
MR. KICHLINE. We do the income side of the accounts, aswell, so we have corporate profits. In economic terms they are barelyhigher in 1987 than in 1986; and if you take profits after tax, theyindeed would go down because of the $15 to $20 billion tax increasethat we have built in for the new tax law. So essentially, corporateprofits in an economic sense are little changed next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about corporate profits in 1987 compared to 1986 and explaining why they would go down if the new tax law is implemented.


Passage number 117.
MR. HELLER. May I ask you a different question on thedomestic side. The hourly earnings index has been declining verysharply, and there has been a lot of publicity recently given to newentrants into the workforce being paid barely above minimum wage. Isthat improvement in the index entirely due to new low-wage workersentering the workforce. Or is it across the board for existingworkers as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a request for clarification and information.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 118.
 In other words, is the mix--MR. KICHLINE. The hourly earnings index that we focus onadjusts for inter-industry shifts in employment. So it is not averagehourly earnings as such; the index adjusts for that. As you know, itpopped up in November by about four-tenths; it is volatile from monthto month. Contract construction was up very strongly and there werewage increases as well in finance, insurance, and real estate. Thathas been a hot area--particularly the real estate, where there hasbeen a lot of employment and maybe there has been some bidding up ofwages. But I don't know that we have noticed anything in particularabout rapid growth in the minimum wage area. I would note that otherinformation that we are looking at for contract construction does nottend to support this sense of a very rapid sustained increase inconstruction wages. Did I answer your question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement or contention in the passage. The speaker mentions that there have been wage increases in the finance, insurance, and real estate sectors, possibly due to bidding up of wages in the real estate industry. However, they do not believe there has been a rapid growth in the minimum wage area. The speaker also adds that other information they are looking at for contract construction does not support the idea of a rapid sustained increase in construction wages.


Passage number 119.
MR. HELLER. Well, actually I wasn't focussing on theNovember numbers. I was looking at the quarterly numbers because the12/15-16/86monthly figures are so volatile. The quarterly figures show asustained downward trend and I was really wondering whether the newentrants are pulling the average down or whether that reflects justlow settlements across the board.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their focus on the quarterly numbers and their curiosity about the reasons behind the sustained downward trend.


Passage number 120.
MR. KICHLINE. Some of it is lower settlements. We do haveinformation there: the average of settlements in the Bureau ofNational Affairs series, which includes all settlements of 50 or moreworkers, continues to drift lower. One other feature that isinfluencing the labor market data on the wage side, in a major way, isthat many of the agreements provide for bonuses and lump sum paymentsthat do not get cranked into the hourly earnings. That's sort ofstraight time salary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is providing information about lower settlements and the influence of bonuses and lump sum payments on wage data.


Passage number 121.
 But this bonus feature pops up a great deal andthat may be one thing that--MR. HELLER. That's outside the index.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply adding an additional point about a "bonus feature" that occurs frequently, and Mr. Heller interrupts to note that it is not included in the index.


Passage number 122.
MR. KICHLINE. Yes, the index is straight time hourly pay; ittakes away overtime and all these other things. That particularfeature is captured in compensation measures but not in the hourlyearnings index. And that seems to be spreading.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact and explaining the difference between the index and compensation measures.


Passage number 123.
MR. TRUMAN. If I may correct myself, Governor Angell. Anincrease in interest rates would deteriorate the current account.[Unintelligible] on balance that way. Now, on the GNP net exports--because you net out government interest payments--it would go theother way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply correcting himself and explaining how an increase in interest rates would affect the current account and GNP net exports.


Passage number 124.
MR. ANGELL. Ted, thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude to Ted, indicating a positive interaction without any indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 125.
MR. FORRESTAL. Ted, can I go back to what you said beforeabout the exchange rate. Did I hear you say that if the exchange rateremains the same in 1987 that two-thirds of the improvement woulddisappear from the trade balance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The person named Mr. Forrestal is asking for clarification on a statement made by Ted, possibly to better understand the topic being discussed.


Passage number 126.
MR. TRUMAN. That is the conclusion that we have come to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states the conclusion that they have come to without any indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 127.
MR. FORRESTAL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any context or text. The phrase "MR. FORRESTAL" does not provide enough information to make a judgment.


Passage number 128.
 If that were to happen you would then--MR. TRUMAN. This is in the real [balance]. It would be lessthan that amount of deterioration on the imports, on the net currentside, because you don't have the right [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a continuation of a statement, discussing the potential impact of a hypothetical situation.


Passage number 129.
MR. FORRESTAL. I am thinking about what that does to theoverall forecast. You said that one-third of the forecast isdependent upon improvement in the trade balance. If you remove two-thirds of that improvement, your forecast is 0.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 130.
6--MR. PRELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage "6--MR. PRELL" without any context or further information.


Passage number 131.
 Well, that is assuming--MR. TRUMAN. In retrospect it would be 0.6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement that assumes a particular percentage and then adds "in retrospect."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 132.
MR. KICHLINE. I think there are other things that happen.You may well have different price behavior, for example, or differentinterest rates that come out of the forecast, or different consumptionspending.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there may be different price behavior, interest rates, and consumption spending outcomes resulting from the forecast. This implies potential disagreement or contention about the specific impacts of the forecast on these factors.


Passage number 133.
 Basically, the inclination is not simply to adjust thedomestic forecast down by the full amount because these other thingscould be happening to help shore up--12/15-16/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Subject to your correction, you have aboutthe lowest price forecast of any of these standard forecasts. Wouldyou explain why I should be so reassured.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for an explanation and reassurance regarding the lower price forecast.


Passage number 134.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, Mr. Chairman, [unintelligible] says thatwe are going to get [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without more context.


Passage number 135.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] remind us that we've allbeen too high [unintelligible]; next year we are in the clover, itseems.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear disagreement or contention. It appears to refer to a positive future outlook.


Passage number 136.
MR. KICHLINE. It depends on what you assume about the oilprice and, as Ted mentioned, we have that drifting up to $16. So thatis clearly different from 1986 but it is not a major problem. Anotherbig issue is what you assume about import prices and how they will bereflected in domestic prices. We think we have something reasonablethere. I don't know how some of these other forecasts track thatthrough. In addition, our sense is that we have at the moment fairlymoderate wage growth, in terms of measured expectations of inflation.You say we are at the low end, but I guess when we talk about numbersthat are four or five percent I would want to be at the low end. Iwouldn't want to be there all the time, but I am perfectly happysitting there in December 1986.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kichline is simply stating different factors and assumptions that need to be considered when analyzing the situation.


Passage number 137.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without clear text, it is impossible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 138.
]MR. KICHLINE. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents Mr. Kichline's agreement or affirmation.


Passage number 139.
MR. JOHNSON. DRI has a somewhat [unintelligible] forecast.I don't know if you know why, but they also have more improvement inthe trade balance than we do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention between the speaker (Mr. Johnson) and any other party. It simply presents a statement about the forecast of DRI and the trade balance improvement.


Passage number 140.
MR. KOHN. They are pretty close to our basis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kohn is stating that they are close to their basis, implying agreement or similarity.


Passage number 141.
MR. JOHNSON. It is a similar forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The presence of "It is a similar forecast" suggests that Mr. Johnson is agreeing or expressing a similar viewpoint, rather than showing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 142.
MS. SEGER. Isn't DRI the major model that is also concernedabout a recession.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 143.
MR. PRELL. [Unintelligible.] I think we are lower incompensation than they are but less optimistic about productivitygrowth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about compensation and productivity growth without opposing or contradicting any other statement or idea.


Passage number 144.
MR. PARRY. Ted, you focused on net exports for 1987. Thegrowth that you have for the fourth quarter of 1986 is very large.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Ted focused on net exports for 1987 and mentions that the growth for the fourth quarter of 1986 is large.


Passage number 145.
MR. TRUMAN. Two-thirds of that, or a little more than halfof that, is the oil. About $15 billion of that reflects the change inthe fourth quarter in the volume of oil from the high level. We havedifferent sources of preliminary data for November, too, and we aremore confident about that number than about some of the others.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses the sources and confidence levels of different data.


Passage number 146.
MR. PARRY. It is certainly interesting to note that thegrowth in real terms is $28.6 billion for the fourth quarter of which$27.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not state any disagreement or contention. It simply provides information about the growth in real terms.


Passage number 147.
2 billion--MR. TRUMAN. A lot of it is based upon two assumptions: oneis that the oil imports will behave this way; and the other has to do12/15-16/86with what is or is not picked up in the national income accounts oncounterpart inventory. Such a very little amount was picked up thatwe could find [unintelligible] in the third quarter, assuming that wetreat it symmetrically in the fourth quarter. Much of it is oil; asmall part of it is non-oil imports. And agricultural exports havebeen quite strong. Again, we have both October [data] and some otherinformation on November agricultural exports; it seems[unintelligible] special factors which are not carrying through thatexpansion in the forecast period. But we have had a $4 billion annualrate of increase in ag exports, which largely [reflects] Japanesepurchases, and then some continued improvement on the [non-ag] exportside.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing different assumptions and factors that contribute to the forecasted increase in exports.


Passage number 148.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we might call on Mr. Kohn forcomments about Mr. Simpson's paper.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is neutral and does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply suggesting that Mr. Kohn be asked for comments on Mr. Simpson's paper.


Passage number 149.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 150.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the question we might devote alittle time to--[not] this afternoon but tomorrow morning--in settingthe stage for our next meeting is what targets we want to use, if any.I have been assuming that we would have targets for M2 and M3. Mllooks a lot more doubtful to me. I think we might go some distance inestablishing a framework so that when we come to the next meetingwe'll at least know what targets we are going to have, if any.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker suggests discussing the targets for M2 and M3 but expresses doubt about having a target for M1. There is no clear disagreement or contention in this passage.


Passage number 151.
MR. HELLER. If any. You are required to have them, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about a requirement.


Passage number 152.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you are right. It is a matter oflaw; we've got to cook up some target. That was a little too[unintelligible]; I don't want to [unintelligible] my view yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and mentioning the need to establish a target in a legal matter.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 153.
MR. JOHNSON. The broader aggregates we never [miss] thatbadly. As for Ml, a big question mark in my mind is whether we evenwant a target for next year. I would hate to get into the samesituation we got into this year with Ml. That could really constrainthe markets quite a bit at the beginning of the year--if we set atarget assuming another stable pattern of velocity for the year andend up with something [close to this year]. There just seems to betoo much uncertainty about it, period. The study even indicates thatthere is so much uncertainty around Ml that it doesn't seem to haveany great advantage. Maybe if velocity patterns stabilized a littlemore during the year we could re-establish a target at midyear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses uncertainty about whether they want a target for Ml for the next year. They mention the negative consequences of setting a target based on assumptions that may not hold true. The speaker also questions the advantage of having a target for Ml, suggesting that it may not be beneficial.


Passage number 154.
MR. HELLER. I think it is not only the disinflation impacton M1 but also the very sharp shifts that we get in the componentsright around that borderline of Ml, those between Ml and M2. We getgrowth rates up and down, near 20, 30, or 50 percent sometimes. Andit is right on that borderline; it's very difficult to draw a lineright there. If we want to have an Ml target we might want to look atthe old M1A, or something like that, which apparently has been alittle more stable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is discussing different components of M1 and M2 and suggesting that there may be a need to look at alternative measures such as M1A for better stability. There is no direct contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 155.
MR. JOHNSON. It has done better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Johnson's statement is a positive one, indicating that something has improved or had success.


Passage number 156.
MR. HELLER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only provides the name "MR. HELLER" without any context or statements that suggest disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 157.
 Maybe somebody from the Research Departmentcould---13-12/15-16/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 158.
]MR. JOHNSON. [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 159.
]MR. HELLER. No, I am not going advocate the old M1A. I amjust saying between that and the current M1 it would be the lesserevil.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is not expressing any disagreement or contention in this passage. They are simply stating their preference between the M1A and the current M1 as being the lesser evil.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 160.
MR. JOHNSON. You mentioned the sensitivity of Ml to a changein interest rates. But what about the spread between NOW accounts andtime deposits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The mention of the sensitivity of M1 to a change in interest rates suggests that the speaker believes there is a relationship between the two. However, the question about the spread between NOW accounts and time deposits implies a different perspective and questioning the validity of that relationship.


Passage number 161.
MR. KOHN. Well, when I mentioned interest sensitivity, I wasthinking of something that really encompassed the opportunity cost, sothat would be relative to that time deposit--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kohn is simply clarifying his previous statement and providing further explanation of his point.


Passage number 162.
MR. JOHNSON. So when you mentioned a percentage pointdecline in interest rates, you meant a compressing of the spread.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 163.
MR. KOHN. Right. Or a widening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement that is not challenged or rebutted.


Passage number 164.
MR. JOHNSON. A decline in the opportunity cost.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not mention any opposing viewpoints or contradictory ideas. It simply states Mr. Johnson's point of view.


Passage number 165.
MS. SEGER. Could you tell us more about the new model thatyou have that does a better job explaining the relationships.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 166.
MR. KOHN. The most recent version basically encompasses whatwe think is a little better fix on the offering rates--establishingthose in the model.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the most recent version includes improvements to the offering rates.


Passage number 167.
 But mostly the reason it gives a betterperformance is that it has been refitted and it has much higherinterest sensitivities and that happens to--MS. SEGER. Just because you added the additional experience.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not have any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about the performance improvement of a refitted item.


Passage number 168.
MR. KOHN. We added additional experience and I think themodels are influenced by the most recent experience in some way. Ihave my own concerns that we may have over-reacted econometrically, insome sense, to the most recent data--that some of the shifts thatwe've gotten in M1 are really very substantial shifts in reaction to achange in the state of the world from a high interest rate, highinflation world to a lower interest rate, lower inflation world. Myconcern is that when we look back a couple of years from now, byincorporating that into the interest sensitivity term we may haveoverstated what actually could happen as interest rates fluctuate in acyclical sense in much smaller waves around a lower level. I can onlyemphasize the tremendous uncertainty at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not involve any disagreement or contention. It simply presents the concerns and uncertainty of Mr. Kohn regarding the models and potential overreaction to recent data.


Passage number 169.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me summarize what I think I heard yousaying. As a central point, if one assumed no change in velocity withunchanged interest rates M1 would go up 5.5 percent. If interestrates then moved up 2 percent we should have about a 14 percentincrease in Ml; in a different environment, if they moved down by 2percent we should have minus 3 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is a summary and presentation of different scenarios based on assumptions and changes in interest rates. There is no indication of conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 170.
MR. KOHN. The other way around. But you are right that a 2percentage point change would imply maybe an 8 percentage pointeffect; I used one percentage point and got a 4 point effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply agreeing with the previous statement made by someone else and providing additional information to support their point.


Passage number 171.
 Now,that is---14-12/15-16/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You multiplied by 2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a mathematical calculation.


Passage number 172.
MR. KOHN. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply includes an individual's statement without any opposing viewpoint or contradictory information.


Passage number 173.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But that too is opportunity cost.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence is stating a fact about opportunity cost without presenting any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 174.
MR. PARRY. Are you saying that in the estimation theinterest rate elasticity may be somewhat higher than is really thecase--that it may be more of a one-time shift.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a question posed by Mr. Parry to clarify a statement or point made by someone else.


Passage number 175.
MR. KOHN. I have that suspicion. Obviously, I can't showit. It is true that the newer models with the higher elasticities dopretty well this year; they show about a 12 percent growth. Sothey've got that on their side. I just have the suspicion that insome sense we may have overreacted. But I think that M1 is going tobe very interest sensitive, very sensitive to opportunity costs--inpart because, as Governor Heller was saying, it is closelysubstitutable for other kinds of short-run liquid deposits and insureddeposits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their own suspicion and opinion about the situation without conflicting with any other statements or perspectives.


Passage number 176.
 And as those things shift then--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas. It simply mentions Chairman Volcker without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 177.
 When you say a one percent change ininterest rates, you are talking about a one percentage--MR. KOHN. One percentage point change in interest rates. Inmy own calculation I was using the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Kohn corrects the speaker's terminology by confirming that they should be referring to a one percentage point change in interest rates, rather than a one percent change. There is no contention or disagreement between the two speakers.


Passage number 178.
MR. JOHNSON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions "Mr. Johnson" without any further context or information, so it is impossible to determine if there is contention or disagreement based on this limited information.


Passage number 179.
 I thought you said--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Absolute change. All you are talkingabout is a change in the funds rate from 5 percent to 6 percent orfrom 5 percent to whatever.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 180.
MR. JOHNSON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "MR. JOHNSON" simply provides a name without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 181.
 I thought you said there was some opportunitycost --CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 182.
 [Unintelligible] the opportunity cost isbetween--MR. KOHN. That implied that there was some adjustment by theinstitutions, but a slow adjustment. That is, this was taken from thetable in the last part of the paper that referred to a slow adjustmentof the offering rates. It didn't imply that offering rates didn'tchange--only that they changed slowly as they have this year. So itis not necessarily a one percentage point change from opportunitycost; it would be something less than that. It would be, say, a onepercentage point change in market interest rates on January 1st andthen a very slow adjustment of offering rates to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 183.
MR. ANGELL. You assume this interest rate sensitivity worksboth ways on the same demand function.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Angell discussing a assumption about interest rate sensitivity.


Passage number 184.
MR. KOHN. The way we have it now, it would. But for largechanges, I am not certain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses uncertainty or lack of confidence regarding the impact of large changes.


Passage number 185.
MR. ANGELL. [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is not any contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker's response is unknown as the statement is marked as unintelligible.


Passage number 186.
]MR. PRELL. The symmetry of the response of the banks to thisis a further complication.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that the symmetry of the response of the banks is a further complication. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 187.
-15-12/15-16/86MR. ANGELL. If it did have symmetry, that would mean that ifwe were ever to get back into a higher inflation scenario and the needfor higher interest rates one might argue that the correct path for Mlmight be zero. This thing works both ways.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that if there were symmetry and a higher inflation scenario, one might argue that the correct path for something referred to as "Mlmight" would be zero. The statement "This thing works both ways" reinforces the idea that the argument applies in both scenarios.


Passage number 188.
MR. KOHN. It's not likely to be symmetrical from the currentlevels since offering rates are above where they need to be anyhow.If you raised interest rates from the current level, presumably you'dshort cut a certain adjustment that otherwise would be happening. Soit is a more complicated kind of thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. The speaker is presenting their opinion and discussing a hypothetical situation.


Passage number 189.
 But if you started from anequilibrium relationship of offering rates--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If the market rate that you use changes byone percentage point, what is the elasticity of M2 and M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a hypothetical situation without presenting any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 190.
MR. KOHN. I don't have an M3 elasticity, but M2 with a slowadjustment would be .09 elasticity. So .09 times about 16 percentwould be about a 1-1/2 percentage point change in M2. The elasticitywith respect to Ml--this is over a year--was .23.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is presenting information and calculations without any clear disagreement or contention.


Passage number 191.
MR. BLACK. Don, in expressing doubts about the new model,are you explicitly assuming that you will have more rapid adjustmenton the offering rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking for clarification.


Passage number 192.
MR. KOHN. Well, that is another thing that could happenhere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 193.
 It could be, particularly if interest rates moved down, thatthe cost pressure on banks would be so large that the competitive damwould break and you could get offering rates moving much more promptlythan that--MR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 194.
 You are seeing some movement--MR. KOHN. You would have smaller elasticities but they wouldstill be large.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply describing a situation without any opposing views or conflicting statements.


Passage number 195.
MR. ANGELL. It would be relatively [more] comfortable thanliving within an M1 pattern for 1987 of between 2 percent and, say, 16percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 196.
MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I think that we have come a longway on this subject in the last [few years]. A few years ago, we weresitting around here talking about M1 as if it were synonymous withtransactions balances. I should hope that that concept may beseriously damaged. And we were talking, either directly orindirectly, about the causal relationship between the rate of changein transactions balances and the rate of change in nominal GNP. Asyou know, [I have been] arguing that we can't measure money anymoreand that we really should start to think in terms of gearing policy tothe rate of change in liquidity. In that connection, I think oneindicator that we might want to use--if you think there is safety innumbers and in the past that has proven to be the case--is totalliquid assets, if you can displace Ml. I would certainly stronglyurge that we use total liquid assets if we want a third [target].Last year its behavior relative to the nominal GNP was less defectivethan any of the other indicators. It wasn't too great, but it wasless defective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Morris, is reflecting on past discussions and expressing his own views and suggestions regarding the measurement and use of money and liquidity indicators for policy purposes.


Passage number 197.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but without the passage, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement. Could you please provide the passage or more context?


Passage number 198.
]12/15-16/86MR. MORRIS. Well, there was one year when it was[unintelligible] but so did all the others--everything did well--andthat was 1982. Since 1982 its velocity has been less than tranquil, Isee, but the deviation as compared to M1 trend velocity is very small.I am not saying that any of these is anything that we should tie our[unintelligible] to in any rigid way. What we have learned is thatnone of these monetary aggregates has an extremely stable relationshipto nominal GNP. But the fact is that in four out of the last fiveyears we have not met our initial M1 target, and I think that issomething we ought to pay a little attention to. Despite thedeviation of the relatively broader aggregates from trend velocity, wegenerally have been hitting the [targets for] the broader aggregates.We have had ranges wide enough to encompass them. And we have donethat this year. If we are forced to go with these, and under currentlaw we are, then I think it makes sense to go with--I wouldn't callthem targets--but indicators of monetary policy that we are morelikely to hit. And I think the situation with M1 now is such that M1velocity is completely unpredictable. We need to forecast Mlvelocity, as Mr. Kohn's paper indicates. But first we need to knowwhat is likely to happen to interest rates, what the relationshipbetween nominal GNP and interest rates is, and also how the bankersare going to respond to any change in interest rates. And it seems tome that all that adds up to the proposition that the current M1velocity is not predictable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the fluctuation of monetary aggregates and acknowledging that their relationship to nominal GNP is not stable. They also mention the importance of accurately forecasting M1 velocity and understanding the impact of interest rates and banker responses. There is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 199.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Suppose we had a situation where interestrates were rising, say, one percent or more and M1 was rising at thesame time, say, at least faster than the nominal GNP. Does that tellyou anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a hypothetical scenario and does not present any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 200.
MR. ANGELL. Yes, it certainly does. It seems to me thatFrank wants to throw away too much. During a period of acceleratinginflation, from even very low levels, it seems to me it's the casethat there is still a rather stable relationship. There may be astable relationship during periods of disinflation, but we may not bewilling to admit to what that is. That is, we may not be willing toadmit to the negative velocity that would entail. What I think weknow is that when you shift from an inflating [unintelligible] economyto one of disinflation and outright deflation, then thoserelationships are unstable. And I think that every such period inhistory would demonstrate that to be the case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Angell disagrees with Frank's viewpoint and argues that there is still a stable relationship during periods of accelerating inflation, while relationships become unstable during disinflation and deflation.


Passage number 201.
MR. MORRIS. I am just saying that I have no objections tousing M1 for whatever information you think it may be giving you.What I do object to is using it as a published target of monetarypolicy when the uncertainties are so enormous.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 202.
MR. JOHNSON. I agree with that point. I think Wayne hasmade a good point too. You can visualize times when this relationshipgives you a lot more accurate assessment of nominal GNP, and I can seea time when more stability would return to Ml. When you have bigshifts, as you say, from a high inflation, high interest rate economyto low inflation and low interest rates, you expect big changes andunstable conditions. I wouldn't want to throw M1 out altogether; butI certainly feel uncomfortable publishing a target range for 1987 inthe middle of a transition period like this. And giving people theimpression that we are going to make some attempt to hit that targetreally bothers me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 203.
12/15-16/86MR. ANGELL. Maybe we should call it a monitoring range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting a name for something.


Passage number 204.
MR. MORRIS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about Mr. Morris or any context that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 205.
 Even if you do that the New York Times is goingto publish a picture of it every Friday showing M1 way [outside]--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What [velocity] increase do you get with,say--just to keep the arithmetic easy--a 6 percent increase in nominalGNP and no change in the discount rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage does not present any explicit contention or disagreement. It is simply providing a hypothetical scenario and asking for the increase in velocity.


Passage number 206.
MR. KOHN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage as there is only an individual's name mentioned.


Passage number 207.
 For next year we would have, because of some ofthe lagged effects of the declines in interest rates--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Suppose there are no lagged effects ininterest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply discussing the hypothetical scenario of no lagged effects in interest rates.


Passage number 208.
MR. KOHN. Then I would say we'd get about a 5 percentincrease in M1 and I would expect about a one percent trend increasein velocity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents an opinion and an expectation.


Passage number 209.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You still have a trend.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement simply states a fact about the existence of a trend without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 210.
MR. KOHN. A little one; between zero and one, backing off alittle. I think there could be some trend from having demand depositsand currency in there. It is not all NOW accounts that might have atrend growth of about zero, the way M2 did. So I can't rule out thatthere would be some trend in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Kohn, is simply stating that there could be a small trend between zero and one when it comes to growth in demand deposits and currency. He clarifies that not all NOW accounts will experience the same trend as M2, and thus he cannot rule out the possibility of some trend existing.


Passage number 211.
MR. STERN. That would imply very slow growth over the lastthree quarters of next year given the first quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply presents a logical conclusion based on the information provided.


Passage number 212.
MR. KOHN. No. I didn't think that was a projection for nextyear but rather if we were in equilibrium. For next year we wouldhave much faster growth for the year given that we have lagged effectsfrom this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kohn is simply offering a different perspective or clarification on the projected growth for next year.


Passage number 213.
MR. ANGELL. What kind of velocity would you have if you hada 5 percent nominal GNP and a 100 basis point decline in interestrates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a hypothetical scenario without presenting conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 214.
MR. KOHN. I guess I would have about a minus 3 percent,using my 4 percent minus the one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement of an individual's calculation.


Passage number 215.
MR. ANGELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any context or text provided.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 216.
 So that would mean an 8 percent--MR. KOHN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is evident from the phrase "So that would mean," which suggests that the speaker may have a different interpretation or understanding of the situation.


Passage number 217.
 This is not for next year; this is starting outfrom the position--MR. MORRIS. What if the banks continued to pay the currentrate when the market rates really went down by one percentage point.Then Ml would balloon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage simply presents a hypothetical scenario regarding the banks continuing to pay the current rate when market rates go down. It does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 218.
MR. KOHN. That is right. Now, my calculation assumes evenwith a 4 percent reaction, which is a huge reaction to a onepercentage point change in interest rates, at least some slowadjustment of those offering rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Kohn.


Passage number 219.
 I don't know what--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You get interest rates back up to 21percent again; you won't have any money supply at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing a hypothetical situation without any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 220.
12/15-16/86VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's the question I want to ask.I am not sure about that. Within the framework of this revised modelthat you are working with Don, is it plausible--this is not,obviously, an operative question for 1987--that you could get apattern of pricing behavior by banks that would produce a real creditcrunch in the old fashioned sense of the word. Is it plausible to getpricing by banks that becomes so aggressive that you are not even sureof the algebraic signs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 221.
MR. KOHN. I guess by credit crunch you mean a situation inwhich interest rates are rising. They could raise their rates on NOWaccounts by even more because of the concern about lowering--. Isuppose M1 could swallow M2 at some point here but that sounds ratherextreme.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is merely a statement of the speaker's thoughts and speculation about the possibility of certain events occurring.


Passage number 222.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage "VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN" as it is not a complete sentence or statement.


Passage number 223.
 It depends on what kind of marketthey want to--MR. ANGELL. I don't see how the crunch can occur, Jerry,without [interest rate] ceilings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is a statement expressing uncertainty or skepticism about a possible scenario, but there is no conflict or disagreement indicated.


Passage number 224.
 Deregulation shouldn't mean thatyou are going to price so that the quantity demanded--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I realize this is a highlyimplausible circumstance, but in that circumstance if the banks decidethat what they really have to do to protect themselves, or to keepaway from hot money positions themselves, is not just maintain theirdeposit base but increase their "stable deposit base" they could getvery aggressive in pricing retail deposits in a crunch typeenvironment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. It is simply discussing a hypothetical scenario and considering the potential actions of banks in that situation.


Passage number 225.
MR. ANGELL. Well, then they have negative margins, don'tthey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Angell is asking for confirmation or clarification by stating "Well, then they have negative margins, don't they?"


Passage number 226.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only provides information about Chairman Volcker without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 227.
 It seems to say that retail deposits aremore volatile than--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think it says that they are notmore volatile, but that in order to keep them the competitivepressures get so intense that banks have to respond by pricing thosedeposits more aggressively.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that retail deposits are more volatile and that, in order to remain competitive, banks have to respond by pricing those deposits more aggressively.


Passage number 228.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is hard for me to see the situation inwhich they would price those deposits more aggressively than themarginal deposits. Mr. Parry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating a personal difficulty in understanding a situation, without any conflicting perspectives or contrasting opinions.


Passage number 229.
MR. PARRY. As I recall our discussion about Ml in July,after lengthy discussion, I think we came to the conclusion that itwould be best to show a range for M1 and that we would stick with thecurrent range and note all the uncertainties associated with it. In1986 we have had very sharp declines in interest rates. We are nowexpecting, at least on the basis of the general discussion, thatinterest rates are going to be flat. So it seems to me that one couldrepeat what we set out as a tentative target and feel a little betterabout it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply recollecting a previous discussion and suggesting a course of action based on that discussion.


Passage number 230.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The argument on the other side--just toput forth the argument--is that if it is going to be so volatile in-19-12/15-16/86either direction, with relatively modest changes in interest rates,does that serve us well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presenting an alternative argument or viewpoint without expressing any disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 231.
MR. MELZER. One thing that struck me in reading this paperis that the advantage of a narrow aggregate is that we can influenceit. When you get out to M2 and M3, our ability to influence issomewhat limited. Just from an operational point of view it isdesirable, at least the way I see things, to have something there thatwe can influence should we choose to do so. The other thing thatstruck me is that the NOW account aspects of Ml are really going tocause ongoing problems in that regard. There may come a time when wewant to go to some more strictly transactional base, whether it is M1Aor some other type of narrow aggregate. This isn't the time, I don'tthink, to lay a new narrow aggregate on the table because there arestill a lot of uncertainties. But I do have this feeling that it is adesirable thing, if we want to choose a regime around a narrowaggregate, that we could control it--that we have the concept of thatintact in some way, in terms of how we set targets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 232.
MR. MORRIS. May I object to that argument. We cannotcontrol M1 unless we do not have an interest rate policy. In otherwords, if we want to have a strict monetarist regime and decide we aregoing to produce X amount of Ml, we can do that, but we have tosurrender any influence over interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In the passage, Mr. Morris is expressing an objection and presenting an alternative viewpoint. He is suggesting that if they want to have control over M1, they would have to give up their influence over interest rates. However, there is no explicit disagreement or contention with any other person or viewpoint in this passage.


Passage number 233.
 You really are going tohave to add that to your operational--MR. ANGELL. That is always the case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement suggesting the necessity of adding something to an operational, and Mr. Angell acknowledges that it is always the case.


Passage number 234.
MR. MORRIS. What's always the case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a transcript of a conversation and does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 235.
MR. ANGELL. If you want to focus strictly on Ml, you havegot to give up interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement made by Mr. Angell, expressing the idea that if one wants to focus strictly on M1 (a measure of money supply), they must give up considering interest rates. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 236.
MR. MORRIS. I would argue that we are never going to give upsome kind of interest rate policy. Nor should we. And, therefore,the idea that M1 is controllable has no merit whatsoever.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing agreement with the idea that interest rate policy should not be given up and that the notion of M1 being controllable is without merit.


Passage number 237.
MR. BOEHNE. There is a value to the monetary aggregates thatgoes beyond the control issue and that is their value as an indicatorvariable. We can use interest rates to control nominal GNP but one ofthe problems is we don't know what nominal GNP is except with aconsiderable lag. Something like M2 can give us information aboutwhat is going on in the economy, in an indicator sense, even though wedon't control it. And it seems to me that there is some value inhaving an indicator variable that has a lag that is shorter thannominal GNP. If you look at M2, it has not been all that bad eventhough we have had a drop in velocity this year. If we had used M2,for example, and had followed it more as an indicator value, it wouldhave signalled the need for lower interest rates during the first partof the year, sooner than in fact we did lower them. And if you lookat it now, what it is signalling is that we don't need furtherreductions in short-term rates at the moment. You have to look at anindicator variable in the context of a whole lot of other things. ButI think one could have a framework for arguing the value, in anindicator sense, of the broader aggregates--both M2 and M3--that isquite separate from this control business.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing the value of monetary aggregates as indicator variables and their usefulness in providing information about the economy, even though they are not directly controlled. They suggest that using M2 as an indicator variable could have signaled the need for lower interest rates earlier in the year and currently indicates that further reductions in short-term rates are not needed. The speaker acknowledges that using indicator variables should be done in the context of other factors, but overall, they see value in using broader aggregates as indicators.


Passage number 238.
12/15-16/86MR. JOHNSON. I can conceive of a time when Ml would be[unintelligible]. I don't want ever to get in a situation like this,but 1979 was a very convenient time for an Ml target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's thoughts and feelings about a potential situation.


Passage number 239.
 It is adisguise, maybe, for a high interest rate policy; but it certainlyavoids a lot of the politics of having to--MR. MORRIS. The broader aggregates would do the same thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement presenting a potential perspective on the situation.


Passage number 240.
MR. JOHNSON. Well, I don't know. If I remember right, M2was right on the target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Johnson is simply expressing his uncertainty about the situation.


Passage number 241.
MR. HELLER. You could go the other way. If you go on thecontrol issue raised by Mr. Melzer, what is wrong with going to themonetary base. Then you have something that is really under ourcontrol, and it probably has been performing better than the currentM1 at least.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the possibility of using the monetary base as a control issue.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 242.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Damning with faint praise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. "Damning with faint praise" is a phrase that indicates subtle criticism or underwhelming praise. It implies that the speaker is not genuinely impressed or supportive of the subject, and therefore there is an underlying contention or disagreement.


Passage number 243.
MR. ANGELL. [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 244.
]MR. JOHNSON. There is something to at least having ameasured narrow aggregate that we can influence, if we can. But Ithink the point is still this: I don't see that the uncertaintiesaround Ml or the base are any more improved than they were when westarted out last year. I realize that we didn't forecast the declinein interest rates that we got last year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Johnson is expressing his opinion and observations about the uncertainties around Ml or the base, without directly contradicting or arguing with anyone else.


Passage number 245.
 I am just saying--MR. HELLER. What about the base. You don't get that kind ofshifting that you get around the artificial line drawn on M1 and [inresponse to] what you call financial deregulation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a clarification or elaboration of a previous statement.


Passage number 246.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You get that kind of shifting; it is justonce removed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing a specific kind of shifting that is described as "just once removed." There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 247.
MR. JOHNSON. That is right. The magnitude is not as great,but it is there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Johnson simply acknowledges the accuracy of a statement without expressing any competing or conflicting views.


Passage number 248.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With shifting into NOW accounts, as Irecall, you get a higher reserve requirement relative to the base, allother things equal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about shifting into NOW accounts resulting in a higher reserve requirement relative to the base.


Passage number 249.
MR. JOHNSON. Definitely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not clearly indicate any contention or disagreement. It merely states that "MR. JOHNSON" is stating something definitively, without providing further information.


Passage number 250.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions the name "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" and does not provide any information or context that would suggest contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 251.
 You don't have to accommodate it but--MR. JOHNSON. Who is to say, Bob, that we won't get a shockwith energy prices or something. What if OPEC--. We could get a bigsurge in interest rates and we would end up looking vicious on M1 andneed to go, as you say, even temporarily to negative rates of growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Johnson raises potential concerns about a possible shock with energy prices or a surge in interest rates, which contradicts the previous statement of not needing to accommodate it.


Passage number 252.
MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that there are several ways wecould go here. But one thing I feel is very important is for themarket to understand that if inflation were to reemerge as a threat wewould move quickly to a monetary aggregate targeting--we would makethat our primary responsibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and stating that if inflation were to become a threat, they would move quickly to a monetary aggregate targeting.


Passage number 253.
 I don't know whether we have it outthere--12/15-16/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody else have anything burning tosay. At this stage I just want to give you a little homework. I waslistening to this and I think we ought not come to any obviously finaljudgments; but it would be very helpful if we had a good sense of theframework in which we should approach the necessary numerology,recognizing that we can't get away from that. Is there any sympathyfor a new narrower aggregate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement or request for input.


Passage number 254.
MR. BLACK. Yes, I have some Mr. Chairman, which I will talkabout tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black simply states that he has something to talk about the following day.


Passage number 255.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there any sympathy for any newaggregate at all. Responses in the morning. I even want a consensusin the morning, as nearly as we can get one. Do we want to have anormal type target for Ml at all. And I would have a sub-question tothat, which may be quite important. In the absence of a normaltarget--which says to me that we have a target of X to Y and if we'reoutside it, we're outside it--is there anything that we would want tosay about movements of M1 in relation to other things, such as thingsthat would alarm us or reassure us. And finally, the question is: Dowe retain M2 and M3. If we answer all those questions with a "no" wedon't have any targets. So you have one constraint on your remarkstomorrow: you can't answer no to all the questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking several questions and requesting a consensus in the morning. These questions pertain to the topic of setting a normal target for M1 and whether or not to retain M2 and M3. While there may be different opinions on these matters, the passage does not indicate any explicit disagreement or contention.


Passage number 256.
[Meeting recessed]12/15-16/86December 16, 1986--Morning SessionMR. BLACK. Did you ask if anybody wanted to comment, Mr.Chairman. At the appropriate time, I would like to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement about someone asking for permission to comment at a later time during a meeting.


Passage number 257.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The appropriate time is [now].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that "now" is the appropriate time, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 258.
MR. BLACK. I don't see much point in setting a range for Mlbecause it has been misbehaving so badly. We could simply omit therange but I think it would be worthwhile if we substituted a range forM1A. I know there are problems with trying to target M1A, just likethere are problems with any of the other aggregates; but the long-runinterest elasticity of M1A reported in the staff paper is low enoughto make it, I think, technically feasible to set a range of 4 to 5percentage points [in width], which is what we have done customarily.It seems to me likely that the interest elasticity of M1A will remainrelatively stable even if the depository institutions began to adjusttheir deposit rates more flexibly in response to changes in marketrates. And I just think that some sort of discipline like that couldbe very useful in reminding the public that we are serious aboutinflation. Also, if we get to the point that we need to tighten up,we are going to need something to [unintelligible]. Remembering backto October 6, 1979, I think a lot of people voted for targeting theaggregates because they thought it provided an excuse to raiseinterest rates more than they otherwise could get away with; and Ithink this kind of aggregate target could be extremely useful in thatcapacity when that time comes, if it ever comes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Black, expresses disagreement with setting a range for M1B but suggests substituting a range for M1A instead. He acknowledges that there are problems with targeting any of the aggregates, but believes that setting a range for M1A could be technically feasible and useful in maintaining discipline and combating inflation. He also mentions that some people may have supported aggregate targets in the past as a way to raise interest rates more than they otherwise could.


Passage number 259.
 I would do thisalong with--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's in large part ex post rationale. Doyou have any studies of the elasticity of M1A as opposed to Ml, Mr.Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is merely asking for studies on a specific topic from Mr. Kohn.


Passage number 260.
MR. KOHN. Yes, we do, Mr. Chairman. I think there is someinformation in the back of the paper--table 3 in Mr. Simpson's memo.You can see that M1A elasticity over a one-year period is roughlycomparable to that of M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that there is information in the back of the paper and provides a reference to support their statement. There is no indication of any disagreement or conflicting views.


Passage number 261.
MR. BLACK. The last paragraph on page 15 is a good one toread on that. For me, it's easier to interpret that sort of thingthan to look at the elasticity tables. It says that a 50 basis pointchange in market interest rates would alter M1A growth and itsvelocity by less than 1/4 of a percentage point at an annual rate inthe short run and about 1/2 of a percentage point over the year--notperfect, but not bad by the standards of the other possibilities, Ithink.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and stating the findings of a certain paragraph.


Passage number 262.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have any confidence, assuming thatone was going to have a target for M1A, about where it should be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about whether there is any confidence in knowing where the target for M1A should be.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 263.
MR. BLACK. I was going to ask Mr. Kohn what he thinks itought to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is potential for disagreement in the passage, as Mr. Black is stating that he wants to ask Mr. Kohn what he thinks the answer should be. This suggests that there may be differing opinions or perspectives on the issue at hand.


Passage number 264.
MR. KOHN. I didn't really think about a target range, Mr.Chairman, but I would say in terms of our experience with M1A over thelast year or two that we have found it not nearly as bad as Ml as apredictor of GNP. It is better, but not that much better. Theproblem here is that demand deposits have been growing even faster-23-12/15-16/86than we would have predicted on the basis of past experience. We havehad about a 9-1/2 percent increase in M1A this year and I think on thebasis of past experience we would have predicted something more on theorder of 6 percent. So we have added, in some sense, an overshoot inour demand deposit growth relative to the growth [unintelligible]. Aswe look at this phenomenon, we see that the current interestelasticity of demand deposits seems to be increasing year by year.Now, I think there are a couple of possibilities here. One is that tothe extent that demand deposits had a large block of sort of "excessdeposits" in them before businesses began to manage them moreefficiently that helped to hold down the elasticity. As cashmanagement has spread into medium and smaller sized businesses, thoseexcess demand deposits are more and more typically out of the demanddeposits and are being held as compensating balances for cashmanagement and other services.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing their observations and interpretations of the data.


Passage number 265.
MR. MORRIS. Do you know if the additional growth is almostentirely in business accounts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking for information.


Passage number 266.
MR. KOHN. Well, yes it would have to be. In our ownershipsurvey, household accounts were about 1/4--I think 26 percent--ofdemand deposits, and that proportion hasn't changed very much. So bydefinition it is primarily businesses that account for the growth.But, returning to the original point, M1A has been better than M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting information and making statements based on that information.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 267.
MR. ANGELL. It also has another feature and that is that itis somewhat more controllable in regard to altering its opportunitycosts, I would presume. Do your studies show that to be the case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "I would presume" suggests that the speaker is not completely convinced by the statement made by Mr. Angell and is seeking evidence or confirmation through further research.


Passage number 268.
MR. KOHN. Well, the market rate is the opportunity cost, theway we look at it, because there isn't an explicit offering rate ondemand deposits. So it's true, as I think President Black said, thatit is not subject to some of the uncertainties that we would see forM1 associated with how depository institutions are going to pricetheir NOW accounts; I think that greatly adds to the uncertainty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining the concept of market rate and how it relates to M1 and NOW accounts.


Passage number 269.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Presumably submerged under this is howdepository institutions price their services.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It presents a statement without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 270.
MR. KOHN. To the extent that there are switches betweencompensating balances and fees, that would affect M1A as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by one individual, Mr. Kohn, about the potential impact of switches between compensating balances and fees on M1A.


Passage number 271.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What interest credit do [they] give.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a question asking for information. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 272.
MR. JOHNSON. It's hard to say that demand deposits have beenless volatile in this whole mess than OCDs. Isn't that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage as the speaker acknowledges that demand deposits have been less volatile than OCDs in the mentioned "mess."


Passage number 273.
MR. KOHN. I'm sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Kohn, is expressing an apology for something.


Passage number 274.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Intellectually, I presume that if you wantto go this way, the excuse would be that we have had all of the shiftfrom demand deposits into NOW accounts that we are going to get andthey are less substitutable at the margin for other types of liquidfunds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement expressing an intellectual presumption or conjecture about the shift from demand deposits to NOW accounts.


Passage number 275.
MR. MELZER. That's what would trouble me. As I saidyesterday, I think it's desirable to have a narrow aggregate, but itwould trouble me to roll another one out right now when there is still12/15-16/86this uncertainty in general about the behavior of velocity. Thatcould not only discredit that aggregate but also could raise questionsabout what we are doing because, when we roll the new one out, we areimplying a higher confidence level in that aggregate and in aggregatestargeting in general.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing personal concern and uncertainty about the behavior of velocity and the potential implications of rolling out a new aggregate targeting.


Passage number 276.
MR. JOHNSON. I think that's a good point. It looks like weare really starting to get desperate--fishing around for something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges the previous point made and agrees with it by stating "I think that's a good point."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 277.
MR. HELLER. That may give you the perfect excuse in a way.You may want to say at the beginning of the year that you are studyingthe possibility of reintroducing narrow monetary aggregates and at thepresent time you are conducting studies to determine if M1A, orsomething along those lines, might be appropriate. If so, at a latermoment in the year you may want to set new targets. Therefore, it'sclear that you want to go back to targets but you avoid having to seta target at the beginning of the year that you will clearly overshoot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Heller, suggests that stating they are studying the possibility of reintroducing narrow monetary aggregates would provide a perfect excuse to avoid setting a target at the beginning of the year that they will clearly overshoot. This implies that there may be disagreement or differing opinions on whether setting a target at the beginning of the year would be beneficial or not.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 278.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. MIA has somewhat peculiar characteristicsto me. It says we are very interested in business demand deposits andcurrency but we don't care what transactions balances individuals holdper se.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that the MIA has a peculiar characteristic in that they prioritize business demand deposits and currency over individuals' transaction balances. This implies a potential disagreement or contention regarding the importance or value placed on different types of accounts or balances.


Passage number 279.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I have a more radical idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that he has a more radical idea without expressing any disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 280.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me recognize Mrs. Horn first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is simply acknowledging and giving recognition to Mrs. Horn without any hint of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 281.
MS. HORN. Well, I agree with many people who think that thisis not the time to set an M1 target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states that Ms. Horn agrees with others who think that this is not the time to set an M1 target.


Passage number 282.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" is simply the name or title of someone and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 283.
 We are only talking now about what we aregoing to do regarding a [new] narrow--MS. HORN. Oh, sorry. That's not what I am talking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply apologizes for not being clear about what they were talking about.


Passage number 284.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will rapidly get to the [Ml] question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase states that the question about Ml will be addressed quickly, indicating a clear and direct intention without any opposing views or conflicting opinions being presented.


Passage number 285.
MR. BLACK. I didn't mean to overstate the case about M1Abecause I don't think it's going to be all that good; I don't thinkanything is going to be all that good. What I would really like tosee us consider is setting inflation targets for the next three yearsor so. I don't have in mind that we would set up any kind ofautomatic operational procedure that would cause us to in any kind ofpredetermined way do something if we deviate from this target. All Iam recommending is that we set forth an explicit objective. I thinkthat would have more than a cosmetic effect because, first of all, itwould help preserve our credibility in the sense that the public wouldknow that we were going to have to take some kind of action to try toget inflation in line if we saw signs that we were deviating from thetarget. The second reason I mentioned a while ago--that it is awfullynice when the time comes that we have to take the unpopular step oftightening to have something that we can point to other than interestrates. If the aggregates are weak, we don't have a lot to point toand something of this sort could give us some political insulation ata time when we need it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Black, is expressing his opinion and making a recommendation, but there is no opposition or contradiction presented.


Passage number 286.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will return to the question a littlelater. Mr. Stern, do you have something [to say] about the new Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they will address the question later and then asking Mr. Stern if he has something to say about the new Ml.


Passage number 287.
12/15-16/86MR. STERN. I was going to say that, from a strategic pointof view, I thought Governor Heller's suggestion was a good one--particularly because I think we ought to take another look at themonetary base as a narrow target. We have some evidence that suggeststhat, at least in recent years, its basic relationship to things likeinterest rates and inflation and output has been more stable than thatof the other aggregates. While I am not prepared at the moment to saythat the evidence is sufficiently convincing to me that I would wantto push it, I do think it's worth some further investigation. Andthat would fit in rather nicely, it seems to me, with the kind ofapproach Governor Heller was suggesting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement from one individual expressing agreement with Governor Heller's suggestion and suggesting further investigation.


Passage number 288.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't detect any strong enthusiasm forintroducing a new narrow monetary aggregate as an actual target atthis point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It seems to be a neutral observation about the lack of strong enthusiasm for introducing a new monetary aggregate as a target.


Passage number 289.
MR. JOHNSON. I would be in favor of continuing to study itif we can, as Governor Heller said. Maybe at midyear if we felt morecomfortable with a narrower target we might look at it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 290.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's return to that. The next question Ihave is: Do we want any new aggregate at all. I think Mr. Morrisproposed one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is continuing the discussion and posing a new question based on a previous proposal.


Passage number 291.
MR. MORRIS. My proposition was that L would be a suitableswap for M1 but only if we wanted to stay with three targets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not indicating any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 292.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The mention of Chairman Volcker does not imply any conflicting perspectives or contradictory information.


Passage number 293.
 Do you push this with enthusiasm or withjust a feeling that if people want to try that we--MR. MORRIS. My thinking is that it is probably a bettermeasure of liquidity than M2 or M3. If I had to choose only one ofthe three I think I would take L.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and reasoning about the measure of liquidity without any opposition or contradiction from others.


Passage number 294.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. L suffers from the grievous defect thatthe figures come in months late.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement simply states a fact that the figures in L come in months late, without indicating any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 295.
MR. MORRIS. But they don't have to. If we wanted an earlyestimate we could get it, I am sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. However, there may be a difference in opinion on whether an early estimate is necessary or useful.


Passage number 296.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would the staff like to comment on L.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Neither yes nor no. The passage does not express any explicit indication of contention or disagreement among the staff. It simply raises the possibility of the staff having a comment without providing further information to determine if there is any disagreement.


Passage number 297.
MR. KOHN. A couple of levels of comments: one is that--returning again to the results we get in looking at L relative to theother aggregates--it looks better in terms of St. Louis type reduced-form regression estimates than the narrow aggregates but about thesame as M2 and M3 in predicting GNP. Before we decide really to pay alot of attention to L, I would like to take a close look at some ofthe data problems. It is supposed to include Treasury securitiesunder one year that are in the hands of the public, outside thebanking system. We don't know quite how many Treasury securitiesunder one year are in the hands of the banking system because theTreasury used to run a survey on that and they don't anymore. Itdoesn't include agency securities, for example, because we are notsure how many agency securities are out there [in the hands of thepublic], although it does include commercial paper. It has some verypeculiar things; I think it has a lot of data problems. We probablycould work around some of them, but my temptation would be to work on12/15-16/86those data problems and also on getting more timely information beforewe get serious about L.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Kohn, is expressing his opinion and concerns about the data problems related to the aggregate L. He suggests working on resolving those issues before giving significant attention to L.


Passage number 298.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody else have any views on L orany other broad aggregate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply asks if anyone has any views on a specific topic, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 299.
MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, maybe what we should do is setthe M2 and M3 targets in conformity with the Humphrey-Hawkins Act andhave staff study a menu of possible aggregates--M1A, L, and whateverelse people think might be appropriate--and try to deal with thatlater in 1987.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 300.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage provided.


Passage number 301.
 I do not detect anystrong urge for adopting L as of--MS. SEGER. We ought to go back to targeting interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not include any explicit disagreement or contention. It is a statement expressing the lack of a perceived urge for adopting a certain approach. The second sentence suggests an alternative approach without opposing the first statement directly.


Passage number 302.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Too radical. Let me just take myquestions out of order. Does everybody agree with what seems to bethe implicit assumption of some people that we will have an M2 and M3target in the traditional form.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion or reaction to a statement without engaging in an argument or conflicting with others.


Passage number 303.
MR. BLACK. Since we can't accept anything else, I would beafraid to throw those out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black is expressing caution or fear about discarding something but does not seem to be disagreeing with anyone else in the conversation.


Passage number 304.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess we have that assumption on M2 andM3. So the other question is what we do with Ml. I think there is aquestion, clearly, as to whether we should have an M1 target, statedas either a target or monitoring range, in the form in which we havehad but didn't initially [adopt in July]. Do we want to say anythingabout Ml. We can obviously say some things that have been suggestedabout looking at various alternatives and studying these things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing whether or not to have an M1 target and suggests considering alternatives and studying the topic further. There is an open question or uncertainty, but no clear disagreement is expressed.


Passage number 305.
MR. BOEHNE. I don't think we can have Ml as a normal target.I think that is fairly clear and obvious, given all the problems. ButI do think there are some advantages to keeping it as a monitoringrange, for the simple reason that it may be useful to us sometime inthe future under a different set of circumstances than we have now.It also has the advantage of some history, so we aren't rolling outsomething new. We can say that it once worked; it's not working now,but it may work in the future. And I would couch it in terms of: Hereis a range; we don't have a whole lot of confidence that we can hit itbut we want to keep it on the shelf so that we can use it; it wouldonly be used in the context of a whole lot of other information, sodon't think that a deviation from the target in and of itself meansthat we are going to change policy; it's in a state that we are goingto look at it and we may bring it back to play a more useful role.So, I am for a monitoring range with some kind of numerical values tothat range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing his own opinion and suggesting that keeping Ml as a monitoring range could be advantageous in the future.


Passage number 306.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine without the passage provided.


Passage number 307.
MR. KEEHN. I would be in favor of continuing to follow Mland certainly reporting on it, but I would be a little reluctant tore-establish the range at this point because the results are going tovary, probably, from whatever we target. And as we go through theyear, if the relationships tend to re-emerge and/or if GNP growth orinflation growth were to begin to move away on the high side, then at-27-12/15-16/86that point I would re-establish the range to use it effectively. ButI'd establish a range that seems appropriate at that time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's personal opinion and approach to the topic.


Passage number 308.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any context or further information. The given passage only contains the name "Mr. Guffey" and does not provide any additional information or statements that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 309.
MR. GUFFEY. I would join those who would opt to maintain M1as an aggregate and also to set a monitoring range. To be sure, I'dadopt language not unlike what we have done in most recent times--thatis, that we will pay attention to it, but only in relationship to M2,M3, and other developments--and as a result keep it in front of thepublic for purposes of going back to it sometime in the future, whichI'm convinced we will have to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Guffey expresses his agreement with the idea of maintaining M1 as an aggregate and setting a monitoring range. He also suggests that they adopt language similar to what has been done in the past. Overall, his comments support the idea of keeping M1 in front of the public for future consideration.


Passage number 310.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 311.
MR. FORRESTAL. I would agree with Si Keehn. That is to say,I would keep M1 for its informational value and because we might needit in the future. I wouldn't want to set a range for it because Ithink it's getting a little embarrassing and boring trying to explainwhy we keep missing it. Moreover, the market seems--and as far as Ican tell the Congress seems--fairly comfortable with our stance on Ml;so I don't think we have a lot to lose by keeping it [for itsinformational value] and just dropping the range entirely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Forrestal, agrees with Si Keehn and expresses his own opinion on the matter, stating that he would keep M1 for its informational value and because it might be needed in the future. He also mentions that it is not necessary to set a range for it as it is becoming difficult to explain why they keep missing it. He further adds that the market and Congress seem to be comfortable with their stance on M1, so there is not much to lose by keeping it for its informational value and dropping the range completely.


Passage number 312.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 313.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The idea that I am fooling with is avariation on several themes here. First of all, I do want to keep M1in the ball game, even if it is on the bench, partly because when Ilook at the behavior of M2 and M3 it seems that they basically growwithin a 6 to 9 percent range, regardless of what's going on in theeconomy, inflation, interest rates, or anything else. There's acertain amount of comfort that you can draw from that, in that youhave a good chance of hitting the targets but not much comfort interms of what hitting the targets may mean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is just discussing their idea and their thoughts on M1, M2, and M3. There is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 314.
 The thought I had wouldbe to keep the M2 target, and presentationally--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The M2 target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is about a single thought, which is to keep the M2 target. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 315.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Keep M2, M3, and maybe a monitoringrange for debt like we have had in the past. Presentationally, what Ihad in mind is that they would be prominently displayed in the boxthat is always part of the testimony. Also in that box in a prominentplace we could have a brief paragraph that would say something like"While the Committee has not adopted a formal target for M1 for 1987,it will continue to monitor its behavior closely. Consistent withthat, the Committee expects that in the context of GNP growth of, say,6 percent and relatively stable interest rates, Ml growth should be ina range of 4 to 8 percent." And then add something along these lines:"However, in the unlikely event that income is growing rapidly andvelocity is increasing the Committee might be prepared to re-establisha target [for Ml]." You could maybe combine that idea with GovernorHeller's suggestion and broaden it to say something to the effect thatin the intervening period the Committee is restudying theserelationships and definitions and so on. Some notion like that hassome appeal to me, both presentationally and substantively, even if itdoes mean that Ml in some sense is on the bench rather than in theball game.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 316.
12/15-16/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Parry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, the passage does not contain contention or disagreement. There is no conflicting or opposing information presented. The passage simply provides a date and a name without any further context or details.


Passage number 317.
MR. PARRY. I basically agree with what Jerry said. It seemsto me that having Ml still play a role--and with a range--makes somesense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker states that they agree with someone else and explains their reasoning, indicating agreement rather than disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 318.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not sure you are agreeing with him.Maybe you can be more explicit. I am not sure whether you are or youaren't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement or contention in the passage. The speaker states that they are not sure if the other person is agreeing with someone else. This implies a lack of consensus or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 319.
MR. PARRY. Well, he stated a range. He even stated aspecific range for Ml, but a monitoring range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of fact about Mr. Parry stating a range for Ml in a monitoring range.


Passage number 320.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That seems to be somewhat different.Perhaps it's more nuances--. If I understood Mr. Corrigan, he saiddon't present a range even as a monitoring range; present one as afootnote under certain assumptions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is acknowledging that there might be a slight difference in perspective but is not expressing any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 321.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It's a little more than a footnote.I'd have it in a prominent place in that box that is always the focalpoint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: This passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states an opinion about the placement of something.


Passage number 322.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have a little difficulty visualizingyour paragraph as part of a box.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 323.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I added in close physical proximityto the part that lays out the quantitative targets for M2 and M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "close physical proximity" is simply providing additional information about the specific area or section being referred to.


Passage number 324.
MR. HELLER. An off-balance-sheet item.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement of fact about an off-balance-sheet item. There are no conflicting viewpoints or arguments presented.


Passage number 325.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. An off-balance-sheet item.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or argument that could be debated or disagreed upon. It simply states the term "off-balance-sheet item," without offering any additional explanation or presenting any contrasting perspectives.


Passage number 326.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Johnson.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context about Governor Johnson, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 327.
MR. JOHNSON. That is an interesting possibility, but myviews are even more basic. I would simply explain the problems wehave had with M1 and then say that, given those problems and theuncertainties that still lie ahead on M1, we are undertaking a studyon narrow aggregates in general but that under the circumstances nowwe are only publishing an M2 and M3 target. Perhaps at midyear whenwe have had more evidence on whether velocity has stabilized for someof these narrower aggregates, we would have a chance to choose one ofthem--and maybe Ml is the one again--and we might publish a new targetrange. I don't see that it serves us any good purpose to have a rangeat all for the first six months of the year. As a matter of fact, ifwe published a range, I think we would all feel uncomfortable sayingthat we ought to have a range that includes 12 or 13 percent growthfor Ml, even though that has been the experience [because] ofvelocity; I think we would be constrained to want to say somethinglike 5 to 8 percent or 6 to 9 percent. And then we would run into thesame potential problems, it seems to me, of running above the targetsinitially in the year and having the markets ask: What's the Fed goingto do about Ml. Even if they don't believe we will do much, it couldbe a matter of weeks that they are uncertain about it. It couldaffect the markets in a way that I don't think we would really want.So, I would be in favor of announcing that we still think there is animportant function for a narrow aggregate but we are going to studythe issue; it could be that M1A or some other narrow measure responds12/15-16/86better than Ml. And we could also get a better feel for velocitylater. But I am for going with an M2 and M3 target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Johnson is presenting his views and suggesting a course of action, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflict with others.


Passage number 328.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ms. Seger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no information provided in the passage, therefore it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 329.
MS. SEGER. Unfortunately, my view is the same as it was lastJuly--which was that we should not publish an M1 target range becausethe aggregate was behaving so weirdly. I felt that it would--and as amatter of fact it did--confuse the financial markets and marketparticipants, regardless of how many qualifications we put out with itand despite our saying that we were not paying as much attention to itas we used to. As long as it can be graphically presented everyFriday by The Wall Street Journal and The New York Times, people willpay attention to it. Those footnotes don't get transmitted becausenewspapers don't transmit everything and the readers don't want all ofthat baggage. They are looking for easy answers. So I would go alongwith Governor Johnson's view that it's best not to establish a rangefor it now but to indicate that we are doing a thorough study of thisand looking for some sort of narrow aggregate. I would publish an M2and M3 range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. Ms. Seger is expressing disagreement with the idea of publishing an M1 target range, stating that it would confuse the financial markets and market participants. She argues that people pay attention to the M1 range because it is graphically presented in media outlets and that the footnotes specifying qualifications and changes in attention are ignored. Instead, she agrees with Governor Johnson's view of not establishing a range for M1 but indicating a thorough study and focusing on narrow aggregates such as M2 and M3.


Passage number 330.
MR. JOHNSON. An afterthought on what I said is one thing onthe other side too. If we were to establish something like a 5 to 8percent or a 6 to 9 percent monitoring range, and if we did have anupsurge or sudden increase in velocity, it could really be just asappropriate to be thinking of 2 or 3 percent money growth. We wouldbe just as constrained by the minimum on that range as the upper side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Johnson is simply discussing different percentages and their potential implications, without expressing any opposing views or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 331.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. What I am talking about does notcontemplate a range in that sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact or opinion without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 332.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's come back to that. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The phrase "Let's come back to that" indicates a willingness to revisit a topic or idea, suggesting a sense of agreement or openness rather than contention or disagreement. The mention of "Mr. Morris" does not introduce any contrasting or conflicting viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 333.
MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, if I read Mr. Corrigan and some ofthe others who have spoken up for a monitoring range correctly, itreflects a feeling that at some point in time we may face another 1979situation and that at that point we will be able to resurrect M1 againand pursue a more restrictive policy than we otherwise would have beenable to do because of the mystique attached to Ml. I think that's nota very realistic proposition. I think Ml did have that kind ofmystique in 1979 but it certainly doesn't have it now. If we go tothe Congress and say we can't have M1 growing more than 9 percent,they are going to say: Well, you let it grow at 15 percent in 1986 andin 4 out of 5 years in the 1980s you didn't meet your target andnothing happened. Why do you think you have to meet an M1 target thisyear. I don't think you can put M1 back in the box and pull it outthat easily anymore.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris disagrees with the idea that resurrecting M1 as a monitoring range would be an effective strategy. He argues that the mystique attached to M1 in 1979 no longer exists and that it would be difficult to convince Congress to support a more restrictive policy based on M1.


Passage number 334.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You don't want a range, I take it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is making an assumption based on the understanding that the person they are addressing does not want a range. There is no disagreement or contention evident in the passage.


Passage number 335.
MR. MORRIS. No sir.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 336.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Angell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage only mentions Governor Angell and does not provide any information about disagreement or contention.


Passage number 337.
MR. ANGELL. Ml is not going to go away. We are not going tokeep a chart out of The Wall Street Journal or The New York Times. Ipresume we are going to continue to release weekly figures, four-weekaverages, so it's there. I think too much attention has been given to-30-12/15-16/86it. I prefer that we keep it as a monitoring range. I would prefernot to change it; to tinker with the numbers is like tinkering withM1A. We are not going to tinker with the numbers and have them belarge enough that we have a chance of being within them. So, I wouldlike to have a monitoring range, a historic range that we have beenusing, and simply indicate to the market that there may come a timewhen M1's velocity will return to this more historic relationship.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Angell, is expressing his preference to keep the monitoring range for M1 and not to change the numbers. He believes that too much attention has been given to M1 and he wants to maintain the historic relationship.


Passage number 338.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Melzer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contentious or disagreement. It simply mentions Mr. Melzer without providing any further information or context.


Passage number 339.
MR. MELZER. That is essentially where I would be. I wouldset a range and then put language around it like we did in Julyindicating that we wouldn't necessarily expect to hit it. Inconnection with that, that's where we could bring in Governor Heller'spoint that because of the interest elasticity of Ml, we are looking atother narrower aggregates that would have less elasticity. I don'tthink we have lost a lot of credibility by having the range and thennot meeting it. My own view is that it doesn't create a lot confusionin the marketplace as to what we are doing. I think when the marketgets worried about rapid M1 growth, it may well be against thebackdrop of other developments like, say, a weak dollar, a steeperyield curve, and so forth. They're not making judgments about rapidM1 growth solely based on what our range is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is discussing one person's opinion and view on setting a range for M1 growth and its potential impact on the market.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 340.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is not enough context provided to determine the specific reason for the contention or disagreement in the passage involving Mr. Stern.


Passage number 341.
MR. STERN. My preference would be to go without a range forMl, basically for some of the reasons already mentioned--that we thinkthe relationships between M1 and the other economic variables wereally care about have broken down or at least we don't understandthem very well. To set a range in that context, it seems to me, isdifficult and hard to justify. I certainly would not be uncomfortablewith some language to the effect that we are going to continue towatch what happens with M1 and evaluate it along with a variety ofother incoming information. As a kind of fallback position, it seemsto me that if we are going to set some sort of range it ought to besomewhat more realistic than the ranges we have been adopting, simplybecause I don't think we are achieving very much by specifying rangesthat our best estimates suggest are going to be too low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Stern is expressing his preference and suggesting a course of action, but there is no disagreement or debate with any other person or viewpoint.


Passage number 342.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information in your question to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage involving Mr. Boykin. Please provide the passage or more details.


Passage number 343.
MR. BOYKIN. I agree pretty much with what Tom Melzer hasjust said. I would set a range and I would try to explain it. Itseems to me that whatever credibility we had on Ml we have lost. Themarkets have adjusted to that loss of credibility. They seem to beaccepting the fact that we don't know. If we come up with somethingelse, it would be an implication that we know what we are doing. Ifwe lose on that, we double our credibility loss. I would rather ridewith what we have for a while and, obviously, be looking for betterways. But I guess I have not heard anything proposed that gives me alot of confidence that it would be any better than what we have beendoing over the last several months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Boykin, expresses agreement with Tom Melzer's statements and explains his own perspective on the situation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 344.
MS. HORN. Mr. Chairman, I am with those who think we shouldnot set a target range for Ml but I suppose, in the end, a monitoringrange is a possibility. The words that we associate with what we dowith M1--and for that matter with monetary targeting in general--I12/15-16/86think are very important. And I would like to see some words thatmaybe go back a bit to Bob Black's point about the targeting ofinflation, or just some words that say monetary targeting is not anobjective of the Federal Reserve System--that whether it's Ml, M2 orM3, we are not expecting to control the aggregates, but we are settingranges that we think are consistent with such and such a pattern ofprices, employment, and total spending. I would indicate that,basically, we began setting target ranges publicly and inCongressional testimony as a way of assuring the Congress and thepublic that we were in fact intent on getting to a certain point withinflation, and that at the moment the connection between monetarytargets and inflation is not what it used to be, and that we aretalking here about what monetary targets we think are consistent withour ultimate objective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Ms. Horn expresses her disagreement with setting a target range for M1, but suggests that a monitoring range is a possibility. She also disagrees with the idea of monetary targeting as an objective of the Federal Reserve System, instead suggesting that they set ranges consistent with certain economic factors. Overall, Ms. Horn disagrees with the idea of targeting specific monetary aggregates and believes that the connection between monetary targets and inflation has changed.


Passage number 345.
MR. BOEHNE. May I make a comment on the suggestions forstudies. If Don Kohn checks his files, I think he will find a wholestack of studies that we have done on this particular topic. I thinkour words ought to be couched in terms of "we will continue to studythis subject on an ongoing basis" rather than make a reference to anew major study that we hope will somehow enable us to find the truth,because six months or a year from now, when the results of this studycome out, I think they may be somewhat disappointing. I just don'tthink we want to set ourselves up for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. Mr. Boehne is simply making a suggestion about how to phrase the language regarding future studies.


Passage number 346.
MR. JOHNSON. Well, we can always say we studied it anddidn't find anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement suggests that there is a shared understanding or agreement among the people involved.


Passage number 347.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did you express yourself explicitly onthis subject, Governor Heller.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking Governor Heller if he expressed himself explicitly on a subject.


Passage number 348.
MR. HELLER. Yes. I would stay away from setting an explicittarget right now and then note that we are thinking of re-establishinga target at some later time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting not setting a specific target at the moment and considering establishing one later.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 349.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have a range of opinion. I don'tsee anybody saying we should have a target of the traditional type, asopposed to a monitoring range. I will make a couple of observations.I think I am repeating what other people said but--even setting fortha monitoring range the way we did [in July] or as we do for debt Idon't think is very helpful, because we are likely to be either wayabove or, in some conditions, way below. I would hate to be in aposition where every indication was to tighten up and we've got all ofthese interest elasticity [unintelligible]. I'm not particularlyexpecting that in the short run but, over time, we may want to tightenup and if we have great interest elasticity and M1 runs low peoplewill say: You are running below that 5 percent target, how can youpossibly tighten up under those conditions. So I have a real concernin both directions about setting forth a target, even a monitoringrange, just pure and simple.I share some of the concerns about promising too much from astudy. I would suggest that we say we are going to get back to it atmidyear. It seems likely that the study is going to show that almostanything we look at has a lot of interest elasticity and that gives usthe problem that we are not going to be in any position--. Obviously,nobody can oppose a study. It's just a matter of the way it's stated,as Mr. Boehne just said. However, I think we can say something that12/15-16/86would be useful. And that probably would be something along thelines--I haven't quite visualized a box, but that's a subsidiarypoint--that we think we know something about Ml and how it behaves ina very broad way. I think we probably could say something like: undernormal or specified conditions, we would think it would rise at a pacesomewhat around nominal GNP and we think that a nominal GNP--I'm notsure I'd state it quite this way--of around 5-1/2 or 6 percent isappropriate. And if interest rates weren't changing, that's what wewould expect. But if other things happened and interest rates wentup, we would expect M1 to run low, and the public shouldn't besurprised by that; if interest rates were declining and the economywas soft, we would expect M1 to run high. If inflation is down, wewouldn't be disturbed by a higher figure; if inflation is rising andinterest rates are rising, we wouldn't be disturbed by a lower figure.Everyone ought to understand that that's the way we will appraise Ml--as a kind of supplementary device to the other targets, withoutputting it in the box, or setting a monitoring range per se. We mightfootnote it or something. I don't know how much one can say in a box.It's a visual point, but I think we could have a useful discussion ofM1 indicating the kinds of conditions under which we would bedisturbed or not disturbed by a big slowdown or a greater increase.That might be more useful than anything else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage includes different opinions and concerns about setting a target or monitoring range for M1. Some individuals express concern about setting a target or range, while others suggest providing a broad understanding of how M1 behaves under different economic conditions.


Passage number 350.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I didn't mean literally within thebox. All I meant to say is that I thought it should not be buried onpage 28 of the testimony--that it should get some prominence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is an explanation clarifying the intended meaning of a previous statement.


Passage number 351.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Page 16.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, could you please provide the passage from page 16 so that I can determine if there is any contention or disagreement?


Passage number 352.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. You know what I mean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage is a direct question and does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 353.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we could have a discussion of Ml.Maybe we could mention studies and all of this other stuff. I didn'tlook at it very carefully, but I think we could say that we are notignoring it, but that we find ourselves unable just to give a simplerange that encompasses all the significance of it. [How we view] itwould depend upon circumstances, and we can try to describe thecircumstances. The trouble is that this is getting too complicated,obviously. The basic point that we would make is that we think M1 hasa lot of interest elasticity and an increase or a decrease should notbe a surprise if there are changes in interest rates that may beappropriate for other reasons.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the possibility of having a discussion about Ml (presumably a topic related to economics or finance) and expressing their thoughts on the matter. They mention the need to consider studies and circumstances and acknowledge that the topic may be complicated. They also state their belief that changes in interest rates could affect M1. Overall, there is no clear disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 354.
MR. ANGELL. But, of course, without a change in interestrates now for four months, where we normally have an interestelasticity problem, it seems we also may have an increase in demandfor financial assets that may continue even in a period of stableinterest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a possibility or potential scenario that could occur.


Passage number 355.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that is correct. If you thoughtthat was a great big possibility, unlike those nice little equationsMr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges agreement by saying "I think that is correct."


Passage number 356.
 Kohn has, the less you can say about it or the more vaguely yousay anything--MR. BLACK. I think Jerry's concern is that if you bury ittoo deeply then you may not be able to exhume it if you need it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is just expressing a concern about burying something deeply and potentially being unable to retrieve it in the future.


Passage number 357.
12/15-16/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what "exhume it if you needit" means. If it really has a lot of interest elasticity, I am notsure what the exhumation means.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not presenting any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing confusion and lack of understanding about the meaning of "exhume it if you need it" and is unsure about the implications of exhumation in relation to interest elasticity.


Passage number 358.
MR. BLACK. Well, that may change some over time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black simply suggests that something may change over time, without any conflicting opinions or conflicting ideas being expressed.


Passage number 359.
 I hope--MR. JOHNSON. The one thing that might be possible, if wewant to have any kind of picture at all to illustrate it, would be tohave two sets of parallel lines imposed on the same graph instead ofhaving a cone shaped target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Instead, there is a suggestion or idea being proposed, but no conflicting viewpoints are presented.


Passage number 360.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Have three-dimensional graphs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention about three-dimensional graphs. It simply states the existence of three-dimensional graphs without providing any additional context or opinions.


Passage number 361.
MR. JOHNSON. You wouldn't need a three-dimensional graph;you could have one inside the other. One would be associated withstable interest rates and the other would be associated with volatileinterest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Johnson is suggesting that instead of using a three-dimensional graph, one could have one graph inside the other, with each graph representing different scenarios associated with stable or volatile interest rates.


Passage number 362.
MR. HELLER. Make it out of rubber.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. It is a simple request to make something out of rubber.


Passage number 363.
MR. ANGELL. One thing we might do is, without any monitoringrange, to suggest that the Federal Open Market Committee mightreinstitute quarterly ranges at any time that it deemed appropriate.That would give us the chance, in case circumstances changed wherebywe believed that we had an inflationary tension that neededcorrecting, we could then institute a quarterly target without settingup an annual target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting a course of action without any opposing views being presented.


Passage number 364.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That is kind of the thought that Iwould mention at the end of what I suggested: that the range we haveisn't really a monitoring range in the sense that we have used thatterm historically; it's just a statement of what we would expect tohappen in somewhat normal conditions. But we could add on to that thethought that, in a context in which GNP, velocity, and inflation wererising, the Committee would be prepared to reconsider Ml as a target--or something like that without being specific about a quarterlytarget.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 365.
MR. ANGELL. Even though I asked for a monitoring range, I amhappy to join this consensus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that they are happy to join the consensus, indicating agreement and cooperation.


Passage number 366.
MR. BOEHNE. Instead of monitoring range, maybe a better termwould be an observation area, or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting a different term to use instead of "monitoring range," but there is no opposing view or conflict present.


Passage number 367.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, implicit in what I am saying,anyway, is that we will continue to observe Ml. I don't know exactlywhat the right wording is, but we would observe it within someanalytic framework, if we could state it. [Unintelligible], I'mafraid, unless Mr. Kohn can give me a little more reassurance than hegave me yesterday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about the wording and asking for reassurance, but there is no actual disagreement or opposing viewpoints present.


Passage number 368.
MR. KOHN. I think the model would say it's close to onepercent, but I think it's still in a period of evolution.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kohn is simply expressing his opinion about the evolution of the model's accuracy.


Passage number 369.
MR. MORRIS. Plus or minus one percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Plus or minus one percent" does not introduce any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions. It simply adds a range or margin of error to a numerical value.


Passage number 370.
MR. KOHN. Plus one percent, in terms of velocity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only states a numerical value without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 371.
-34-12/15-16/86MR. JOHNSON. Adjusted for income and interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states that something has been adjusted for income and interest rates.


Passage number 372.
MR. KOHN. Well, adjusted for interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 373.
MR. BLACK. Don, how likely do you think it will be thateventually we will get to the point where these rates paid on othercheckable deposits will vary pretty directly with market rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is potential for contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of "how likely do you think" suggests that there may be differing opinions on the likelihood of other checkable deposit rates varying directly with market rates. Different individuals may have different perspectives or beliefs on this matter.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 374.
MR. KOHN. I think that's possible but, as I indicatedyesterday, I think some of the interest elasticity that we areobserving now may be exaggerated. If the offering rates begin to moveup or down with market rates then we would observe what the elasticityis with respect to market rates. But it's still going to be verysubstitutable, at the margin, with other closely related deposits. Idon't think that we will get back to where we were before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Kohn, suggests that the interest elasticity observed may be exaggerated, while also mentioning the possibility of offering rates moving up or down with market rates. This indicates a disagreement or differing opinion on the current state and future behavior of interest elasticity.


Passage number 375.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I sense we have gone about as far as wecan go on this subject this morning. I have a little work to dobefore the next meeting. Does anybody want to express any views, in avery preliminary way, about the M2 and M3 targets that we settled ontentatively last time. What were they: 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent [forboth]. Does that still seem about right or does anybody have a strongview for something different than that. This would be very tentativeat this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for input or opinions on a specific topic.


Passage number 376.
MR. MORRIS. I have been trying to think about why it is thatthe broader aggregates, including L, have been growing more rapidlyrelative to the nominal GNP. The only thing that I have been able tocome up with is that in recent years, with the decline in interestrates, we have had a big increase in the value of financial assets inthe hands of consumers and businesses--a big increase in stock pricesand bond prices also. In fact, financial assets have been growingmore rapidly than nominal GNP. So if an investor wanted to maintainliquid assets at a constant proportion of his portfolio and the otherfinancial assets were growing more rapidly than GNP then his liquidassets would have to grow faster than nominal GNP as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is offering their own analysis and explanation for a phenomenon and there is no indication of conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 377.
 Now,whether that is the answer to it, I don't know, but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Your projection [would be] that if we hada great crash and stock prices went down people would want to holdless liquidity then, if your argument is symmetrical.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not suggest any contention or disagreement. It merely presents a hypothetical situation and expresses uncertainty about the outcome.


Passage number 378.
MR. MORRIS. They would, certainly; if we had a greatdepression then liquidity would go down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is making a statement about a hypothetical situation and its potential impact on liquidity.


Passage number 379.
MR. ANGELL. What kind of depression.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not include any contention or disagreement. It consists of a single speaker asking a question without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 380.
MR. MORRIS. [Unintelligible.] What Paul is talking about isa great crash.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of a speaker addressing someone named Paul and mentioning a topic or event called "a great crash."


Passage number 381.
MR. ANGELL. I thought you said great deflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their understanding or interpretation of a previous statement.


Passage number 382.
MR. MORRIS. Well, a stock market crash would lead to areduction in the rate of growth of liquid assets, even if people triedto improve their position or maintain it. If incomes are dropping,that's going to be difficult to do. But if that theory has anyvalidity to it--and I am not sure it does--it means that when thefinancial assets start growing at about the same rate as nominal GNP,12/15-16/86you would expect that the liquid assets would go back to their priorgrowth rates relative to nominal GNP. I don't know whether this makesany sense to you, Don, or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is unsure about the validity of a theory and is simply stating their thoughts and uncertainties.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 383.
MR. KOHN. Those wealth variables we have do, I think, havebearing on M2 growth and on the broad aggregates; it makes some sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 
There is contention or disagreement in the passage because the speaker (Mr. Kohn) expresses doubt or skepticism about the relationship between wealth variables and M2 growth and broad aggregates, suggesting that it only "makes some sense."


Passage number 384.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does this lead you to the conclusion thatthe targets should be changed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is a straightforward question asking for the reader's opinion or conclusion based on the information provided.


Passage number 385.
MR. MORRIS. It leads me to conclude that we probably shouldnot reduce the ranges for the broader aggregates. My tentative ideawas to cut half of one percent from the 6 to 9 percent range for thisyear. I don't see that there is any case for doing that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris states his conclusion that the ranges for the broader aggregates should not be reduced and expresses his tentative idea to cut half of one percent from a specific range. Additionally, he mentions that he doesn't see a case for doing so. Overall, there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 386.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you can argue the opposite on thebasis of your knowledge.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is potential for contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "you can argue the opposite" implies that there is room for debate or differing opinions based on the person's knowledge.


Passage number 387.
MR. MORRIS. Not, I think, while interest rates are stillhigh relative to the inflation rate. If you promise that interestrates are going to continue to move toward their normal relationshipto the inflation rate, and if that stays low, then you would expectthe value of financial assets to continue to rise relative to GNP fora while.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Morris about the relationship between interest rates, inflation, and the value of financial assets.


Passage number 388.
MR. HELLER. Mr. Morris makes an important point there,because I think it really explains a lot of the past behavior that wehave seen. The trouble with it is that if you are trying to use itfor forecasting purposes you first have to forecast what the stockmarket and the bond market are going to do, and that's probably justas tough as anything else that we've seen. But you can get morestable functions that way; I fully agree with you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Heller is agreeing with Mr. Morris and expanding on his point.


Passage number 389.
MR. JOHNSON. There may be some reason to believe that. Idon't know how long this stock adjustment will go on either, becauseof the change in the environment, but it wouldn't bother me--and itmight give off an important message--if we could find a way to lowerthose broader targets a bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Johnson is simply expressing a personal opinion and indicating that it wouldn't bother him if the broader targets were lowered.


Passage number 390.
MR. BLACK. Particularly if we drop the M1 target, I think ithas a message there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply expresses an opinion and suggests that there is a message to be found if the M1 target is dropped.


Passage number 391.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Parry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I am unable to answer your question without the passage you are referring to. Could you please provide the passage so that I can assist you?


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 392.
MR. PARRY. Under the assumption of little or no change ininterest rates in 1987 and the kind of nominal growth that isincorporated in the staff's forecast, on the basis of the staff'sanalysis and some analysis that we have done we think we would getgrowth of M2 and M3 at the lower end of the tentative ranges. Infact, we got 5 to 6 percent on M2 and 6 to 7 percent on M3. It seemsto me that one could argue for perhaps a 1/2 percentage pointreduction in the existing tentative targets [for 1987]--to somewherearound 5 to 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. Mr. Parry is suggesting a reduction in the existing tentative targets for 1987, which implies a disagreement with the current targets.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 393.
MR. MORRIS. Well, maybe that's something that we need to getfurther counseling on from Mr. Kohn--[whether his work] indicates thathalf of one percentage point is not a matter of major consequence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. This passage presents a disagreement on whether a half of one percentage point is a matter of major consequence. Mr. Morris suggests that further counseling is needed to determine if Mr. Kohn's work indicates this, indicating that there is contention or disagreement on the matter.


Passage number 394.
12/15-16/86VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I would just make the observationthat for every one of those financial assets there is a financialliability, too. One of our problems, looking a little beyond M2 and8-1/2 or 9 percent is the liability structure of the economy as awhole. In some ways it is what's driving the increase in some ofthese asset-based measures. And I think that is still a major concernover the long haul. That's one of the things that creates apreference on my part to try and shave off that half point, eventhough I am under no illusions about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply making an observation and expressing their concern about the liability structure of the economy. There is no opposing viewpoint or argument present.


Passage number 395.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Shave it more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 396.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It only mentions the position and name of Vice Chairman Corrigan.


Passage number 397.
 No, just shave the half pointbecause in the long run--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Keep it where we have it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The statement suggests maintaining the current position without any opposing viewpoint or conflicting argument. It simply proposes to keep things as they are.


Passage number 398.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanantion: There is contention or disagreement in the passage indicated by opposing points of view or conflicting ideas. Without the actual passage, it is not possible to provide a detailed explanation.


Passage number 399.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Angell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage.


Passage number 400.
MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that we have no evidence that1987 is going to be substantially different from 1986. I look at the1986 M2 and M3 target bands and see that in January and February wewere running a little below. And if we want them as targets I presumethat means that when they run low we ought to be easing; andhindsight, I think, would tell us that it would have been okay to havesome accommodation in that [early 1986] period. But we also found aperiod of time when we ran up to the 9 percent range. Now, if wewanted to be at 8-1/2 percent--if the targets mean anything--we wouldhave to say that we should have screwed it down a little tighter inJuly and August and September. I am not sure that there is evidenceof that [being desirable]. I would prefer not to get into wishfulthinking about bringing the M2 and M3 [ranges] down until we haveevidence. I might be persuaded at the February meeting that 8-1/2percent and 5-1/2 percent are satisfactory, but hindsight mightsuggest that 9 percent may not have been too bad.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Angell is simply stating his thoughts and observations about the targets and the need for evidence before making any decisions.


Passage number 401.
MR. PARRY. But the forecast for 1987 is quite different thanthe experience for 1986 in terms of interest rates, and that's one ofthe most significant factors in determining the growth of theaggregates. So why wouldn't that make a difference in your view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Parry is simply posing a question and expressing his view on the impact of interest rates on the growth of aggregates.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 402.
MR. ANGELL. But if you went back a year ago and asked theFOMC what its interest rate forecast was, some of what has happenedmay have been unexpected. It may very well be that we do not knowwhether the economy, for sure, is going to be growing at a 4 percentreal path--or 3 percent, or even 1-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage states that there may have been unexpected events in the past year and uncertainties about the future growth rate of the economy. This suggests that there is contention or disagreement about the accuracy of previous interest rate forecasts and the future growth of the economy.


Passage number 403.
MR. PARRY. Yes, but you have to base your determination onexpected values and we are expecting--or at least the staff forecastis--that there will be no change in rates. If one thought that rateswere coming down, that would certainly give a lot of reason to supportthat. If you buy the idea that rates were not going to change verymuch, why wouldn't you expect a significant slowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement explaining the reasoning behind a certain belief.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 404.
MR. ANGELL. Well, because I am not so sure that the economywill be growing at a 3 percent real path or a 6 percent nominal path.12/15-16/86It may very well be that we will have been inaccurate or not have beenable to foresee that. We might be on a path that is conducive tolower interest rates; if so, would we want to have an M2 target thatrestrained us and caused us to tighten in an environment in which theeconomy was growing at a real path of, say, 1-1/2 percent and anominal path of 4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The disagreement in the passage is centered around the uncertainty of the future economy and whether the M2 target should be adjusted based on different growth paths.


Passage number 405.
MR. PARRY. Change it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage consists of a single sentence without any conflicting statements or opposing viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 406.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're coming perilously close to havingno target at all. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The statement implies that the person being addressed is not effectively directing their actions towards a specific goal, which could suggest a disagreement or potential conflict regarding their approach or lack thereof. The use of the word "perilously" also implies a sense of urgency or concern about the situation.


Passage number 407.
MR. KEEHN. It seems to me that last July we established thetentative ranges and reduced them by 1/2 of a percent, really, todeliver a message--namely, that we were going to continue to controlinflation. That must really be an important part of any kind ofmechanistic result. Changes at this point, if we don't have asubstantial reason for doing them, would give a rather false message.Therefore, I would be in favor of maintaining the tentative rangesthat we set out last summer to continue that message.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with maintaining the tentative ranges set out last summer in order to continue the message of controlling inflation.


Passage number 408.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anybody else want to offer some commentson this subject. I will take silence as indicating at least that youare not more than 1/2 point away from the range in either direction.I guess we have established a broad band.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply asking for additional comments and then stating that silence will be interpreted in a certain way. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 409.
MR. JOHNSON. I think the elasticities for the broaderaggregates are such that there is a lot of tolerance in the currentranges. We can still see 15 to 16 percent Ml growth as consistentwith 6 to 9 percent [growth in the broader aggregates]. That's why Idon't think a 1/2 point reduction, or some small symbolic reduction inthe target, is a real danger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the opinion of Mr. Johnson about the current ranges and potential dangers.


Passage number 410.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will give Mr. Kohn the last word. Justrefresh our collective minds, given your assumptions or Mr. Kichline'sassumptions: What is the probable range in which M2 and M3 are likelyto come in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply asking for clarification or reminder about the probable range of M2 and M3. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention between different viewpoints.


Passage number 411.
MR. KOHN. Well, Mr. Chairman, that's a difficult question inpart because the models, as Mr. Parry said, give us some pretty lownumbers for [monetary] growth next year--especially if you assume thatdepository institutions are going to adjust down their offering rates,increasing the opportunity cost of holding M2 [assets]. However, I amnot sure I believe the models in many cases, but particularly in thiscase. So if I gave you a purely model-based forecast, looking acrossdifferent models, I could give you anywhere from 9-1/2 percent for theMinneapolis VAR model to the 5 to 7 percent that the non-VAR modelsare clustered around.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker does express some doubt about the accuracy of the models, but there is no direct disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 412.
MR. JOHNSON. That sounds almost like General Motor's range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states a statement made by Mr. Johnson and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 413.
MR. KOHN. Similar to General Motor's models. But when youlook under the hood, that sounds low to me; so I think a little higherthan that would be more likely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 414.
MR. JOHNSON. It is true, I think, that after-tax real long-run interest rates are even slightly negative. If you take themarginal [income tax] rate off the nominal interest rate and then take-38-12/15-16/86[out] about a 3 or 4 percent inflation expectation, you have anegative number on longer-term rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement made by Mr. Johnson about after-tax real long-run interest rates being slightly negative is presented as a factual statement. There is no opposing viewpoint or conflicting information given.


Passage number 415.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we can turn to what we have todecide this morning. Before we do that I would open the floor forcomments on the [economic] situation and outlook. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply mentions the speaker's intention to discuss a certain topic and then asks for comments on another topic.


Passage number 416.
MR. BOEHNE. In the Mid-Atlantic part of the country,economic performance is mostly positive. We have sensed a pickup inmanufacturing activity in recent months; retailers report fairly brisksales; construction, both residential and non-residential, is doingwell; and loan growth in my District is running about twice thenational rate. Unemployment rates are well under the national rate,particularly in New Jersey, Delaware and the Southeast quadrant ofPennsylvania. We are also seeing some wage hikes that are higher thanthe national average, as one would expect, particularly in the growingindustries in our District. The outlook is generally positivealthough bankers doubt that loan growth will continue in 1987 as ithas in 1986.On the national economy, I find myself in broad agreementwith the staff: 2-1/2 to 3 percent real growth and around 4 percent orso on inflation, which for the fifth year of a recovery isn't all thatbad. The only word of caution that I would pass on--and it's largelyanecdotal and I don't know what to make out of it--is that ourexaminers are reporting more noticeable deterioration in consumer loanportfolios, especially the credit card portfolios of some of the bigcredit card issuers in Delaware. I had lunch with some merchants inpart of the District a week or so ago and they reported that more andmore potential sales are being turned down because people are hittingthe ceiling on their credit cards. And I had lunch with some creditcard people and they talked about something called a special lendingoption program--SLOP for short--for people who have bad creditratings. They lend to them with higher interest rates and extracollateral and so forth. Again, I don't know what to make out ofthat. But there is somewhat of a pawn shop mentality in banking withhome equity loans and all that; and maybe the consumer is running outthe string to some extent and bankers are not being all that prudentin trying to put some limits on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 417.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 418.
MS. HORN. Mr. Chairman, our view hasn't changed much sincethe last meeting. We are substantially in agreement with the staffforecast, and for the Fourth District that staff forecast, if it cametrue, would not be a bad outcome. It would give us some more time tocarry through the further restructuring process that is under way inour heavy manufacturing sector. We continue to experience plantclosings and structural changes and, of course, the size and speed ofthe adjustments is closely related to the impact of the exchangerates. A period of slow growth would be basically a good outcome forus on that front. There is a hopeful note on the export side in ourDistrict. In talking to our directors and to other businessmen, wedon't have a profusion of new export orders to report but we do have asignificant increase in the number of inquiries from foreigncustomers, and their attitudes seem to be much more receptive than wehave noted in the past. Beyond that, there is also a feeling that thethrust of imports into specific markets has not been as strong as it12/15-16/86was. We have hope on another front as well--on the employment growthin our District. To take the Ohio numbers alone, in the last yearOhio employment has grown faster than the nation as a whole,significantly fueled by employment in the services sector, and withinthat, in the business services sector. On the negative side, not onlyin our bank but in our District many feel that the risks connectedwith the 1987 forecast are on the down side. That feeling stems fromthe straightforward reasoning that the trade accounts may not turnaround as much as anticipated in the forecast and that the businessinvestment sector may not be particularly strong. So it's easy topicture an economy that won't, in fact, be growing in the 2 to 3percent range. It would be nice to be able to identify some trulybright spots to counter the skepticism but so far I haven't been ableto do that. On the retail sales side, we see in our District much ofwhat was reported yesterday as the national trend; we see soft retailsales with a slightly stronger durables component. Our retailers saythey have plenty of traffic in their stores but that just isn'tresulting in the kind of sales they expect. They are, of course,reacting with discounting and waiting to see what the last few days[of the Christmas shopping season] will bring.I will end with a note on the agricultural situation in ourDistrict. We have a fairly small agricultural sector and it's fairlydiverse. But I report this just because it seems rather interesting.Up until just a few months ago, three months ago maybe, the attitudein our District was that somehow the agricultural situation--landprices and income pressures on farm banks and on good farmers--hadreached a plateau. This view has shifted significantly in the lastcouple of months under the weight of good crops and the low pricesassociated with them and the huge federal outlays. We now have a viewamong quite a wide range of people--from bankers to other observers inour District--that there is going to be another significant adjustmentin land prices and in farm programs as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. Horn is simply providing information and reporting on various aspects of the Fourth District's economic situation.


Passage number 419.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Parry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context or information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 420.
MR. PARRY. Our forecast is about as close as one could getto that of the staff. We feel confident that the fourth quarter willshow strength of 3 percent or more; I think the available nationalstatistics on production, sales, inventories, and employment wouldsupport such a conclusion. Plus, what we see in the Twelfth Districtis indicative of a strong economic picture for the fourth quarter.When I look at 1987, one of the things I would note is that, first ofall, we do have a fairly sharp slowdown expected in the first quarter;and we have a fair amount of uncertainty about how sharp that slowdownmight turn out to be. We expect it to be centered on weakness in bothnonresidential and residential investment spending. We still don'thave much of a handle on what the effect of the tax reform is likelyto be in 1987. It seems likely that it is providing some strength tothe current quarter and also, given the timing of some of the changesin taxes in 1987, that it will be a negative for next year. Withregard to the trade sector, which we have talked of as a key factor,we did some studies based upon alternative assumptions of the speed ofpassthrough of import prices and what that might do in terms of thedemand for imports. And any statistical study we did produced agreater improvement than we have in our forecast and that the Boardstaff has in its forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the speaker's confidence in their forecast, their observations about the economic picture, and some uncertainty about certain factors.


Passage number 421.
 In addition, regional anecdotal evidencesuggests--12/15-16/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does that mean you get a high price forimports.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The mention of regional anecdotal evidence does not imply disagreement or conflicting opinions. It is simply stating that there is some evidence that suggests that imports may be priced higher.


Passage number 422.
MR. PARRY. No. Even if one uses some of the series that donot have much of a passthrough, you still get a sharper slowing inimports than is included in our judgmental forecast and in the Boardstaff forecasts that we have seen. So I think we are running onjudgmental forecasts as far as imports.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion or observation about the forecast for imports.


Passage number 423.
MR. HELLER. How about import prices. Do they go up. Isthat what you are saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Heller raises a question about import prices, seeking clarification on whether they go up.


Passage number 424.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Import prices don't go up all that much.What he is saying is that you get a big improvement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement about the impact of import prices.


Passage number 425.
MR. PARRY. Right--faster than what we have. In other words,if you look at the statistical studies, we all seem to be takingconservative positions with regard to the net exports. That's notvery comforting, given what we have seen to date. We have someregional anecdotal evidence that suggests more signs of a pickup inexport volumes in the Twelfth District. There has been a strongpickup in foreign demand for aircraft. We have had foreign orders forelectronic products, including computer graphics and certain measuringdevices. There is some additional demand for agricultural exports andnot much sign at all of any declines in imports, I might point out.It appears as though the bottom line, as far as the net export sectoris concerned, is that there is a chance of some positive surprises inthe trade account.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting statistical studies and anecdotal evidence to support the idea that there may be positive surprises in the trade account.


Passage number 426.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On that happy note we will hear from Mr.Melzer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "On that happy note we will hear from Mr. Melzer" suggests a positive and harmonious atmosphere.


Passage number 427.
MR. MELZER. In the Eighth District, conditions continue tobe pretty good. We have had good non-ag employment growth in the lastthree-month period--about a full percentage point greater thannationally. Retail sales are a little slower than the nationalgrowth. In a sense, a surprising area of strength continues to beboth residential and nonresidential construction: in the most recentthree-month period through October we have had annual rates of growthof 20 percent in residential and 16 percent in nonresidential.Following up on that, real estate lending has been very strong atDistrict financial institutions; there also has been a notable pickupin commercial lending activity. I would say that some anecdotalcomments we hear tend to bear that out. In Louisville, for the firsttime since I have been involved, I have heard people mention a pickupin manufacturing activity there, particularly among smallermanufacturers. Homebuilders in the St. Louis area are expecting to donext year maybe 90 percent of what they have done this year in thesingle-family area, with multifamily construction down substantially.There continues to be anxiety about the Christmas selling season;there is evidence of a lot of promotional activity in the newspapersand some talk of price cutting, but that still remains to be seen. Iwould say that in general the anxieties remain what we have heardabout before--in terms of the consumer in the first quarter of nextyear, capital spending early next year, and so forth.Overall, our outlook on economic activity would be somewhatstronger than the Board staff's, though not substantially. On the12/15-16/86price side, we believe there is somewhat greater risk. But in generalI would be quite satisfied if we achieved the 2.7 percent growth thatthe Board staff is looking for next year. As Mrs. Horn was saying,that sort of growth rate tends to facilitate the kind of adjustmentthat we need to see in order to get the trade situation into betterbalance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 428.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [The staff's forecast is] 2.8 percent, tobe precise. A few people were talking about housing starts; a housingstarts figure came out this morning, which I am sure Mr. Kichline canreport to you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The statement simply provides information about the staff's forecast and mentions a separate topic of conversation about housing starts.


Passage number 429.
MR. KICHLINE. Housing starts were at a 1.6 million unitannual rate in November. That's just about 2 percent below October.All of the decline is in the multifamily area and, regionally, all ofthe decline is in the South. It's a shade weaker than we had builtinto the forecast, but not much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents information about housing starts in November.


Passage number 430.
MR. MORRIS. What about building permits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The tone is neutral and there is simply a question being asked about building permits.


Passage number 431.
MR. KICHLINE. They are up and very close to starts. Theyare up about 2 percent, surprisingly all in the multifamily area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 432.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage you provided is incomplete. Please provide the full passage so I can assist you accurately.


Passage number 433.
MR. KEEHN. Conditions in our District remain very muchunchanged and are certainly consistent with the trends that have beenin place for so many months now. The unevenness which has been afeature of this whole cycle in our area certainly continues. Theplant closings are a tangible sign of all of this. The last time wetalked a bit about the GM plant closings that we thought would takeplace. That announcement, of course, has been made and it certainlyhas had an enormously negative impact on the District, particularly inMichigan where they are going to be fairly hard hit. Since then therehave been quite a number of plant closings announced, and I must saythat I find it distressing at this stage of the cycle to keep havingthis phenomenon take place.As I look ahead to next year--to say the obvious, I suppose--the two major questions are: 1) inflation; and 2) the trade picture.On the inflation side, I have this feeling that once we get the energyand food effects through the cycle we are going to be into afundamentally higher underlying rate of inflation; but no one that Italked to confirms that. My sense is that market pressures are very,very tight. People are holding down on their raw material purchasesvery substantially and, in turn, aren't able to pass price increaseson their products through to the market. Of course, the operatingratios and the continuation of favorable labor contract settlementstend to confirm that. Our outlook, therefore, for the inflationnumber next year is quite similar to the staff's. The issue of thetrade picture I find equally perplexing, given the large decline inthe value of the dollar. It just has to make sense that we are in abetter position at this point than we were before; and I would saythat the people I talked to are sensing better export opportunitiesthan they had before and, certainly, an improvement in the tradepicture is fundamental to our outlook for next year. But one issuethat I find a little troubling is the enormous disparity between ourwage rates and those of some of the major foreign competitors. To12/15-16/86give an example of this: I was in last week and had a chanceto talk to the general manager of with six orseven plants around the world; and they have a good one in Mexico.Wage rates in are $23.00 an hour; wage rates in Mexico are$1.00 an hour.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing the current conditions in their district and expressing their thoughts on inflation and the trade picture. They also mention the wage rates in a specific plant but do not present any disagreement or contention regarding it.


Passage number 434.
 Not only is that surprising but the productivity inMexico is better than it is in and even more surprising, thequality standards in Mexico are better than they are inCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are they investing more in Mexico.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents surprising information about productivity and quality standards in Mexico. There is no mention of any investment in Mexico, so it is unclear whether they are investing more or not.


Passage number 435.
MR. KEEHN. He says they are investing more in Mexico, giventhat it's a pretty easy decision. The thing I find bothersome aboutthat is that you can have an awful lot of currency value decline andyou can't quite make up for that kind of disparity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Keehn expressing his concern about the potential impact of currency value decline on investments in Mexico.


Passage number 436.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need a 95 percent depreciation in theMexico peso.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement about the desired depreciation of the Mexico peso.


Passage number 437.
MR. KEEHN. Admittedly, that's a pretty narrow product line.Putting it in a broader perspective, our anticipation is that therewill be improvement here. I would end my comments by saying that ouroutlook with regard to the growth picture as well as the other majoreconomic indicators is very much in line with the staff's forecast.We certainly expect a continuation of the expansion through the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Keehn expresses agreement with and support for the staff's forecast and outlook. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 438.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage only mentions "Mr. Forrestal" without providing any further information or context, so it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 439.
MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, our forecast is very much likethe Greenbook's and I too would be very happy if we got 2.7 or 2.8percent, whatever it happens to be. But I would repeat what I saidlast month: that I think the risk is on the down side.With respect to the regional economy, developments showcontinued strength in almost all of the urban areas but weakness inthe rural areas, particularly in the agricultural and energy-dependentsectors. Christmas retail sales have been fairly good so far, againin those urban areas, although in a lot of the large urban centersthere has been a rapid proliferation of stores and that has kept theunit gains fairly [modest]. The black spot in our District, ofcourse, is Louisiana, which is basically in a depression. The onlygood news that you can find there at all--if indeed it is good, butyou grasp at almost any straw here--is that the rig count hasstabilized and maybe even picked up a bit. People down there are nowsaying that a $15.00 oil price would be a viable price to begin toaccelerate some exploration. Now, that's a lower price than we haveheard before. The farm sector also is fairly depressed in most areasof the Southeast. We are looking for greater liquidation, mostly dueto the drought that we suffered last summer. More and more farmersare being forced to the wall and land prices continue to plummet inmany areas. In the housing sector, we are finding generally thatsingle-family home construction is picking up in several areas inresponse to sales of new homes. I don't know how that squares withthe latest numbers, but that was the information that we had.Nonresidential construction is off. So it's a very mixed picture, Mr.Chairman, in the Southeast. Despite that, there is still a fairdegree of confidence among most people outside of Louisiana that weare going to have continued expansion in 1987. There is the evidencethat the trade situation is turning around and there is an expectation12/15-16/86on the part of people in the export-related areas that they are goingto see improvement in 1987.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that there is "continued strength in almost all of the urban areas" but also highlights weakness in rural areas, particularly in the agricultural and energy-dependent sectors. The speaker also mentions that Louisiana is in a depression and the farm sector in the Southeast is fairly depressed. This indicates a disagreement or contention about the overall state of the economy.


Passage number 440.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about Mr. Boykin or any statements that could indicate contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 441.
MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, the Eleventh District has remainedmuch the way it was when we reported at the last meeting. We continueto think that we are at the trough, statistically at least; we thinkthere is going to be some improvement in 1987. We just did our ownforecast for the District and we think we will do about half as wellas the national forecast. That does key off the national forecast,because we think that's where most of our strength is going to be--thespillover effect from that--and we do pretty much agree with thestaff's forecast. Also, if oil prices are in the $13.00 to $16.00range we have a little optimism there, and that's built into ourforecast. We have had a little improvement in non-ag employment inthe District, although the Texas unemployment rate is still holding at9-1/2 percent versus 7 percent for the nation. Of the eight highestunemployment rates [for cities] around the country, we have five ofthem in Texas. It depends on where you happen to be; if you are inMcAllen, Texas it's 19 percent. Agriculture presents a bit of a mixedbag. If you are in the livestock business, it's looking pretty good;if not, it still looks bad or not very encouraging. The high-tech andrelated areas look pretty good.One reason I said that, statistically, we think we are at thetrough is that, anecdotally, we are about the only ones who thinkthat. Comments of our directors and reports from around the Districttend to be more negative in that we get very little encouragement. Intrying to figure out why that is, I think it is probably that ourdirectors don't have the same view of the national economy's growththat we have. In other words, they have a feeling that growth is notgoing to be as strong as we think it will. So, while there is notanything really to brag about openly, we are going to go along andgradually improve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Boykin, states that his district is at the trough statistically and predicts some improvement in 1987. However, he then acknowledges that the comments and reports from directors and around the district tend to be more negative and that they don't share the same view of the national economy's growth. This suggests a disagreement or differing opinions on the outlook for the economy.


Passage number 442.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A little vignette in Texasis actually goingto try to export some steel to Japan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement presented in the passage. It is simply stating a fact about a business in Texas exporting steel to Japan.


Passage number 443.
 That's a--MR. BOYKIN. I'd say two things about that: it's an unusualplant and it's an unusual individual.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply describing something as unusual.


Passage number 444.
MS. SEGER. Will they let it in or will it have to sit on aboat for three years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a question about whether something will be allowed in or if it will have to wait on a boat for three years.


Passage number 445.
MR. BOYKIN. That he is going to find out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that someone named Mr. Boykin will find out something.


Passage number 446.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 447.
MR. STERN. The economic recovery in the Ninth Districtremains intact, with all of the imbalances that we have discussed inthe past persisting as well. Anecdotally, it seems that holidaysales, at least in the metropolitan areas, are pretty good so far. Ihave not heard any concerns expressed recently about how that wasshaping up.12/15-16/86At the national level, certainly, the latest spate ofevidence seems to me to be consistent with something like the staff'sGreenbook forecast. My own view is that there is some chance--or thatit would not be that difficult at least to try to build a case--thatin fact we might do a little better over the next four or fivequarters than the Greenbook suggests. When I consider that, I comeback to the view that maybe something like the Greenbook outlook iswhat we will achieve, in fact. It seems to me that ongoingimbalances, both in the economy and in fiscal policy, are likely torestrain the private sector sufficiently that perhaps something likethe Greenbook performance is what we will get and is about as good aswe can expect to get.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their own viewpoint on the economic recovery, but there is no indication of conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 448.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 449.
MR. BLACK. I think the staff's projection for real GNP isstill reasonable both for the fourth quarter and for 1987. Likeeverybody else, we were impressed by the November report onemployment; and I think the staff was right to revise their figures upon that basis. But I really believe that the near-term outlook ismore uncertain than it has been for some little time. It seems thatone month we get a series of good reports and the next month they areall bad; we keep flip-flopping back and forth as these reports comein. But for three reasons, I am now concluding that the risk may beon the down side. One reason is in the foreign trade sector. I amparticularly uneasy about the rapid improvement of the net exports ofgoods and services projected for the fourth quarter by the staff.Even taking account of the likely slant in petroleum imports, I thinkthere's certainly better than an even chance that we are eventuallygoing to see some improvement on the trade side; at the same time,this strong and increasing competition from some of the smaller Asiancountries and rather lackluster performance in the German economy inthe third quarter lead us to think that the improvement might not bequite as great as most people are assuming. I guess it was Bob Parrya while ago who suggested that it might be stronger now, and Icertainly hope that he's right on that. I am a little worried by it.We are disturbed for a second reason by this continueddeceleration in residential [construction] and new home sales; and wegot a new figure that sort of confirmed that this morning. Finally,we are not as confident about the prospects for consumer expendituresas we were at the last meeting.the head of a large department store reportedthat sales had literally dried up right at Thanksgiving, after havingbeen very good before then. This was a nationwide phenomenon ratherthan something simply confined to the area; we get the samekind of reports from other retailers in our area. And I can't helpbut think that some of this strength we are seeing--even in itemsother than automobiles--is an acceleration of purchases by those fewpeople who itemize their sales tax deductions in order to takeadvantage of that this year on big-ticket items before next year whenthe tax is not deductible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Black, expresses disagreement or dissent by stating that he believes the near-term outlook is more uncertain than it has been for some time and concludes that the risk may be on the down side. He provides reasons for his concern, such as the uncertainty in the foreign trade sector, the continued deceleration in residential construction, and the lack of confidence in consumer expenditures.


Passage number 450.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the following passage as there is no context or content provided.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 451.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our view is very closeto, and consistent with, the Greenbook forecast. I think that is anacceptable outlook, and I would join those who say that if we achieve12/15-16/862.7 or 2.8 percent growth in the fifth year of recovery, that's apretty good record given the projection for prices.On the regional front, the situation has not changed greatlyfrom what has been reported before--that is, we have an unevenrecovery, with severely depressed conditions in the energy,agricultural, and aircraft sectors of the economy. I suppose we cantake some comfort from the fact that our most recent agriculturalsurvey shows that the decline in agricultural real estate values ismoderating. That is the second quarter in a row in which declineshave averaged only 2 percent, as contrasted with earlier declines of 6to 7 percent in each quarter. Those values now are roughly 50 percentof what they were in 1981 at their highs. I take some comfort fromthe discussion about exports, particularly Ted Truman's indicationyesterday that agricultural exports have picked up. I must tell you,however, that we don't see any of that activity in the Tenth District.As a matter of fact, the crop this year has been a bumper cropvirtually across all crop lines, and the good news is that the redmeat industry--both beef and hogs--together with the governmentsubsidies are returning some cash income to our agriculturalproducers.On the energy side, there has been a bit of an uptick in therig count from 215 to 223; that's cited as a great improvement in ourDistrict. But having met last week with a very small group ofOklahoma businessmen, I can tell you that pessimism pervades that partof the country, both because of energy and agriculture. And thesituation regarding bank failures is very, very gloomy; they can seeno light at the end of the tunnel, if you will, so they are justhunkering down and hoping that something magic happens that will bringthem out of this depressed state. I don't see what that will beeither, I might tell you. In the aircraft industry, there is afurther decline--that is, layoffs, simply because they cannot competeon an international basis given the value of the dollar and there isno [new] domestic demand for purchases of aircraft, largely because ofthe very big pool of used aircraft. As companies have cut back overthe years, one of the first things that went was their airplane. As aresult, new aircraft just are not coming off the line or selling, sothe industry is simply laying off the people. All in all, it seems tome that we have quite a long ways to go in the Tenth District to jointhe rest of the country in the recovery. But it seems to me that theGreenbook forecast is quite reasonable for the nation as a whole.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that the Greenbook forecast is reasonable for the nation as a whole, but disagrees with the positive outlook for the Tenth District. They mention the gloomy situation regarding bank failures, the pessimism in the energy and agriculture sectors, and the decline in the aircraft industry. This shows a disagreement with the overall positive outlook presented in the passage.


Passage number 452.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ms. Seger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without more information. The passage only includes the name "Ms. Seger" and does not provide any context or additional details.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 453.
MS. SEGER. Perhaps the story that Si Keehn mentioned aboutthe plant closings in the Midwest and the hit that certain states,including my own, are going to take made me feel a little lessoptimistic about both the current state of the national economy andalso the outlook for next year. I think that some of the apparentstrength at the moment is related to tax reform and is primarilydriven by businesses and some individuals trying to push theirtransactions into 1986 rather than do them in early 1987. Anotherportion arises from inventory building and, unfortunately, I thinkpart of that is involuntary. In fact, using our own staff estimates Ibelieve that $25 billion out of the $40 billion or so increase in realGNP in the fourth quarter comes from the inventory swing. So I'm just-46-12/15-16/86wondering if maybe the first half of 1987 could be quite a bit weakerthan we presently expect it to be.If you'll allow me, I'd like to give you some comments I gotfrom a top automotive analyst yesterday about what's going on there.I found them very interesting. He thinks that somewhere between100,000 and 200,000 new car sales are being pushed into this year fromnext year for tax reasons, namely to get the sales tax deduction.Some other unknown quantity of sales was generated this year by thetremendous interest rate incentives that we all know about. Those tooare likely borrowed from 1987 but the exact amount of the borrowing isnot known. The bottom line of his analysis is that total new carsales in 1987 will be about 75,000 below what they're running in 1986and that import sales will be flat. So the whole hit will come on thedomestic side. Also he made a big point--and he does not work forGeneral Motors by the way--about the inventory situation at GeneralMotors. At the end of November GM dealers were already up to 85 days'supply of unsold new cars. More importantly, if you look at some ofthe individual models, their stocks are running above 100 days'supply. Earlier this year when GM had problems with excessiveinventories their response was to launch another incentive program andtry to "buy" sales, shall we say. But that was a very expensive wayto go in order to maintain production stability and their marketshare. So the betting now is that when GM has this excessiveinventory situation they are going to pare their production schedules.I don't sense that we have enough of that paring in our numbers,particularly what will likely hit early next year. Also, I'm not surethat we are taking enough out on the commercial building side. I justhave a gut reaction that office construction could be a lot weakerthan we are presently estimating. Salomon Brothers had an interestingpresentation showing that over the past 12 months the new officeconstruction put in place has been off about 14 percent and that theboom that has been running from 1979 to 1986 has raised the vacancyrate from 3.6 percent up to 24 percent in the suburbs and almost 17percent in downtown markets. Using their estimates and running withcurrent demand levels, they think we'd have to get a 50 percentdecline in new construction in order to bring back single-digitvacancy rates by the early 1990s. I found that rather startling.Finally, I really believe that the tax reform is going to take anotherbite out of business spending and that it possibly will be weaker--notjust in the first half of the year but in the whole year--than we'represently expecting. So, I just think that sometime we ought to askourselves if maybe we are running the risk of a recession sometime inearly 1987. I'm not arguing that we are, but I think maybe we oughtto consider that possibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses concern about the current state of the national economy and the outlook for next year. They mention potential weaknesses in the first half of 1987, including the impact of tax reform on business spending and the excessive inventory situation at General Motors. They also mention the potential weakness in office construction. These concerns suggest a disagreement or contention about the strength and stability of the economy.


Passage number 454.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who else wants to contribute to this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a simple question inviting others to contribute, without expressing any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 455.
MR. HELLER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context about Mr. Heller or any specific situation involving him, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 456.
 Oh, I guess if we have to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement expressing a lack of enthusiasm or willingness.


Passage number 457.
]MR. HELLER. Overall, I'm in broad agreement with the staffforecast. I think their numbers are eminently reasonable. I'm a bitmore optimistic on the consumer; I'm not only looking at the high debtlevels, but also at the high asset growth that they've experienced andsome interesting data that were brought to our attention recently; thelatter show that the net worth of the consumer is now at its highest12/15-16/86point in relation to personal income in the last decade. So, itreally doesn't mean that the consumer has to fall off the cliff, as alot of the debt-watchers would make us believe. Furthermore, taxreform will clearly be a positive picture for the consumer. Startingon January 1 there will be bigger pay checks--maybe even for thefederal employees, who knows. The bad surprise for the consumer willonly come in April '88 when he realizes that his deductions and theold tax shelters have been gone for the last year and that he has tocome up with a tax payment. But I don't think it will influenceconsumer behavior a lot before then.On the foreign trade sector--well, I hope Bob Parry is right.But I don't see an awful lot of growth in the foreign economies, and Ithink it is very difficult for American producers, given the currentsituation and current exchange rates, to increase their market shares.So, on the export side, I don't think we will see as much progress ashas been hoped for. I think we will be making the progress on theimport substitution side because American producers clearly are morecompetitive, although some of the numbers will be skewed--for instanceby the automobile plant building in this country and foreign plants ingeneral that have been [unintelligible]. On investment, I'm not quiteas pessimistic as some people. I think it's important for themanufacturers to see the sales going up rather than just looking atthe tax incentives; and as long as sales are sustained they will alsostart to invest again. Overall, as I said earlier, I'm in broadagreement with the staff's GNP forecast for growth of slightly below 3percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses general agreement with the staff forecast but also offers some more optimistic views on certain aspects, such as consumer behavior and tax reform. Overall, there is no significant disagreement or contention in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 458.
MR. JOHNSON. I'm generally in agreement with the staffforecast, too. I think there are some risks, as indicated by thesensitivity of things to the exchange rate. That was illustratedyesterday by the notion about what's riding on the further 10 percentdecline, to some extent. But even if you cut back [growth by] 6/10thsit's not the end of the world. After 4 years of expansion, I thinkit's very unusual and very comforting to know that cost/pricepressures are as moderate as they are at this stage. I don't think wehave ever, at least in the postwar period, entered a recession withthe moderate kind of cost/price pressures [we are seeing] at thisstage. So, I'm reasonably optimistic that the expansion willcontinue. I think it's a question of by how much. I think there isthis continuing dichotomy in the [financial] system and in the economythat's still a bit troublesome. But over time, the change in thedollar is going to improve that. There's a long adjustment periodstill ahead to work out all of the inflation excesses of the past.But I'm fairly optimistic that expansion will continue. I'm a littleconcerned that the expansion in the first half of the year may showsome transitory problems, and I think we ought to remain flexible forthat; I don't think it's likely to be deadly. So, I agree with thestaff assessment but I think the risks are a bit on the down side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Johnson agrees with the staff forecast to some extent but also expresses concerns and risks about the exchange rate and potential problems in the first half of the year.


Passage number 459.
MR. ANGELL. My view is very similar to Mr. Johnson's andmany others around the table, and that is that the staff forecastseems to me the most likely event. I would have a slightly lower CPInumber. But I must admit that I only overestimated the rate ofinflation one time in the last seven years; so I put my CPI at 3percent, hoping that I'll have another overestimate in here sometime.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 460.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What does the staff have for the CPI.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply asking a question about the staff's familiarity or knowledge of the Consumer Price Index (CPI).


Passage number 461.
12/15-16/86MR. ANGELL. 3.7 isn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage appears to be a date entry or reference and does not contain any content or information that would suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 462.
MR. HELLER. 3.7.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement from Mr. Heller.


Passage number 463.
MR. ANGELL. 3.7 percent on the CPI, 2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a factual piece of information, without any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 464.
7 percent on thefixed--MR. KICHLINE. We have 1.4 percent this year and 3.7 percentnext year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any contention or disagreement. It simply presents two percentages for different time periods without indicating any conflict or opposing views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 465.
MR. ANGELL. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that there is contention or disagreement because Mr. Angell's response, which starts with "Yes," suggests a contradicting or opposing viewpoint.


Passage number 466.
MR. MORRIS. How much of that is attributable to the oilprice increase assumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating a question or statement made by Mr. Morris.


Passage number 467.
MR. KICHLINE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 468.
 Well, let's see--MR. ANGELL. Basically, my view is that taking food andenergy out in an attempt to get a baseline is just not a very accurateway to go, because when you take food and energy out then you have theservices sector, which is such a large portion of what's left. So Ifeel uncomfortable with any inflation forecast that takes food andenergy out because then we have what I call a measurement problem. Ithink many of you see that measurement problem in the service sector,and I think that just keeps our baseline inflation rate a little toohigh. So, I am a little more optimistic on inflation, but I certainlyappreciate what I would call the staff's "within the range" forecastthere. My concern is that even though the fourth quarter seems tohave some strength to it, it seems to me a very vulnerable strength;we could end up the quarter in a rather fragile and vulnerableposition. I see that in terms of world imbalances. We continue tohave these huge saving rates in Japan and western Europe and we haveother countries that are almost synonymous to farmers and oil peoplein the United States that have these huge debts. There's nothingreally happening internationally, it seems to me, to cause that basicstructural position to improve. So we're kind of patching together aninternational problem which is of grave concern. It seems to me thatwe have a fragile circumstance in the import sector. I'm looking forimport prices not to rise quite as fast as others because the Japaneseautomobile industry seems so attuned to doing what they need to do onthe wage and price front in order to remain competitive, and I don'tthink we're going to see price increases there. And it doesn't seemto me that we're going to have much chance to lower our imports withour staff's projected real GNP path.So, I think we do run some risks that the first and secondquarters could cumulate to a lower level of output than we'reforecasting. And if that happens, I don't know what's going to turnit around. If we get off to a weak start, I don't know what will liftus up because it seems to me that the pattern of consumer spending mayworsen as fast as we get any export side improvement. I think therewill be export side improvement, but I think it's going to be veryslow and it's going to come only to industries that are very attunedto keeping costs low. Also, of course, if we end up with a lowergrowth than estimated, then we're not going to get quite as good agovernment budget outcome. If we achieve 3 to 4 percent real GNPgrowth, government spending as a percent of GNP has a chance to take anoteworthy downturn. I'm kind of uneasy but, like many of you, I-49-12/15-16/86share the priority of maintaining stable prices, and I guess I'mwilling to run a little risk here in order to achieve price levelstability. But I think we have to be aware of how vulnerable we maybe and we have to be ready for some unexpected events. It may notcome out just like the forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily expresses the speaker's views and concerns.


Passage number 469.
MR. KICHLINE. Mr. Chairman, the answer to this questionabout energy is essentially that in 1986 energy prices are decliningat 18 percent. In our estimate they have a weight of about 10 or 11percent, so the energy sector depresses the consumer price index byabout 1-3/4 percentage points this year. Next year our guesstimate isthat energy prices will be up 6 percent, so they would add 0.6 of apercentage point. So a major part of the swing is the energy sector.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information about energy prices and how they will impact the consumer price index. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 470.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And that's only assuming [an oil price] of$16; if it went to $18 it would be more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a hypothetical scenario where an oil price of $18 would lead to a higher consequence than an oil price of $16.


Passage number 471.
MR. KICHLINE. That's correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kichline simply states that the previous statement is correct.


Passage number 472.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you get that kind of a swing in energyisn't the implication, when you're talking about the consumer priceindex, that you must have other prices going lower relative to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a hypothetical question posing the implication of a swing in energy and its potential effect on the consumer price index. It does not present conflicting viewpoints or opinions.


Passage number 473.
MR. KICHLINE. We have one other element that's importanthere: food. And it has a big weight, something like 18 to 20 percent.This year we're estimating food price increases of about 4 percent andnext year 2 percent. So that is a major swing the other way. Theother prices that we have in there don't change a great deal from oneyear to the next; it's not much of an acceleration.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply explains that the price of food is an important element and that it is expected to increase by 4 percent this year and 2 percent next year. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 474.
MR. ANGELL. And food prices could be even lower than thatgiven the fact that the red meat industry has the highest profitmargins it has had for many, many years and given the fact that we hadweather that adversely affected poultry prices. So we do have somepossibilities for food being better and we have an underlying wagestructure change in the service sector that's rather noticeable fornext year compared to this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents information and possibilities without any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 475.
MR. JOHNSON. Service sector inflation is continuing todecelerate, I think, sort of gradually.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Johnson is stating his observation about service sector inflation decelerating, which suggests a gradual slowdown.


Passage number 476.
MR. KICHLINE. Yes. We have something like 5-1/2 percent in1986 and our number [for 1987] is a little under 5 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states two different percentages for 1986 and 1987 without any conflicting information or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 477.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anybody else want to say anything. Let meask a question. If the nominal GNP were higher than you're projectingwould you think that it's more likely to appear in prices or in realGNP. Before you answer that, I know what the models show: that theprices will show up in 1990 and the real will show up right away. Iguess I'm really asking where the risks are and how confident you feelabout this inflation forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It is a request for more information and clarification on the inflation forecast.


Passage number 478.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, let me answer that in a less direct waythan you might like. In looking at 1987, I think the risks are thatin the first half the economy will turn out to be weaker rather thanstronger. We can't identify how much spending is being acceleratedbut I think we probably underestimated it. I wouldn't be surprised tosee a number in the fourth quarter that's greater than what we have12/15-16/86built in; and if that happens I might also look for a weaker firstquarter and first half. Beyond that, I tend to think that we may runwith stronger GNP rather than weaker as we get into the latter half ofthe year. On the price side I think there's a good bet that verylittle will happen in the near term. But if we're wrong at thispoint--again looking out--consistent with my view on real GNP I mightbe adding a few tenths to the inflation side rather than taking away.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply presenting the speaker's perspective and predictions about the economy.


Passage number 479.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And you're projecting, essentially, a fewtenths per month average increase in the consumer price index with oilprices tilted slightly higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is presenting a projection about a potential increase in the consumer price index with slightly higher oil prices.


Passage number 480.
MR. KICHLINE. And food prices slightly lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a simple assertion that food prices are slightly lower.


Passage number 481.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And the food price tilt--you've only got a2 percent difference and maybe it should be bigger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply suggesting that the food price tilt, which currently has a 2 percent difference, should potentially be bigger.


Passage number 482.
 It probably willbe, but I--MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that if the price pattern isstronger we will then get more desire to hold inventories and theeconomy could turn out to be stronger than the staff estimates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 483.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, there's another factor too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It only mentions the existence of another factor without any conflicting ideas.


Passage number 484.
 To theextent--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Your argument is that they go together.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The author is simply acknowledging the argument that the two things go together without expressing any opposition or contradictory viewpoint.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 485.
MR. TRUMAN. There has been a lot of discussion about importprices and I share the skepticism, both ways, that has been expressedon that. But to the extent that you get import prices moving morerapidly you would then have a direct impact in terms of statisticalaggregate demand, because real GNP presumably would also accelerate inthe process of import substitution that Governor Heller spoke of. Sothere is a direct link there even with the [unintelligible] ofinventory.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage states that there has been discussion and skepticism about import prices, suggesting the presence of disagreement.


Passage number 486.
MR. ANGELL. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about contention or disagreement.


Passage number 487.
MR. TRUMAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions the name "Mr. Truman" without providing any context or details.


Passage number 488.
 Moving both at the same time is built in thisfour-quarter time period--MR. ANGELL. It just seems to me, Ted, that we do have quiteample capacity at a lot of these manufacturers in basic industry areasworldwide. The evidence seems to point to increased determination tobe competitive by one means or another, whether it's by subsidy orsome other event. And I tend to feel that the world prices arecontinuing on a moderate plane.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 489.
 But much of it would be--MR. TRUMAN. Well, [unintelligible] you're right about howthe rest of the world is behaving. Your words about the rest of theworld suggested an even soggier picture; that too could affect thebase prices and then you don't have the given exchange rate change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Truman is simply acknowledging and agreeing with the previous statement made by the speaker.


Passage number 490.
Whatever you want to assume about [unintelligible] could be less--MR. ANGELL. But it might not be so bad for us to go back to4 percent CPI and get a little stimulus in here and then have to goback when M1 starts behaving well and tighten up interest rates--runthem up 150 basis points. Maybe that's not too bad; I don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is just presenting different possibilities and suggesting that there might be some benefits to certain actions.


Passage number 491.
12/15-16/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, Mr. Black raised an interestingquestion earlier about whether we should have an inflation target,more explicitly. It's a big subject. It's a nice question on how wecan get the interest rate down. Maybe we ought to reserve a littletime next meeting for being a little more explicit in our discussionabout what we really are satisfied with and what priority to give it.Meanwhile, we will turn to Mr. Kohn and then go to coffee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 492.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude towards the chairman.


Passage number 493.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Given what you were talking about earlierregarding the various models for Ml and given the relative stabilityof interest rates--in fact there has been a very faint increase of aninsignificant amount, but it has been stable for quite a long time--why are you still showing a 12 percent rate of increase in Ml. Arethe lags that long.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a question seeking clarification about the reason for showing a 12 percent rate of increase in Ml despite the stability of interest rates and the previous discussion about different models for Ml.


Passage number 494.
MR. KOHN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 495.
 Yes, and especially when the offering--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 496.
 How long has it been since short-termrates--MR. KOHN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 497.
 Well, August was the last discount rate cut, so--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And that's about the last time short-termrates went down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a fact about a past event and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 498.
MR. KOHN. Now, if the offering rates were to adjust morepromptly--. But they've been edging down very slowly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Kohn, is simply stating a fact about the offering rates edging down slowly. There is no conflicting information or opposing viewpoints presented.


Passage number 499.
 So we havevery narrow opportunity costs, yet we continue to see huge growth inthose--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We haven't had a substantial increase inshort-term market rates, since when--September.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 500.
MR. ANGELL. Four months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is not contention or disagreement in the given passage. This is because the passage only provides the speaker's name (Mr. Angell) followed by a time reference (Four months). It does not present any conflicting ideas or opposing viewpoints that would constitute contention or disagreement.


Passage number 501.
MR. KOHN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only includes a statement ("Yes") in response to an unspecified question or prompt. Without further information, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 502.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And you're saying that the lag is morethan six months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply summarizing what the other person is saying.


Passage number 503.
MR. KOHN. Well, the total lag would be more than six months.The models probably were projecting a bit more of a slowdown over thelast couple of months than we actually had.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that the models projected a larger slowdown than what actually occurred in the last couple of months.


Passage number 504.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wonder what they are projecting for thefirst quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a neutral statement expressing curiosity or a desire to know what someone else is predicting for the first quarter.


Passage number 505.
MR. KOHN. For the first quarter they are projecting anywherefrom 11 to 14 percent, or 10 to 14 percent on this November-to-Marchbasis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is not indicating any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the projected percentages for the first quarter.


Passage number 506.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What would they project for the secondquarter, assuming unchanged interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presenting a hypothetical question without taking a stance or opinion.


Passage number 507.
12/15-16/86MR. KOHN. They would project a first quarter of 13 percentand a second quarter of 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating projected numbers for the first and second quarter.


Passage number 508.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Even then they don't get down to the[growth rate of] nominal GNP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply states a fact without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 509.
MR. KOHN. No. They would get there by the second half ofthe year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 510.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A one-year lag.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "a one-year lag" simply states a time delay of one year, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 511.
MR. KOHN. Well, it dissipates slowly in the model.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a fact without any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 512.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll go and have a short lag for coffee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker and someone else will go have a short lag for coffee, implying agreement or a plan.


Passage number 513.
[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, after half of an afternoon and mostof the morning we have to get to a decision. Who would like to saysomething. We have a volunteer--Governor Johnson.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The mention of needing to make a decision and finding a volunteer does not indicate any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 514.
MR. JOHNSON. I'll volunteer. After condensing all of this--what I hear and the way I feel--I don't feel strongly about changingmonetary policy from where we were before. I still think that a $300million borrowing target is about right. Although I favored [a tilt]last time, I feel a bit more strongly about it this time. I think wemight want some asymmetric language in the directive because of thepotential I've heard mentioned for a little more downside risks thistime, at least in the first half of the year. I think the inflationpicture looks a little less risky now than it did earlier, so we mightwant to change the mights and woulds in the directive to be asymmetrictoward potential ease rather than tightness at this point. But Idon't feel too strongly about it; I feel a little more strongly thanlast time, but it's just a suggestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Johnson is expressing his own opinions and preferences but does not indicate any conflicting views with others.


Passage number 515.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who would like to pitch in. Mr. Parry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The statement "Who would like to pitch in?" is a simple question, without any conflicting opinions or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 516.
MR. PARRY. I would favor alternative B mainly because Ithink there are convincing signs of strength in the economy at thepresent time. But I share the view that the extent of the slowdownwhich we all seem to agree is likely to occur in the first quarter isuncertain and that, of course, should be noted in the policy statementas well. That could be done either in terms of asymmetric language orin some other more direct way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Parry is expressing his preference for alternative B and acknowledging the uncertainty surrounding the extent of the potential slowdown in the first quarter.


Passage number 517.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Melzer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage provided does not contain enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 518.
MR. MELZER. I would also favor alternative B. I would notfavor asymmetrical language. To an extent, I think we've alreadyallowed for potential weakness in the first quarter; we've beenpursuing a very stimulative policy. I would be somewhat concerned ifwe didn't begin to see some slowing in Ml with stable interest rates.We are having to provide reserves at a very high rate to maintain thefunds rate at this 5-3/4 to 6 percent level. I don't know how longthose lags are either, but if we continue to see very rapid rates ofMl growth against the backdrop of stable interest rates, there may besome pickup in economic activity and I'd be concerned. So, I favoralternative B, with no asymmetry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their preference for alternative B and their concern about rapid M1 growth against stable interest rates.


Passage number 519.
12/15-16/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists of a date (12/15-16/86) and someone's name (Mr. Morris), so there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 520.
MR. MORRIS. I would favor alternative B without asymmetry,too, because the market, in a context of the federal funds rate goingup, read a lot more--at least temporarily--into the last directivethat we published with asymmetrical language in it than we intended.For that reason I would favor symmetrical language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Morris, is expressing agreement with alternative B without asymmetry and providing the reason behind his preference.


Passage number 521.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: In the absence of a passage, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement. Please provide the specific passage for analysis.


Passage number 522.
MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, I believe the forecast,although I'm somewhat nervous about it as I indicated earlier. Butuntil the downside risks really begin to emerge I would favor nochange in policy. Therefore, I would opt for alternative B as shownin the Bluebook. I would slightly favor an asymmetric directivesuggesting greater ease. Also, I would like to see us adopt thelanguage suggested in the Bluebook with respect to M1 and not continuewhat we have had--that we are continuing to look for a reduction inM1. I prefer the language that has been suggested by the staff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Forrestal, expresses some nervousness but ultimately agrees with the forecast and favors alternative B as shown in the Bluebook. There is no indication of disagreement or contention with any other individuals or viewpoints.


Passage number 523.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without a full passage provided, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the mentioned passage. Please provide the full passage to further assist you.


Passage number 524.
MR. BOEHNE. [I favor] alternative B with an evenhandeddirective. [Although] it's true that we expect some weakness in thefirst half, we also expect some increase in inflation. But I don'tthink we are going to know very much at all about the first part ofnext year before our February meeting. So, I think it would just betoo early to indicate to the marketplace, with an asymmetricaldirective, that we're concerned about a downturn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boehne expresses his preference for alternative B with an evenhanded directive and acknowledges that there may be weakness in the first half of the year but also expects an increase in inflation. He also suggests that it would be too early to indicate concern about a downturn before the February meeting. There is no disagreement or contention presented in the passage.


Passage number 525.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 526.
MR. BLACK. I, too, would favor alternative B, Mr. Chairman.I prefer the proposed substitute language because I don't think wehave any idea where Ml is going to be headed in the next two to threemonths and I don't think we'd react to it anyway, unless we weregetting similar signals from the other aggregates. I always tend tofavor a symmetrical posture and I think I would this time, [although]what Manley said certainly makes sense. I prefer "somewhat" over"slightly" because I think that indicates a little more willingness toreact in case something unexpected occurs. And for the same reason Iprefer the "woulds" over the "mights.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is expressing his personal preference for alternative B and providing his reasoning behind it. He also acknowledges that Manley's viewpoint makes sense. However, he ultimately agrees with alternative B and provides specific language preferences without challenging or contradicting others.


Passage number 527.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: cannot attend the meeting tomorrow due to a scheduling conflict"


Passage number 528.
MR. STERN. I, too, prefer alternative B and I would advocatesymmetric language. It seems to me that even if we get some weaknessin the first half of next year, to some extent that is anticipated atthis point. We are expecting an overall satisfactory economicperformance and I don't think we would want to alter policy at thatjuncture if, essentially, the expected were happening. So it seems tome symmetric language would be appropriate and only if the economy orother measures, like the exchange rate, were deviating significantlyfrom the general path we expected would we want to react.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. Mr. Stern expresses his preference for alternative B and advocates for symmetric language in discussing economic policy. He believes that if the expected economic performance is satisfactory, there is no need to alter policy. He suggests that policy should only be reacted to if there are significant deviations in the economy or other measures. There is no indication of any disagreement or contrary viewpoint in the passage.


Passage number 529.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as Mr. Keehn is not mentioned.


Passage number 530.
-54-12/15-16/86MR. KEEHN. I'd be in favor of alternative B also, perhapsfor slightly different reasons. I would think that these minutesprobably are going to be released just before your testimony, andthat, therefore, these should be consistent with the last [directive].I would think that would be a slightly better environment--symmetricallanguage, without suggesting any change to the market--as you go intoyour testimony.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with alternative B and providing additional reasoning for their support.


Passage number 531.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the provided passage because it merely states "Mr. Guffey" without providing any additional information or context to suggest any conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 532.
MR. GUFFEY. "B" and symmetric.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only states a statement made by Mr. Guffey regarding "B" and symmetric, without further context or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 533.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You get to the heart of the matter. Mr.Angell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "You get to the heart of the matter" is a compliment or acknowledgment that Mr. Angell is addressing the core issue or main point.


Passage number 534.
MR. ANGELL. "B" and asymmetric. If we use symmetriclanguage, I prefer "would" and "somewhat" to "might" and "slightly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing a preference in language usage.


Passage number 535.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You want to be asymmetric.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a preference or desire for asymmetry without any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 536.
MR. ANGELL. I would like to be asymmetric because it seemsto me that when the minutes are released they should be the bestreflection we can provide at this time as to the general outlook. Andasymmetric is a better reflection of what I heard around the tablethan symmetric.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Angell is expressing his opinion about the minutes being asymmetric and providing a better reflection of the general outlook.


Passage number 537.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 538.
MS. HORN. "B" and symmetric.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 539.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states the name "Mr. Corrigan" without any additional information or context.


Passage number 540.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I clearly want "B". I get confusedon the symmetries and asymmetries here, though. In listening to theconversation, I think we might want to keep the language symmetrical;but even if the language were symmetrical I don't think that wouldnecessarily preclude some easing--to go back to two months ago--ifthings really got "oozy." But I think the point about having thelanguage symmetrical in the context of the testimony is a good point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 541.
MR. JOHNSON. That's a good point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Johnson acknowledges that the previous statement made is a good point.


Passage number 542.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information for us to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 543.
MR. BOYKIN. "B" and symmetrical.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "MR. BOYKIN. "B" and symmetrical" does not show any conflicting views or arguments. It simply mentions the letter "B" and the concept of symmetry.


Passage number 544.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Seger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information given in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 545.
MS. SEGER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine the answer without the actual passage.


Passage number 546.
 Well, based on my views of the economy, I shouldbe voting for "A," but in the spirit of Christmas I will go with--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You've got to break this pattern sometime.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is reflecting on their personal views and decision-making process without engaging in any conflicting opinions or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 547.
MS. SEGER. I will go with "B," but I would like asymmetriclanguage allowing for some lesser reserve restraint should all heckbreak loose.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker is suggesting a different option than the one being discussed, indicating a disagreement or difference in opinion.


Passage number 548.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Heller you're last in line.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact that Mr. Heller is last in line.


Passage number 549.
12/15-16/86MR. HELLER. Can't avoid it anymore. I also favoralternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states their preference for alternative B, without any opposing views or conflicting opinions being mentioned.


Passage number 550.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage only mentions "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" without providing any context or information that could indicate disagreement or contention.


Passage number 551.
 "C" just for--MR. JOHNSON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 552.
 If Henry were here today--MR. HELLER. Taking Henry Wallich's spot, I would want "C."But I think I'll go with the "B". And while I would not favorasymmetrical language, I agree that we should shade it in anasymmetrical fashion if it comes to that point. So I am taking Mr.Corrigan's amendments to Mr. Johnson's proposition.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their agreement with Mr. Corrigan's amendments to Mr. Johnson's proposition.


Passage number 553.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have unanimity for "B." Beforewe get to symmetries and asymmetries, let me see what that means. I'mhappy with the language. We certainly would say "maintain theexisting degree of restraint. This action is expected to beconsistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the period from November toMarch at..." Well, I guess we have a choice: we can say about 7percent; we can say 6 to 7 percent; or I suppose we could say 6 to 8percent. What's your choice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing possible options for expressing a certain percentage but does not express any disagreement with others.


Passage number 554.
MS. SEGER. How about "about 7 percent".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not include any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states the phrase "about 7 percent" without any contrasting opinion or conflicting statement.


Passage number 555.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is "about 7 percent" all right withpeople. "Respectively" is not needed if we say "at an annual rate ofabout 7 percent." I don't know what you want to do about this Mlstatement. It seems to me a bit vacuous to say the outlook for M1remains subject to a great deal of uncertainty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statements are expressing opinions or doubts, but there is no explicit argument or disagreement between different viewpoints.


Passage number 556.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. However accurate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: This sentence does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas. It simply states that something (accuracy) is present.


Passage number 557.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. However accurate. It seems to me betterthat something be said in the [policy record] text rather than in thedirective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement is providing a personal opinion about the importance of including something in the policy record rather than in the directive, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 558.
 That's--MR. HELLER. But it would set the stage a bit for theFebruary testimony.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The use of the word "but" indicates that there is some disagreement or opposition to what was previously mentioned.


Passage number 559.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have no objection to saying it at greatlength in the policy record or whatever we call it. This is anoperational directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker states that they have no objection to discussing a certain topic in great length, indicating their willingness and agreement with the idea.


Passage number 560.
MR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 561.
 Well, you could say "in view--"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a matter of taste. It just soundsodd to me to say in an operational directive that we have greatuncertainty about Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
This passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion about the wording of an operational directive, but there is no conflict or opposition present.


Passage number 562.
MR. MORRIS. Take the sentence out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only includes a statement without any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 563.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's one thing to do: just leaveit out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply suggesting a potential course of action.


Passage number 564.
 Or we could just say "growth in Ml will continue to be judgedin the light of--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's good, yes.SPEAKER(.). I think that's the one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 565.
12/15-16/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could say "monitor" instead of "judge.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement presenting an alternative option without any conflicting perspectives.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 566.
"MR. HELLER. Sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker says "Sure" as a response to a statement or question, which suggests disagreement or a contrasting viewpoint.


Passage number 567.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Now you're getting into majorchanges here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement that does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 568.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions the title or name "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" without providing any information or context about any contention or disagreement. Therefore, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 569.
 It seems to me a slightly more--I don'tknow--MR. ANGELL. "Viewed" makes a lot of sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker starts by expressing uncertainty in their statement ("It seems to me a slightly more"), and then clarifies that they are unsure of the word to use ("I don't know"). Mr. Angell's response also agrees with the speaker's point by stating that "Viewed" makes sense.


Passage number 570.
MR. HELLER. [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in the passage as it is unclear and unintelligible.


Passage number 571.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Viewed" or "appraised".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The words "viewed" and "appraised" are synonyms and do not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 572.
MS. SEGER. "Fretted over". How's that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The phrase "Fretted over" is simply a statement without any clear disagreement or conflicting views.


Passage number 573.
MR. ANGELL. "Appraised" works pretty well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "Appraised" works pretty well" does not involve any conflicting or contradictory opinions.


Passage number 574.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Appraised in the light of the behavior ofM2 and the other factors mentioned below." Isn't that a little bettermaybe. Then we get to symmetric or asymmetric. Let me try[unintelligible] greater support for the symmetric one. I'm not sureI understand this comment about being released before the testimonyand being symmetric. What difference does that make.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any specific contention or disagreement. Instead, it seems to be expressing confusion and seeking clarification on certain points.


Passage number 575.
MR. GUFFEY. Because that's what we had this past time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement stated in this passage. It is a simple statement from Mr. Guffey about something that occurred in the past.


Passage number 576.
 Inother words, it's consistent with what we had in the last--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why is consistency a virtue in this case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact and explaining why consistency is a virtue in this case.


Passage number 577.
MR. JOHNSON. I think it all depends on what the economy isdoing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 578.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Precisely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "precisely" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply adds emphasis to a statement made before or clarifies a specific detail.


Passage number 579.
 I think it will look good ifthe economy is a little soft or--MR. KEEHN. I suggested it because, as Frank said, the marketoverread what we said the last time. It seems to me there could be anoverreading at this point. [With no change] you would go into thetestimony without that clouding the comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention as there is no clear opposing viewpoint expressed. The speaker is mainly discussing their suggestion and potential concerns about market overreaction, rather than engaging in a debate or argument with another person.


Passage number 580.
MR. ANGELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: This passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 581.
 But on the other hand--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. If the economy is weaker in such away that the asymmetry was operational, it seems to me this languagewould be operational anyway. That's the point I was thinking of.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting a different perspective by expressing an alternative point of view and acknowledging that the discussed language may still be operational. However, they do not explicitly argue against or contradict the previous statement.


Passage number 582.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I agree that if the economy were weakthis does reflect a little substance as to how quickly we would move.It certainly is not a [big] difference. If it turns out that we havemoved by the time this is released, we'll look better if it's a littleasymmetric.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with the statement that if the economy were weak, it would affect the speed of their movement. They also acknowledge that it is not a significant difference and mention that moving before the release would be beneficial.


Passage number 583.
MR. PARRY. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not show any sign of contention or disagreement. It appears to be a simple agreement or affirmation.


Passage number 584.
12/15-16/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we haven't, I am not sure it makes alot of difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is expressing uncertainty about whether something has been done or not, and it does not contain any element of discontent or disagreement.


Passage number 585.
 But I--MR. PARRY. Well, the questions could get a little harder atthat point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple statement without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 586.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm a little bothered--I don't want to betoo bothered--but if, in substance, we feel we want to be a littleasymmetric I'm not sure I see any compelling reason not to say thatif, in fact, we feel that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 587.
MR. ANGELL. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It only shows a simple affirmation by Mr. Angell with no opposing views expressed.


Passage number 588.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. If everybody's right about thelikelihood that the fourth quarter is strong--and we're not going toknow a lot about the first quarter by the time of your testimony--whatwas going through my head is that if we have an asymmetrical directivebut have decided not to use the asymmetry, then the questions areharder, I think. On the other hand, if circumstances are such that wedecide we want to ease a bit, nothing here would prevent us from doingthat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different possibilities and scenarios without expressing any opposition or conflicting viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 589.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. While I think it's certainly true thatnothing will have prevented us from doing it, I think this differenceis not enormous. It may just come down to a question that dependsupon substantive views.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker acknowledges that there could be a difference but expresses their belief that it is not significant. This suggests a disagreement or contention regarding the extent of the difference.


Passage number 590.
 If we really think the [likely direction ofpolicy] is significantly tilted I would think on general principlethat we ought to say something in the interest of truth; and if it'snot that clear then--MR. BLACK. What I heard was a feeling of uncertainty, Mr.Chairman, tilted a little in the way you say. But if uncertainty isthe predominant feeling then the symmetrical language makes a littlemore sense to me because we could be wrong in either direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is considering whether or not to voice their opinion on the likely direction of policy, and another person adds their perspective, stating that there is a feeling of uncertainty. However, this does not create any conflict or disagreement between the two speakers.


Passage number 591.
MR. ANGELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only provides a name without any surrounding information or context. As a result, it is impossible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 592.
 But I think what we've written here--MR. JOHNSON. I thought the tone was we could be wrong morein one direction than the other.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and opinions, indicating that they believe they could be mistaken in one direction more than the other.


Passage number 593.
MR. BLACK. Yes, I agree with that; and I was on that side.But I don't say that with a great deal of confidence and I don't thinkany of us does.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black is simply expressing agreement with a statement and acknowledging that his belief is not strongly confident. He also states that he believes none of the others have much confidence in their position either.


Passage number 594.
MR. ANGELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage "MR. ANGELL." The passage only mentions the name "Mr. Angell." It does not provide any information or context to suggest any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 595.
 I only remember one person--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One thing that hasn't been mentioned--solet me just mention it for the record--is that in terms of flexibilityof action I think the performance of the dollar makes it easier toease slightly if otherwise we wanted to than if the dollar was notbehaving. Now, I'm not saying that dictates any action; I don't thinkit does. But I think we ought to reflect that properly someplace inthe record, though not with too much emphasis. It could easilychange, obviously, in many ways. But at the moment it is onedifficulty that is removed in making [an easing move] if we wanted todo so, as I say, for other reasons. But I don't want to say this wastoo big a deal. I would have some slight tendency, as I say, towards-58-12/15-16/86easing language if we feel that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that the performance of the dollar could make easing slightly easier, but also states that it does not necessarily dictate any action. They also express the need to reflect this point in the record, but not with too much emphasis, indicating possible disagreement or differing opinions among the discussants.


Passage number 596.
 We have used asymmetric languagelots of times to make this--MR. MELZER. In connection with the dollar, could I ask aquestion. You may choose to answer [or not]. If the Germans were tocut their discount rate tomorrow would it necessarily follow, in aneconomic sense, that we should leap to match that. In other words,you could make the argument that, standing alone, that might be asalutary action over time to address the trade imbalance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply posing a question and suggesting a possible argument that could be made.


Passage number 597.
 I don'tknow whether that's something that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'll just give you my own reaction.I don't think we need to talk about it theoretically because I wouldbe very surprised if Germany reduced their discount rate any timeduring this relevant period. I would say I don't see any need to, inyour terms, "leap." If, in fact, the result was a significantstrengthening in the dollar then I would think that might become apositive factor weighing in the balance toward some easing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and there is no indication of any opposing views or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 598.
MR. ANGELL. Because that would take the dollar quite a waysfrom the staff forecast and might have some implications.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing a hypothetical situation and its potential implications without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 599.
MR. HELLER. It would tilt our foreign trade balance thewrong way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is a statement expressing an opinion about the potential impact of a certain action on the foreign trade balance. While others may disagree with Mr. Heller's opinion, there is no clear contention or disagreement present in this statement alone.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 600.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wouldn't put quite the same weight onthe staff forecast. It might move it in the direction that wascounterproductive over time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The statement suggests disagreement or contention about the importance of the staff forecast and its potential negative effects in the long run.


Passage number 601.
MR. JOHNSON. I think that would depend on how the domesticeconomy was performing--whether it was really starting to show somesigns of picking up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Johnson is expressing his opinion and discussing a potential factor that could influence the domestic economy.


Passage number 602.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All I'm saying is that it would put weightin that direction if the dollar actually moved. It may not offsetother things if it [unintelligible] but that's my own view on it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their own opinion and offering a potential outcome if the dollar were to move.


Passage number 603.
MR. GUFFEY. But would you be easing policy through the Deskor would you be considering a discount rate decrease under thosecircumstances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Guffey is simply asking a question about the potential actions the person being addressed would take in a certain situation.


Passage number 604.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Subsidiary questions. Well, you know thisis not a federal case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement indicating that the issue being discussed is not as significant or serious as a federal case.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 605.
 Gee, we've got a whole hour that we can--MR. BLACK. We can make a federal case out of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The statement "we can make a federal case out of it" suggests that there is contention or disagreement. The use of the phrase implies that the situation could be blown out of proportion or escalated to an extreme level.


Passage number 606.
MR. MORRIS. Can we spend an hour talking about symmetry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking if they can spend an hour talking about symmetry.


Passage number 607.
MR. BLACK. That would be making it a federal case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The statement by Mr. Black is a simple observation or opinion, without any opposing or conflicting viewpoints mentioned.


Passage number 608.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me write it down here. It took mesome time to figure out how to spell it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply describes the difficulty the writer had in figuring out how to spell a word.


Passage number 609.
MR. BOEHNE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only contains the name "Mr. Boehne."


Passage number 610.
 We've had less--MR. JOHNSON. It seems like we can kill two birds with onestone with that. I don't think the implications are great one way orthe other but if some sort of asymmetry in the language would12/15-16/86represent our current feeling--and maybe I'm wrong interpreting itthat way--that we actually believe that the economy is going to showweakness, the timing [of the directive's publication] would beassociated with the actual event.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of one person expressing an opinion and considering possible implications.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 611.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think a fair summary of the discussion--I'm not talking about the directive now--would be that there wassomewhat more emphasis on the risks of a shortfall in the early partof the year than the other. Presumably, the directive will getinterpreted in that light anyway, which [unintelligible] arguments.It's no big deal if we put asymmetry in here so long as that's in thebackground discussion. So I don't think this is a terribly greatissue: but we're pretty closely divided as to what to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The statement "we're pretty closely divided as to what to do" indicates a lack of consensus among the participants in the discussion.


Passage number 612.
MR. HELLER. I'll certainly go along with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Heller, is expressing agreement with a statement or proposal without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 613.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could fool around with the "slightlys"and "somewhats" too. We could have one "slightly" and the other"somewhat;" that would be a new way of doing it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a suggestion or alternative way of approaching a task or situation.


Passage number 614.
MR. BLACK. And we can play with the "woulds" and "mights"too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests the possibility of playing with "woulds" and "mights."


Passage number 615.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that's what we usually do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply agrees with the statement mentioned.


Passage number 616.
MR. BLACK. You've got three combinations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is simply stating a fact or observation about the three combinations.


Passage number 617.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement regarding Chairman Volcker.


Passage number 618.
 We could say "slightly greater reserverestraint or somewhat lesser reserve restraint would"--MR. BLACK. Oh, we could really have some fun indeed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is more about expressing excitement and the possibility of having fun.


Passage number 619.
MR. JOHNSON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. However, it is difficult to determine with certainty as the context or complete passage is not provided.


Passage number 620.
 I have a tough time telling the differencebetween "slightly" and "somewhat," but I guess just for variation--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I think it's easier to tellthe difference between that than it is between "might" and "would.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses the difficulty of distinguishing between certain words.


Passage number 621.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. After all of this, is there any sense insaying "slightly greater reserve restraint or somewhat lesser reserverestraint might".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting opinions or differing viewpoints. It poses a rhetorical question, suggesting that there is no sense in making minor distinctions about reserve restraint.


Passage number 622.
 Either "might" or "would"--MR. GUFFEY. [The press] would have a good story with this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "might or would" suggests possibilities or potential outcomes, but it does not imply disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 623.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think "slightly" is better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "I think 'slightly' is better" is a personal opinion that does not indicate any controversy or disagreement. It simply expresses a preference without conflicting with any other viewpoint.


Passage number 624.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I have a great compromise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "I have a great compromise" suggests that the person speaking has come up with a solution or agreement that satisfies everyone involved, implying unity rather than disagreement.


Passage number 625.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That was an attempt at a compromise. Doyou have a better compromise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 626.
MR. JOHNSON. Yes: "slightly," "somewhat," and "would.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The words "slightly," "somewhat," and "would" suggest that Mr. Johnson is expressing his agreement or understanding of something, rather than expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 627.
"VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think the "slightly greater" isnot really operational in a borrowing [unintelligible]. So what aboutleaving it "slightly greater, slightly lesser" and have the "would"apply to both. It's still symmetrical but "would" is a little morepurposeful than might.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting a way to improve the symmetry of the statement without expressing any disagreement or conflict with the original idea.


Passage number 628.
12/15-16/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But that's clearly symmetrical. It's onlythe reservation in your mind that is in the first part of thesentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the reservation in someone's mind is located in the first part of the sentence.


Passage number 629.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't have a strong feeling aboutthis. The two things I'm worried about are the testimony and theyear-end thing too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 630.
 We are going to have crazy money markets here forthe next--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know, maybe I'm wrong, but thistestimony [issue] seems pretty irrelevant. In the testimony I'll saywhether we've changed policy or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about the relevance of the testimony but does not explicitly disagree with anyone else's viewpoint or opinion.


Passage number 631.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But what I was thinking of is thatif events work in a direction that we would choose not to [move] andwe have an asymmetrical directive, then you have to answer questionsthat seem to me a little difficult such as "Why did you say you weregoing to change and you didn't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing a thought about the potential challenges of dealing with events that go against one's desired direction.


Passage number 632.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I didn't say we were going to change; Isaid we might. In September we said we might tighten; in December wesaid we might ease.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It states that there might be a change in the future, specifically mentioning tightening or easing, but it does not present conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 633.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't feel that strongly about iteither way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they do not have a strong opinion on the matter.


Passage number 634.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, neither do I. I only feel stronglythat we've got to reach a conclusion next time. And I would prefer aconclusion that satisfied the maximum number of people. Does itappeal to anybody apart from Governor Johnson to say "slightly greaterreserve restraint or somewhat lesser reserve restraint would".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 635.
MR. ANGELL. I would much prefer to say "slightly greaterreserve restraint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, there is a mention of a preference for "slightly greater reserve restraint" which suggests a difference in opinion or disagreement about the level of restraint.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 636.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Could we just try it again. "Slightlygreater reserve restraint or somewhat lesser reserve restraint would.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting trying to do something again, but they are proposing different options of either slightly greater reserve restraint or somewhat lesser reserve restraint. This implies that there is a difference in opinion on what the best course of action is.


Passage number 637.
"MR. JOHNSON. Yes, that was my suggestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement is a confirmation or agreement with a suggestion made by Mr. Johnson.


Passage number 638.
MR. ANGELL. That's what I would do. I think that mostaccurately reflects the discussion. There was only one individualthat I recall who said [the economy] might be stronger and yet itdidn't appear that it would be strong enough to require some action.There were quite a few who said it could be weaker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply summarizing the discussion and stating their own belief about the economy. There is no indication of conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 639.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could really make it asymmetric byleaving out the possibility of [greater reserve restraint], but that'sprobably too asymmetric.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply considering the idea of making it asymmetric by leaving out a possibility, but it also acknowledges that this may be too one-sided or unequal.


Passage number 640.
MR. JOHNSON. Yes, even I wouldn't want that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Johnson, is expressing agreement with a statement, suggesting that he also wouldn't want something. There is no indication of disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 641.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, is that acceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 642.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It is to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is a personal opinion and does not indicate any disagreement or contention with others.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 643.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Can I have a show of hands as to howacceptable "slightly greater or somewhat lesser would" is. There is12/15-16/86reluctance in some of those hands, but I see quite a few. You need anexpert to read that asymmetry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that there is disagreement or contention about the acceptability of the phrase "slightly greater or somewhat lesser would." This is evident from the mention of "reluctance in some of those hands" and the statement that an expert is needed to interpret the asymmetry.


Passage number 644.
MR. JOHNSON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage provided, "MR. JOHNSON," is insufficient to determine if there is contention or disagreement. The passage only mentions a person's name and does not include any additional information or context.


Passage number 645.
 Yes, it's pretty--MR. HELLER. We should publish a guide to asymmetry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply expressing agreement or approval of the idea to publish a guide to asymmetry.


Passage number 646.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the [policy record] discussion I thinkwe can reflect the fact that there was more uncertainty on the downside and, given that, a little more possibility of easing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing the speaker's own perspective and opinion about the topic being discussed.


Passage number 647.
MR. ANGELL. It would be nice to have the economy performbetter than we expected.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Angell expresses a positive sentiment about the economy performing better than expected.


Passage number 648.
 That would be--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And we keep the 4 to 8 percent [range forthe funds rate]. There's nothing else that appears. Does thatcapture things. It's: maintain; about 7 percent; growth in M1 willcontinue to be appraised in the light of the behavior of M2 and M3 andthe other factors cited below--which are the strength of the businessexpansion, developments in foreign exchange markets, progress againstinflation, etc. Okay. We will vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is a statement of an agreement or consensus regarding the range for the funds rate and the factors that will be considered for appraising the growth in M1.


Passage number 649.
MR.BERNARD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage based on the given information.


