Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeFebruary 24, 1981A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held on Tuesday,February 24, 1981, at 12:00 noon, at the call of Chairman Volcker. This wasa telephone conference meeting, and each individual was in Washington, D. C.,except as otherwise indicated in parentheses in the following list of thoseparticipating.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. Solomon 1/, Vice ChairmanMr. GramleyMr. GuffeyMr. MorrisMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. RoosMr. SchultzMrs. TeetersMr. Winn(New York)(Kansas City)(Boston)(St. Louis)(Cleveland)Messrs. Boykin (Dallas), and Mayo (Chicago), AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Black (Richmond), and Corrigan (Minneapolis),Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmondand Minneapolis, respectivelyAltmann, SecretaryBernard, Assistant SecretaryOltman (New York), Deputy General CounselAxilrod, EconomistMessrs. Balbach (St. Louis), J. Davis (Cleveland),R. Davis (New York), T. Davis (Kansas City),Eisenmenger (Boston), Ettin, Henry, Keir, Kichline,Truman, and Zeisel, Associate Economists1/ Left the meeting prior to the vote to adopt a modification of the domesticpolicy directive.2/24/81Mr. Pardee (New York), Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Sternlight (New York), Manager for DomesticOperations, System Open Market AccountMr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Prell, Associate Director, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Steele, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, Boardof GovernorsMr. Smoot (Philadelphia), First Vice President, FederalReserve Bank of PhiladelphiaMessrs. Burns (Dallas), Danforth (Minneapolis) Keran(San Francisco), Koch (Atlanta), Parthemos (Richmond),Scheld and Syron, Senior Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of Dallas, Minneapolis, San Francisco,Atlanta, Richmond, Chicago, and Boston, respectivelyMrs. Nichols (Chicago), Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of ChicagoMr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a list of participants in a meeting.


Passage number 2.
 Campbell (New York), Assistant Secretary, FederalReserve Bank of New York-2 -Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call ofFebruary 24, 1981CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Kichline, do you want to give us avery brief update on the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking someone to provide an update on the economy.


Passage number 3.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, employment, production, and sales wereall well maintained in January. Housing starts in January continuedsurprisingly strong, and the incoming data generally point to evenleaner inventories than we had anticipated earlier. So, briefly, asof now we would expect that real growth in the current quarter will beonly a little less than the downward revised 4 percent shown for lastquarter. On inflation, it's clear that we continue to experience veryrapid price increases. And we continue to anticipate that theincoming data on the CPI and PPI will show some degree of accelerationin the remaining months of the quarter. As of now it's ourexpectation that nominal GNP this quarter will probably grow at closeto the rate experienced last quarter, which was just a little above 15percent at an annual rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply provides their analysis and expectations regarding employment, production, sales, housing starts, inventories, inflation, and nominal GNP growth.


Passage number 4.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Sternlight, do you want to catch us upon where we are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking Mr. Sternlight if he wants to provide an update on the current situation.


Passage number 5.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is not contention or disagreement in the passage. The reason is that the passage only mentions Mr. Sternlight without providing any additional information or context that could indicate a disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 6.
 Yes, I'd like to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, wait a minute. I looked at Mr.Axilrod and said Mr. Sternlight. You apparently have a call into Mr.Axilrod, so why don't you catch us up and then I'll have Mr. Axilrodcatch us up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 7.
MR. STERNLIGHT. My call to Steve, Mr. Chairman, was aboutthe fact that the funds market situation has changed since our morningcall today. But Steve might want to give more background on this.The general situation is that we are looking at a need--to meet ourpath objective--for substantially more reserves in this statementweek. We've been going through the week finding the funds rate belowthe 15 percent lower bound, and on Friday and again yesterday we tookaction to drain reserves, which did not really cause the funds marketto firm up very much at all. This morning we were looking at a verylarge need to add more reserves. Funds had inched up to 15-1/8percent. We were prepared to provide some modest amount of reserves,meeting a part of the need by passing through some of our customerrepurchase agreements. But between the time our call concluded and wewere set to go into the market to do that, the money market easedagain. Funds were back at 15 percent and I thought I would defer thatmodest action to add some reserves to the market. So, that was what Iwanted to convey to Steve at that point. We're sitting now with fundsat 15 percent and apparently a large need to add reserves this week ofsomething like $1.6 billion to $1.8 billion on a weekly average basis.The banks have large cumulative reserve deficiencies and they just arenot acting on that basis at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 8.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think that's just a setting forthe general situation. Why don't you proceed, Mr. Axilrod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses their opinion and then encourages Mr. Axilrod to continue.


Passage number 9.
MR. AXILROD. Well, Mr. Chairman, the monetary aggregateshave shown diverse trends since the last Committee meeting. Thenarrow monetary aggregates, M1-A and M1-B, viewed after abstracting2/24/81from shifts to NOW accounts, of course, have been much [lower] than wehad anticipated. But making the best estimate we can of thedistribution of [those shifts], they appear to be from out of demanddeposits and out of other deposits. It looks as if both M1 measures--really it's best to consider them both together--are doing the samething; they are running substantially below the path that theCommittee set. As you recall, that path called for a rate of growthin the M1 measures of roughly 5-1/2 percent. So far as we can tell,from December to March--with a projection for March that indicates adistinct rise in the rate of growth, so if March turns out to beweaker than the 6 percent or so we're projecting we'd be even furtherbelow the path--we'd have growth of M1-A at about a 2-1/2 percent rateand growth of M1-B at a 3 percent rate. From December to date,they're both showing no growth. So, this growth we're showing fromDecember to March really is a projection of growth in the last half ofFebruary and the month of March.On the other hand, while the narrow aggregates are weakrelative to the path the Committee set, the broader aggregates aregenerally strong. At the time of the Committee meeting, the Committeeset a path for growth in M2 at around 8 percent at an annual rate fromDecember to March. In January and February the growth in M2 is veryclose to 8 percent and we're projecting a March rate of growth, giventhe strength we've observed particularly in money market funds so farin February, of close to 10 percent. So, if March turned out to be 10percent or even lower--any number down to 8-1/2 percent or so--we'd besomewhat over the December-to-March path on M2. Our actual projectionfor December to March is 8-3/4 percent as against that 8 percent path.To date the growth is right at about 8 percent. Meanwhile, althoughthe Committee didn't officially set a path over the December-to-Marchperiod for M3, it probably should be observed that growth in M3 hasbeen quite strong. In January, M3 grew at about a 13 percent annualrate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information about the growth rates of different monetary aggregates.


Passage number 10.
 And given the data we have thus far in December--MR. PARTEE. February.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that data was given in December and then Mr. Partee is mentioned without any context to imply disagreement or contention.


Passage number 11.
MR. AXILROD. I mean February, sorry--growth is at around a10-1/2 percent annual rate. So in a sense M3 is growing well aboveits long-run path. Meanwhile, on an average basis, bank credit inJanuary was quite strong, but the fragmentary data we have for thelarge banks suggest a substantial slowing in that growth in February,probably an extension of the slowing that might have been developingover the course of January. That's the report on the aggregates, Mr.Chairman.I don't know whether Mr. Sternlight wants to report furtheron interest rate developments but, given the weakness in the narrowaggregates in particular, there has been a drop in required reservesrelative to the original path. In consequence, the implied borrowinghas dropped from about the $1.3 billion that was used in constructingthe path originally to something on the order of $770 million in thecurrent and next statement weeks, and that has been accompanied by asharp drop in money market rates, and indeed in the funds rate tobelow 15 percent recently. Given our projection of the aggregates, itwould appear that borrowing after the next two weeks would rise backup to somewhere between $900 million and $1 billion. So even if this$770 million worked out--and it hasn't been working out this week--themoney market would be wrenched by a turnaround in the level of2/24/81borrowing back up to the $900 million to $1 billion range. And, ofcourse, it would be even higher if it turns out that we'reunderprojecting the aggregates, as is possible, given the GNP outlookthat Jim just mentioned.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information about the growth of M3 and bank credit, as well as the drop in required reserves and borrowing. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 12.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether you want to add aword, Peter, at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply expressing uncertainty about whether the speaker should add a word and addressing someone named Peter.


Passage number 13.
MR. STERNLIGHT. No. I think Steve covered it. As he said,the short rates have come down because we've been aiming for thenonborrowed [reserve path] such that borrowing was on a decliningtrack. So funds have come down from the 17 percent area to a shadeunder 15 percent; in fact the funds rate average is 14-7/8 percent sofar this week. It is interesting that as you go out longer in thematurity spectrum rates have actually moved up since the time of themeeting a couple of weeks ago with continuing concern in the marketabout longer-term prospects in the economy, budget policy, and so on.So it's very much a swinging around of the yield curve with thoseshort rates coming down and the long rates going up modestly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply describes the movement of short rates and long rates in the market.


Passage number 14.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I think it would helpful to theCommittee, in pointing to the oddity of this M1 behavior, to note thatat the time the path was set at the last meeting we expected--and theCommittee adopted a target of--growth QI-over-QIV of around 2-3/4percent in M1-B, abstracting from all those shifts. Given the patternwe have thus far in the month and expecting March growth of 6-3/4percent, abstracting from shifts, we would end up with a rate ofgrowth quarter-over-quarter of 0.5 percent, effectively zero.Meanwhile, it looks as if nominal GNP is a bit higher. So we'restaring at a velocity here of M1-B of 14 or 15 percent at an annualrate. Granted that the staff in its brilliance expected a downwarddemand shift, we didn't expect anything like this. This would be avery unusual result should it stand up, suggesting that somethingmight give here, either the M1 or maybe nominal GNP. It's not clear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the odd behavior of M1 and suggesting that there may be some unexpected factors at play.


Passage number 15.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is another possibility, notexclusive of the possibilities that you cited: That the kind ofinstitutional wrench of NOW accounts has somehow affected behavior. Idon't know [why] that should be but it's a peculiar coincidence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The author is simply suggesting another possibility and acknowledging that they don't have a clear explanation for it. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 16.
MR. AXILROD. Well, I was talking to Jim in the hall, and mymemory is that in early '79--I'm not sure of the timing--when ATSaccounts were introduced, we got more of an effect on demand depositsthan we thought a priori we would get. Our rationale at that pointwas that this made people begin to think about their whole cashmanagement process and that they might have switched not only into ATSaccounts but decided that they had surplus cash in general and putmoney in money market funds at the time. That's similar to what isgoing on now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement by Mr. Axilrod explaining his memory and rationale regarding the effect of ATS accounts on demand deposits.


Passage number 17.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have an uneasy feeling from time-to-timethat we may just be getting some pure misreporting from banks, whereATS accounts are not classified in the right [categories] with thislimitation of three transfers a month. Banks really don't know whatto do. I suspect we do get some misreporting. Actually, I suspect weget a lot of it; whether it's mutually offsetting, I don't know. Butthere are a lot of elements of uncertainty.-3-2/24/81Well, the general purpose of the meeting today, of course, isthat we are having a consultation because we reached the 15 percent[lower limit on the funds rate band] that we cited [in the directive].The question is what to do about it. My own feeling is that movingvery mechanically on uncertain M1 numbers, in the light of the otheraggregates being high and considering that there has been asubstantial easing in the money market, is probably not appropriatepending some further evaluation of this. We actually set a littlehigher target at the Federal Open Market Committee [meeting] this timethan we had in December, if you recall. We didn't accept the low paththat took us back to the equivalent of the December decision, ifthat's a correct way to state it, Mr. Sternlight. In any event, wehave a conflict between the two parts of the directive and thequestion is what to do about it. We can just operate on the 15percent limit, I think, without doing anything. Alternatively, and Ithink probably more appropriately, we can make a different judgment.These judgments have an arbitrary element anyway. We are keying offthe $1.3 billion borrowing assumption we made at the last meeting andthe changes have been mechanical from there. I would propose raisingthe borrowing assumption from where we now are--not from the $1.3billion but from the $770 million. We think it's likely to go upanyway when we get through this period. Raising that to somewhat over$1 billion and letting the money market go where it goes with thatassumption seems to me not inappropriate at this time. So, that'swhat I would propose. Let me hear what other reactions are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is a discussion of different options and proposals.


Passage number 18.
MS. TEETERS. Are you implying that we would let it reach the15 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is simply quoting Ms. Teeters and does not show any conflicting opinions or argumentative statements.


Passage number 19.
MR. MORRIS. Paul, this is Frank Morris. I would supportyour position. We have a conflict between the financial data and theeconomic data at the moment and my hunch is that it will be resolvedin a softening in the economy. Not only do we see the [low growth inthe] M1 measures, but we see a flattening in business loans and steadyweakness in commodity prices. So, I think we've got to hold on untilwe find which way this ball is going to bounce, and I would supportyour position.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is agreement in the passage. Mr. Morris expresses his support for Paul's position based on his interpretation of the financial and economic data at hand.


Passage number 20.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know which way the ball is goingto bounce. But I'm a little suspicious even if there were someslowing in the economy, which isn't very visible now but which I don'tdiscount, that we may get a big bounce up in these M1 figures anywaybecause that velocity figure looks awfully peculiar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing uncertainty about the future direction of the ball and discussing the possibility of a potential increase in M1 figures.


Passage number 21.
MR. ROOS. This is Larry Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "This is Larry Roos" simply identifies the speaker.


Passage number 22.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Mrs. Teeters], I'll get to you in aminute.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply acknowledging that Mrs. Teeters will be addressed in a moment, implying that the speaker is busy with something or someone else currently.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 23.
MR. ROOS. I must disagree with you. First of all, if youobserve what has happened to the monetary base, there is every reasonto believe that there would be this flat movement of the aggregates.To me our biggest problem is to avoid like the plague a replay of whathappened last year when we had a significant undershoot early in theyear. [My reason is that] I think people are looking to us to achievea steadiness that was not characteristic of last year. If we adjustour borrowing assumption upward, that has the same effect of perhapsleading to an undershoot in the long pull. I just think that we2/24/81should reduce the lower limit of the fed funds range and providewhatever reserves are necessary to avoid a downward movement like theone that occurred last year in such a damaging way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Roos disagrees with the speaker's view on the movement of monetary aggregates and the appropriate borrowing assumption. He suggests reducing the lower limit of the fed funds range and providing necessary reserves to avoid a repeat of the previous year's damaging downward movement.


Passage number 24.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Teeters has a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mrs. Teeters has a question, without providing any further context or indication of disagreement.


Passage number 25.
MS. TEETERS. I just want to clarify what your proposal is,Mr. Chairman. If we moved to a borrowing level of $1 billion, doesthat mean that we're then going to let the interest rate fluctuatebelow as well as above the 15 percent floor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by MS. TEETERS seeking clarification from the chairman.


Passage number 26.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My assumption is that we'd move theborrowing [down to] probably a little above $1 billion, but then letinterest rates develop as they would. And if, after a suitableinterval of time, [the funds rate] appeared to be moving lower and wasinconsistent, we'd have another consultation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their assumption and plans regarding borrowing and interest rates, but there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 27.
MS. TEETERS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage "MS. TEETERS" is insufficient to determine if there is contention or disagreement without any context or further information.


Passage number 28.
 Yes, but moving to the $1 billion plus--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It does not mean protecting the 15 percentfloor per se during this interval, but we may have anotherconsultation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 29.
MS. TEETERS. Right. But moving from where we are to $1billion plus in borrowing implies some tightening in the market at thepresent time. And it would lower the nonborrowed reserve path. Isthat correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking confirmation or clarification regarding the implications of borrowing and its potential impact on the reserve path.


Passage number 30.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it would lower the nonborrowedreserve path, yes. But I don't know what the market effect would be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is uncertain about the market effect, but there is no conflicting opinion presented.


Passage number 31.
MS. TEETERS. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The response "Yes" indicates that there is contention or disagreement present in the passage. However, since only the speaker's name is given, it is impossible to determine the exact context or topic of the disagreement without further information.


Passage number 32.
MR. AXILROD. The market would be somewhat tighter than itwould otherwise be, but I'm not so sure it would be much easier ortighter than in fact it is now; borrowing has been running about $1.1billion. That's literally where we are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage is stating a fact about the current borrowing rate and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 33.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, it's uncertain; it doesn't implynecessarily an increase. We just don't know. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that there is uncertainty and lack of information, rather than engaging in a debate or expressing conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 34.
MR. PARTEE. Paul, I too would like to temporize for a while,and I think that's what we're talking about. It seems to me mostlikely that both of the pieces of the scissors that we're looking atare going to come together by the nominal GNP moderating and by themoney numbers going up. I think both will happen. But now we'retalking about such a very large velocity number that there is lots ofroom for both to move toward each other and still not be out of line.You may remember that late last year we had a couple of similarconference calls in which we told the Manager that he didn't have toobserve the upper limit of the funds range exactly, but that he shouldlet the market tend to [set] the rate and it could be a little abovethat limit. I think a similar [response] may be quite appropriatenow; not changing the lower limit from 15 percent but letting theManager let the market determine the rate. And if it turns out to besomewhat lower than 15 percent, he should not resist it. I do thinkthat would likely result in quite a bit lower rate unless we move thenonborrowed reserve path down some--on the order of $100 million or so2/24/81from where it otherwise would have been--which as I understand it iswhat you're proposing. I think that would be a good move at thistime.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and suggesting a course of action.


Passage number 35.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Paul, this is Tony Solomon. I agreewith the substance of your analysis of the situation and the bottomline of your recommendation. But since it's not clear that even anincrease in the borrowing assumption and a lowering of the nonborrowedreserve path will necessarily keep us where we want to be while wewait out this peculiar situation, another possibility would be tomodify the last meeting's directive to say that in view of thestronger growth in the broader aggregates and the fact that thenarrower aggregates are somewhat distorted by the NOW account picture,we would permit some undershooting for a period of time. And then wecould consult again. As I remember the discussion at our last FOMCmeeting, even though it never got into the directive as such, therewas some feeling in the group that it would be appropriate to permitsome undershooting in view of the overshooting in the second half oflast year. But I'd go along with your more informal approach, if theCommittee doesn't want to modify the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Tony Solomon agrees with the substance of Paul's analysis and recommendation but suggests an alternative possibility. However, he also states that he would go along with Paul's approach if the Committee does not want to modify the directive. There is no clear disagreement or contention between Paul and Tony in this passage.


Passage number 36.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" is a simple mention of a person's name and does not express any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 37.
 Well, if we have a formal approach, Iwould--MR. MAYO. Bob Mayo. I would support you, Paul. Chuck hasgiven my reasoning for the sort of floating idea that you have statedin a little different way. I wouldn't formalize [the approach] atthis point. We'll just keep our ears open until we get some figuresthat we're a little more comfortable with. This is a real puzzle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their support for Paul's idea and discussing their reasoning for not formalizing the approach at that point. The mention of a "puzzle" suggests that they are unsure or uncertain about the situation, but it does not indicate disagreement.


Passage number 38.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just interject. If you want toformalize it, I had some wording that I was fooling around with here,which follows pretty much what Mr. Solomon said. It would saysomething like: "In light of the relatively strong growth of M2 andM3 and the substantial easing recently in money market conditions, aswell as uncertainties about the behavior of M1, the Committee agreedto accept some shortfall in the growth of M1-A and M1-B from thespecified rates in the domestic policy directive as consistent withdevelopments in the aggregates generally and the objectives for theyear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 39.
"MR. MAYO. Sounds pretty good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that "Sounds pretty good."


Passage number 40.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll discuss formal or informal later.Let's get the substantive views.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that the discussion of formal or informal will be addressed later, and the focus for now is on the substantive views. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 41.
MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, this is Willis. I have two or threethings. One is that we have one method now of addressing our basedrift problem with these developments and we really didn't addressthat in our previous discussion. Second is that loan demand is notoff as much at the small banks, I think, as it is at the large bankswith the shift into commercial paper, given the lagging prime rate.And third, a technical way of achieving the same purpose--although Ithink it would be far more difficult to explain--would be to drop theband but at the same time raise the discount rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Willis, is simply presenting three points or observations.


Passage number 42.
 That would doalmost the same thing, although it's more difficult to explain, thatwe'd accomplish with raising the borrowing assumption above the $1billion base--2/24/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It seems to me that fooling around withthe discount rate would be very confusing, Willis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and preference about the potential effects of raising the borrowing assumption versus manipulating the discount rate.


Passage number 43.
 I thought of thatbut--MR. WINN. I think that's right, Paul, but it's another wayto do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers agree that there is another way to do something.


Passage number 44.
MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, this is Jerry Corrigan. I wouldvery much support the approach that you have suggested, and I would bedisposed also to go in the direction that you and Tony both suggestedof coupling that with accepting a shortfall for the time being.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement shows agreement and support for the approach suggested by the Chairman and Tony. There is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 45.
MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply starts with the name "Mr. Guffey" and addresses the Chairman.


Passage number 46.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 47.
MR. GUFFEY. Roger Guffey. I tentatively would support yourproposal, if I understand it. So, I would like to ask a fewquestions. One is: When you speak of adjusting the borrowing[assumption] to $1 billion plus, is that an adjustment from thecurrent [assumption] of what I believe to be about $950 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Guffey is simply seeking clarification and asking questions to better understand the proposal.


Passage number 48.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's only $770 million now--or will be onthe current projection. We're in one of these arbitrary averagingperiods that we use, and because we inadvertently ran a little highearlier in the period, this $770 million is in that sense artificiallylow. So, the current assumption is that on the same mechanics theborrowings would go up anyway based upon current projections of themoney supply in the next reserve averaging period two weeks away. Andthey would be around $950 million. But right at the moment they'rebelow that. The current expectation is that if we didn't do anything,we'd be back at $950 million in borrowing anyway two weeks from now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining the current borrowing projections and stating that they may increase in the next reserve averaging period. There is no indication of disagreement or contrasting opinions.


Passage number 49.
MR. GUFFEY. I'm going to have to ask another question then.The downward adjustment to the nonborrowed path to accommodate yoursuggestion is about $250 million. Is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any form of contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement of a fact or clarification being sought.


Passage number 50.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I can't provide the analysis you're looking for.


Passage number 51.
 It would be about $150 million a couple ofweeks from now and in the current two-week period it would be close to$350 million because we would in effect be leaving borrowings--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. $300 million anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not convey any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information about the estimated amount of money.


Passage number 52.
MR. AXILROD. --at the $1.1 billion level, as they were inthe first two weeks following the Committee meeting, instead of havingthem drop to around the $770 million, which would require it toaverage out at $950 million, if you know what I mean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 53.
MR. GUFFEY. Yes I do and I would approve that. The secondquestion that I had, Mr. Chairman, is for a bit clearer statement asto what we would do with the lower bound, which is 15 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Guffey agrees and approves the statement.


Passage number 54.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, my proposal is that we wouldn't doanything with it, but we would recognize that market rates might beabove or below it. If they were significantly below, we might want tohave another consultation in a couple of weeks or a week or whatever.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 55.
2/24/81MR. GUFFEY. Significantly means something in the 14-1/2percent or below range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The statement does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply defines the meaning of the term "significantly" in relation to a specific range of percentages.


Passage number 56.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know that we would consultif it were 14-1/2 percent, just having consulted today; but if it gotdown toward 14 percent, I certainly think we'd have another one, justconsistent with the basic directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about whether another consultation would be necessary based on the interest rate reaching a certain level.


Passage number 57.
MR. GUFFEY. I would support you on that basis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Guffey, is expressing agreement and support for someone else based on a certain basis.


Passage number 58.
MR. KOCH. Mr. Chairman, this is Don Koch for Bill Ford whohas asked me to convey the fact that since M2 and M3 are quite strongat this time, he would very much go along with your recommendation.Steve, can you tell me what has happened to the excess reserve accountduring the time that borrowings have gone from [our assumption of]$1.3 billion to [the current level of] $770 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply conveying information and asking for clarification.


Passage number 59.
MR. AXILROD. Excess reserves have been running a littlelower than in the previous three or four months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply states a fact about excess reserves being lower than in previous months. There is no contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 60.
 In the first week ofthis period, they dropped to--MR. STERNLIGHT. We didn't hear the question in New York.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a fact about not hearing a question in New York.


Passage number 61.
MR. AXILROD. The question, Peter, is: What has happened toexcess reserves since the Committee meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a question being asked.


Passage number 62.
MR. KOCH. What is happening to the excess reserves duringthis period as far as your expectations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of a question asked by Mr. Koch. It does not express any opinions or conflicting views.


Passage number 63.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, they tended to come down; of course,they had been running very high in December and January. These recentlevels have been a bit more in the $200 to $400 million area. Howthis week is going to work out, I don't know, because right now thebanks seem to have a big cumulative reserve deficiency that they arein no mood to cover.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is purely informative and does not contain any expression of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 64.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who is next.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is a simple question that seeks information, and there is no contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 65.
MR. PARTEE. Maybe that's everybody.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement made by Mr. Partee without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 66.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I haven't talked yet, Mr. Chairman. Thisis Gramley. I support your approach. I think it's important torecognize that either we're looking at very, very artificialstatistics or we're looking at a very, very substantial drop in themoney demand function. And in either of those cases, that means notreacting in ways that could generate problems for the future, I think,[in terms of] letting interest rates go down a lot further than theyalready have. So, I would say: Yes, let's go your direction. Let'smeet fairly promptly again, however, if in fact this approach leads tofurther declines in interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and support for the approach being discussed.


Passage number 67.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I might add to that. If we got a furthervery distinct softening in M1 instead of the reverse, I think we oughtto meet again, too. We've got to keep this under close review. Whoelse has not talked here. Governor Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting that if there is a further softening in M1, they should meet again to discuss it and keep a close review on the situation. The mention of Governor Rice does not indicate any disagreement either.


Passage number 68.
MR. RICE. I accept your proposal, Mr. Chairman, for thereasons that have already been outlined.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Rice is accepting the chairman's proposal based on the reasons already presented.


Passage number 69.
2/24/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Schultz.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage only states a date and the position or title of Governor Schultz. There is no indication of any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 70.
MR. SCHULTZ. I have nothing to add.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Schultz is simply stating that he has nothing to add, indicating that he does not have any additional comments or information to contribute to the discussion.


Passage number 71.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or statements that suggest disagreement or contention.


Passage number 72.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I'm trying to guess what we will dowhen the money supply strengthens. And not knowing that makes itdifficult for me to decide. My sympathies lie with what Larry Roossaid, but I suspect that we might be inclined to drag our feet alittle too much on the up side. If that tended to be correct, thenwhat you suggested might be the best position with which to temporize.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It presents the speaker's uncertainty and conflicting thoughts, but there is no direct clash of opinions or conflicting views between multiple speakers.


Passage number 73.
MS. TEETERS. I haven't known where it was and wasn't awarethat we were dragging our feet on the up side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they were not aware of something, without directly disagreeing with anyone or expressing a conflicting opinion.


Passage number 74.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Teeters, you haven't expressed aview. You asked a question but didn't express an opinion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the given passage, there is no contention or disagreement. Mrs. Teeters is being asked about her opinion or viewpoint on a certain matter, but she has not expressed it yet.


Passage number 75.
MS. TEETERS. I can go along with your approach. We simplycan't make the things reconcile at this point. So, let's let themarket give us some indications as to what it wants to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 76.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 77.
MR. BOYKIN. I agree fully with you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement indicates agreement between Mr. Boykin and the Chairman.


Passage number 78.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. I don't know whether we have anycomment from San Francisco or Philadelphia where the presidents aren'tavailable. Well, there seems to be a general agreement with maybe alittle restiveness. Let me report to you an arithmetic calculationthat was made yesterday that disturbed me, which may bear upon this abit. If you literally took our targets for this year and we hit themexactly every quarter, the average level for the year would besignificantly higher than last year, even though the target is lower.That's a result I don't like much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 79.
MR. ROOS(.). Would you repeat that, please.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a simple request for clarification and does not demonstrate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 80.
MR. SCHULTZ. No. Forget it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is dismissing or rejecting an idea, there is no disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 81.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we were on target every quarter on theaverage, the average level of the money supply for this year would behigher than it was last year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a hypothetical scenario about the average level of the money supply.


Passage number 82.
MR. SCHULTZ. The midpoint of the target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Schultz is talking about the midpoint of the target.


Passage number 83.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, the midpoint of the target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 84.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without further context.


Passage number 85.
 That's the oddity of last year's--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The reason you get that result is, ineffect, the base drift problem. We ended up last year very high, andthat's where the new target takes off from. So if one were looking atthe year-to-year change, the target is too high unless we have ashortfall sometime during the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 86.
MS. TEETERS. Well, we've already got it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement as it simply states a statement made by Ms. Teeters without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 87.
2/24/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we've already got it for six weeks,but the data are inadequate. The question remains as to whether ornot we want to incorporate this in a formal finding, which would bereported when we publish [the policy record]. I think we can do iteither way. One can argue that the more straightforward way is justto report it. It's not really a new directive; it's an instruction tothe Desk as to how to conduct [operations] when we have the aggregatesgoing in somewhat different directions and in the light of the 15percent limit. I think we can well justify the written modification.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing whether to incorporate certain data into a formal finding, and mentions that the decision could be made either way. However, no conflicting opinions are presented, and the speaker ultimately suggests that they can justify the written modification.


Passage number 88.
MS. TEETERS. What did we do when we reached the top.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply asks what was done when the top was reached without indicating any conflicting opinions or discussions.


Passage number 89.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, when we have reached the top, Ithink we've done it different ways at different times. When weactually relaxed the limit, we did a formal relaxation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing a past action and acknowledges that they have approached the task in different ways on different occasions.


Passage number 90.
MR. PARTEE. This is Chuck Partee. Paul, I didn't disagreewith the first part of your language. I didn't like the reference tothe uncertainty with regard to M1 in it. I certainly agree that thereis great uncertainty as to the distribution between M1-A and M1-B.But I don't really think that M1-B could be much stronger than we haveit because of the way the statistics are being handled. I think wecould refer to the strength of M2 and M3 and to the easing in moneymarket conditions. But I wouldn't refer to a feeling that M1-A andM1-B looked at together are not reliable. I can see how it affectsthe distribution, but I don't see how M1-B could be a great dealhigher than we already have it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee simply expresses his disagreement with the reference to the uncertainty of M1 in the language used, but he does not disagree with the overall point being made.


Passage number 91.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, M1-B would be higher if thepercentage coming out of [savings] were higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a hypothetical scenario without any disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 92.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, but we already have 75 to 80 percent, yousee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is stating a fact about the current situation, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 93.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, we already have the percentage comingout of savings at 75 to 80 percent. The other possibility is thatwe're not getting all the ATS accounts reported.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact about the percentage of savings coming out, and then presenting another possibility regarding ATS accounts not being reported.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 94.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't know if I agree on the ATS. Ithink they already have been set up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is expressing disagreement or doubt about the ATS (Automated Trading Systems) being set up.


Passage number 95.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You were looking into that out inMinneapolis, weren't you, Jerry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question asking if Jerry was looking into something in Minneapolis.


Passage number 96.
MR. CORRIGAN. Yes, I don't have anything much further toreport. We have some people up here looking at it, and all I can sayat this point is that the raw numbers look funny.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that they don't have much further information to report and that the raw numbers look strange.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 97.
MR. PARTEE. I think there is probably, shall I say, someavoidance of reserves going on there. But I think it's going on bycontinuing to classify as ATS accounts what are really NOW accounts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker suggests that there is avoidance of reserves happening by misclassifying accounts as ATS accounts instead of NOW accounts.


Passage number 98.
MR. CORRIGAN. I think that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. "I think that's right" indicates agreement or confirmation, not contention or disagreement.


Passage number 99.
MR. PARTEE. And that doesn't affect the aggregates. Itaffects the reserves, but it doesn't affect the aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting a statement without indicating any opposing viewpoints or contradictory ideas.


Passage number 100.
2/24/81MR. CORRIGAN. It depends on where that savings part is inreserves, too. At least it's bothering me in terms of M1-B. Again, Idon't have any way of knowing this, but I just wonder if some of thisflow into money market funds in the last six weeks or so may not bemore of a shift of consumer-type accounts out of banks into the moneymarket funds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing a concern or speculation about the flow of money into money market funds.


Passage number 101.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Of course, that's reflected in thestrength of M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not present any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 102.
MR. CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The provided passage does not contain any specific information or statements that would suggest contention or disagreement. Without any context or additional information, it is not possible to determine if there is any disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 103.
 True, but I'm thinking in terms of Chuck'spoint that he can't find any other reason to think that M1-B--MR. PARTEE. Well, that's a different kind of reason though,Jerry. What you're saying is that the change in interest raterelationships has shifted demands for various kinds of financialassets. That's different from saying that we're uncertain about thequality of the M1-B numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that Chuck has made a valid point and recognizes the distinction between Chuck's reason and their own perspective on the quality of the M1-B numbers.


Passage number 104.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what's the general sentiment aboutwhether to make a formal modification of the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for the general sentiment or opinion about making a formal modification of the directive.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 105.
MR. ROOS. Paul, this is Larry Roos. I urge you to take someformal action because I feel strongly opposed to what everybody isagreeing to today. If you look at the monetary base for the past fourmonths and if you look at total reserves over five months, they havebeen flat. We have these aggregates [unintelligible] have droppedfrom about a 14 percent growth rate over many months to zero recently.All of this adds up to the potential for a very serious undershoot,and I have to dissent from this action. I think it's a total mistake.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Roos, explicitly states that he opposes what everybody else is agreeing to and believes it to be a mistake. He provides evidence to support his viewpoint by mentioning the flat monetary base and total reserves, which he sees as indicative of a potential undershoot.


Passage number 106.
MS. TEETERS. I would much prefer to keep it on an informalbasis at this point. We haven't really changed the lower [limit ofthe funds range]. We're doing something very similar to what was donein December when we reached the top [of the range]. I'd just keep iton an informal basis at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Teeters is expressing her preference for keeping the discussion informal and referencing a previous decision made in December as a basis for her argument.


Passage number 107.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We did take a formal vote in December;that was the most recent time. Well, we have some mixed opinions.Let me just check quickly. Governor Gramley, do want to be formal orinformal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply provides information about a previous formal vote and mentions that there are mixed opinions about being formal or informal in the current situation. There is no clear contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 108.
MR. GRAMLEY. I have no strong opinion; I can go either way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 109.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage based solely on the given information, as the passage is incomplete. Please provide more context or the full passage for a more accurate analysis.


Passage number 110.
MR. GUFFEY. I'm not quite sure. I might say, if Iunderstand what we're doing, that I think I would prefer a formal votein the sense that there has been a policy judgment to change thenonborrowed path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Guffey is expressing uncertainty and stating a preference for a formal vote.


Passage number 111.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's no question that we are changingthe nonborrowed path from a mechanical application of what we decidedlast time. Put another way, one could say it's being shifted in thelight of M2, which is in the directive, and in the light of the 15percent, which is in the directive too. That's why we can do iteither way. But you're basically a formal fellow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining that the nonborrowed path is being adjusted in response to certain factors mentioned in the directive, but it can be done in different ways. The mention of the speaker being a "formal fellow" suggests a lighthearted tone, but it does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 112.
-11-2/24/81MR. GUFFEY. Yes, I think so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The given passage does not provide any information or context to suggest contention or disagreement. It simply includes a statement from someone named Mr. Guffey.


Passage number 113.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information to determine the presence of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 114.
MR. MORRIS. I'm formal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "I'm formal" is an expression used to indicate the speaker's intention to speak in a formal manner. It does not imply disagreement or contention.


Passage number 115.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the given passage to determine whether there is contention or disagreement involving Governor Partee.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 116.
MR. PARTEE. I don't care an awful lot, except for that oneobjection I have to your statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The phrase "except for that one objection I have" suggests disagreement or disagreement with the statement being discussed.


Passage number 117.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 118.
MR. RICE. I don't feel strongly either, but I lean towardinformal because I don't believe we're taking any significant policyaction here today and we may want to take some significant policyaction in a few days.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. MR. RICE's statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. He simply states his opinion that he leans toward informal because he does not believe any significant policy action is being taken today, but acknowledges that there may be a need for it in the future.


Passage number 119.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos wants it formal. GovernorSchultz.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no content or disagreement in the given passage. It simply states a preference or requirement of Mr. Roos.


Passage number 120.
MR. SCHULTZ. I lean to formal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that the speaker, Mr. Schultz, leans towards something formal.


Passage number 121.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the full context or content of the passage.


Passage number 122.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Peter Sternlight, here; he was called away.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement is simply providing information about Peter Sternlight being called away without indicating any conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 123.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did I interpret his previous comment aswanting it formal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence is a question seeking clarification about how the previous comment was interpreted.


Passage number 124.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I think so, although given that he's nothere to cast a formal vote, he might just as soon not have it beformal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a possibility about someone's lack of participation.


Passage number 125.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Teeters is informal. Mr. Winn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage only provides descriptive information about Mrs. Teeters, without any mention of Mr. Winn, so there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 126.
MR. WINN. Immaterial to me, Paul.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response "Immaterial to me, Paul" simply indicates that the subject being discussed is not relevant or important to Mr. Winn.


Passage number 127.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have a lot of immateriality, butamong those who expressed an opinion we have a majority--I don't knowwhether it's a true majority--who would like it formal. So, maybe weought to do it formally. I do think there is uncertainty about thebehavior of M1, but I don't think whether or not that is mentioned inthe [directive] language is anything like a make or break point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker acknowledges that there are differing opinions but does not argue or dispute any points.


Passage number 128.
MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, one way of handling GovernorPartee's point is to talk about uncertainty in interpreting the M1s.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In the passage, Mr. Gramley suggests a way of addressing Governor Partee's point by discussing the uncertainty in interpreting the M1s. There is no indication of contention or disagreement between Mr. Gramley and Governor Partee.


Passage number 129.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, that's all right, to put it in those terms.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Yes, that's all right, to put it in those terms" indicates agreement or acceptance of the terms being referred to.


Passage number 130.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What's this. Uncertainties about theinterpretation of the behavior. Is that the wording.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact and does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 131.
MR. PARTEE. You are saying "interpretation" now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any signs of contention or disagreement. It simply presents Mr. Partee stating a term, "interpretation."


Passage number 132.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, "uncertainties about theinterpretation of the behavior of..." If we're going to take a formalvote, let me try to read some scribbles I have in front of me. "In-12-2/24/81light of the relatively strong growth of M2 and M3 and the substantialeasing recently in money market conditions, as well as uncertaintiesabout the interpretation of the behavior of M1, the Committee agreedto accept some shortfall in growth of M1-A and M1-B from the specifiedrates in the domestic policy directive as consistent with developmentsin the aggregates generally and the objectives for the year." Thatlatter part is meant to convey that we're not just forgetting aboutthese aggregates and we're not going to let them go down so far thatit jeopardizes the objectives for the year. Understood. I take itit's understood. We will vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is summarizing the discussion and everyone seems to be in agreement with the decision.


Passage number 133.
MR. ALTMANN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Mr. Altmann without providing any information or context, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


