Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMay 20, 1986A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, May 20, 1986, at 9:15 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.MrsMr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Volcker, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellGuffeyHornJohnsonMelzerMorrisRiceSegerWallichMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, Keehn, and Stern, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco,respectivelyMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, 1/ General CounselMr. Oltman, Deputy General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. J. Davis, T. Davis, Kohn, Lindsey, Prell,and Siegman, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account1/ Entered meeting after action to approve minutes for meeting ofApril 1, 1986.5/20/86Mr. Coyne, 1/ Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of GovernorsMr..Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMr. Fousek, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bankof New YorkMessrs. Lang, Rolnick, Rosenblum, Scadding, Scheld,Thieke, and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Minneapolis,Dallas, San Francisco, Chicago, New York, andAtlanta, respectivelyMessrs. Burger, Cook, and Fieleke, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Richmond,and Boston, respectively1/ Entered meeting after action to approve minutes for meeting ofApril 1, 1986.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply providing a list of the individuals present at the meeting. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 2.
Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofMay 20, 1986CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there a motion to approve the minutes.SPEAKER(.). So moved.SPEAKER(.). Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. There is a motion to approve the minutes, and it is promptly seconded.


Passage number 3.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Mr. Cross.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Without objection" suggests that there is no disagreement or contention.


Passage number 4.
MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It only includes a statement by Mr. Cross.


Passage number 5.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any questions or comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is a simple request for any questions or comments, indicating openness and willingness to engage in conversation. It does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 6.
MR. WALLICH. Is there some presumption that this situationwill go on and eventually--[not] immediately--that there will becontinuing pressure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if there is an assumption or expectation that the situation will continue with ongoing pressure.


Passage number 7.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Excuse me, I was distracted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. The speaker is simply apologizing for being distracted.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 8.
MR. WALLICH. Sorry, I was trying to say that [the dollar]was being held up temporarily, but over time--half a year, a year--would this look toward continuing pressures on the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.
Explanation: The speaker mentions that there may be continuing pressures on the dollar over time, suggesting a potential disagreement or contention about the future performance of the dollar.


Passage number 9.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would what look toward continuingpressures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention in this passage. It seems to be a fragment of a sentence or a question, which does not provide enough information to determine any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 10.
MR. TRUMAN. I think the question, Mr. Chairman, is whether aresumption of downward pressure on the dollar is expected.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 11.
MR. CROSS. Well, that certainly is going to depend very muchon how the economic data unfold. But one thing that has been animportant factor in the dollar having stopped its decline has been, ifnot a change in the comments and rhetoric and the statements made by anumber of officials in a lot of countries, certainly a view in themarket that the attitudes of the officials in those countries--hereand in Japan and in Germany--are such that there tends not to beconcern about the level of the dollar now. Or, at least thesecountries are not pressing to see it go down further. And in the viewof the Europeans and the Japanese, there is the beginning of anexpression of some concern should the dollar go down further. So Ithink we've seen in the market during this period great attention paidto official attitudes; and there is a different perception in whatthose attitudes are. There is a view that at least for the time beingthere is not felt to be any need to try to guide the dollar downfurther.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage describes the different attitudes and views regarding the value of the dollar, but there is no clear disagreement or contention between the parties.


Passage number 12.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think there's any safe bet as towhat the market will do over the next 6 months to a year.SPEAKER(.). Or two weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about the market's behavior, but there is no disagreement or contention present in the passage.


Passage number 13.
MR. FORRESTAL. Sam, are the Japanese continuing to show aninterest in the government securities market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question about the interest of the Japanese in the government securities market.


Passage number 14.
MR. CROSS. Peter can comment on that, but as far as we cantell they're showing a considerable interest in the government5/20/86 -2-securities market. Apparently, they picked up quite substantialamounts of the latest issues. We did hear in the first part of Aprilthat the long-term capital outflows from Japan were declining, but themost recent information--and we talked to the Japanese a few days ago--was that the capital outflows from Japan through April and early Mayhave continued to be very large. Now, that doesn't mean it's allcoming to dollars because there are some attractions in Australian andother currencies. Also, it doesn't mean that they aren't coveringsome substantial parts possibly by hedging; we don't know. Butcertainly, from what we can tell they are continuing to buy verysubstantial amounts of U.S. government securities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply relaying information about Japan's interest in the government securities market.


Passage number 15.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I could add to that. As Sam said, they arecertainly [active]; in this last bond auction they took roughlyof a $9 billion auction. The interest does tend to be a littlesporadic and one gets the impression in talking to people in themarket that sometimes it's waning or sometimes waxing stronger. Wehave talked to some of the Japanese firms about it and we get theimpression that there is more time and effort put into diversifyingout of government securities into other dollar securities and intoinvestments in the securities of other countries, but with someinterest continuing in the dollar and in U.S. government securities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply providing information about the activity and interest of Japanese firms in government securities. There is no contention or disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 16.
MR. PARRY. Sam, what has been the change in the yen relativeto other countries that are competitive with Japan like Korea, Taiwan,and Hong Kong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking about the change in the yen relative to other countries that are competitive with Japan.


Passage number 17.
MR. CROSS. Those currencies have tended to move with thedollar, so the yen has changed against them in the same way that ithas changed against the dollar. And that is a matter that is causingsome concern for them because they see the diversion of what they'vebeen selling to Korea, being sold by Korea, Taiwan, and elsewhere.And we're seeing moves by the Japanese to shift to those currenciesand to increase their ownership in output [facilities] from there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating facts about the movement of currencies and the concern caused by the diversion of sales. There is no expression of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 18.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll ask you an impossible question, Mr.Truman. What will be the GNP increases in Japan and Germany in thefirst quarter. What would be your best guess at the moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking Mr. Truman a question about predicting the GNP increases in Japan and Germany.


Passage number 19.
MR. TRUMAN. My best guess on Japan is something like 2percent at an annual rate--very low, and maybe something about thesame order of magnitude, say, 1 to 2 percent in Germany. In bothcountries there were declines in industrial production in the firstquarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is offering their own estimation or guess about the economic growth rates in Japan and Germany, specifically regarding industrial production in the first quarter.


Passage number 20.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You think they were both positive anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests that both things mentioned were positive.


Passage number 21.
MR. TRUMAN. On the assumption that the nontraded goodscomponent of the GNP continued to expand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states an assumption about the expansion of the nontraded goods component of the GNP.


Passage number 22.
MR. JOHNSON. Is that in keeping with what their estimate is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention or indicate any disagreement or contention. It is a simple question and does not involve any conflicting opinions or contrasting points of view.


Passage number 23.
MR. TRUMAN. I would think in both cases it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage reveals that "Mr. Truman" believes that something is present in both cases, without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 24.
MR. JOHNSON. I thought Germany had a more optimistic outlookthan that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Johnson's belief about Germany's outlook without any opposing view or conflicting opinion.


Passage number 25.
5/20/86 -3-MR. TRUMAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage appears to simply provide a date and a name (presumably Mr. Truman), without any indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 26.
 Well, it's short of what their expectationswere; there's increasing evidence from--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, they had a more optimistic outlookearlier; there's no doubt about that. Recently, I think they havebeen very concerned about how low [their GNP] may have been in thefirst quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The phrases "short of what their expectations were" and "they had a more optimistic outlook earlier" show a disagreement or difference in opinion. One perspective suggests that the expectations were not met, while the other implies a previously more positive outlook.


Passage number 27.
MR. STERN(.). Ted, if you ranked policies around the world--at least in the United States, Japan and Germany--would we still bethe most expansionary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Stern is asking for Ted's opinion on whether the United States would still be the most expansionary country if policies were ranked globally.


Passage number 28.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, on the fiscal policy side, certainly,although it depends on what you crank in for Gramm-Rudman. But inboth of those countries we're seeing a continuing move toward fiscalrestraint, a continuation of a 4- or 5-year trend. On the monetaryside, for Germany in any case, they are substantially above theirmonetary growth [objective]. They were aiming for 5-1/2 percent inApril and it was a little above 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is just providing information and discussing trends in fiscal and monetary policies in different countries.


Passage number 29.
 That's one of the thingsthat Sam referred to that they are concerned about and one of thethings conditioned to their position in the EMS, which is restrainingthem from providing more stimulus on the monetary side. It's a littlehard to read the monetary part in the short run [in Japan]. TheJapanese really have moved toward a more expansionary monetary postureover the course of the first five months of this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply stating a fact about the concerns and actions of the Japanese government in relation to their monetary policy.


Passage number 30.
MR. CROSS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information about Mr. Cross's state of mind or any potential disagreement or contention.


Passage number 31.
 Every time they--MR. TRUMAN. Their monetary growth dipped down in April, butthey too have been a bit concerned about the excessive monetarygrowth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a concern about excessive monetary growth.


Passage number 32.
MR. BLACK. But if you look back a little farther, Ted, youwouldn't say that they had been as stimulative as we have been,though, would you. This is just recently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Black, followed by a question seeking Ted's agreement or disagreement on a particular matter.


Passage number 33.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, for most of the period up until veryrecently they were following a very tight monetary policy largelydirected at keeping the yen from depreciating too much; there was alot of pressure on them not to ease monetary policy because that wouldcause the yen to depreciate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining the monetary policy and the pressure on maintaining the value of the yen.


Passage number 34.
MR. CROSS. But they have changed the discount rate; theyhave lowered it 3 times and each time the yen has risen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the change in the discount rate and its correlation with the rising yen.


Passage number 35.
MR. JOHNSON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context about Mr. Johnson that would indicate contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 36.
 How do you think Germany will respond to suchlow first-quarter estimates, given the fact that even they, as yousaid, already have made it clear that even if they wanted to dosomething they're sort of boxed in by the French franc in the EMS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The statement suggests that Germany may not be able to take action due to constraints imposed by the French franc in the EMS.


Passage number 37.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, there is some talk that if it comes in lowand the government does poorly in the elections in the second week ofJune--the second Sunday in June, I guess--that there might be someeasing on the fiscal side. I think that has a low probability, but itis a possibility, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing a potential scenario and expressing their opinion about the probability of it happening.


Passage number 38.
MR. JOHNSON. What do you mean by easing on the fiscal side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply a question asking for clarification.


Passage number 39.
5/20/86MR. TRUMAN. Well, I've been told that there are some modestfiscal expansionary measures--public works projects and so forth andso on. They have a national election in January and the implicationsof this June election are that they have enough time to move--to easea bit to stimulate the economy if they're concerned--which I think isa very big "if." One of the problems in interpreting those electionresults, as Sam mentioned, is that they are going to be contaminatedby Chernobyl. So there would be less of a mandate than one might wantin the circumstances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is primarily stating information and observations without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 40.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. A slightly different form offallout.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not present any conflicting ideas or opinions. It simply introduces a different form of fallout without any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 41.
MR. MORRIS. We seem to have a worldwide phenomenon of rapidmonetary growth associated with slow real growth; it's not purelyAmerican.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is a worldwide phenomenon of rapid monetary growth associated with slow real growth. This implies a contention or disagreement between the actual economic growth and the monetary growth.


Passage number 42.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is true at the moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "This is true at the moment" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests that the statement being discussed is currently accurate.


Passage number 43.
MR. JOHNSON. Worldwide velocity problems.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states "worldwide velocity problems" without any additional information or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 44.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In more extreme form here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 45.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes. These measures aren't worthmuch, but if you use any kind of conventional measure of real interestrates, the United States right now is probably very much on the lowside of real interest rate countries around the world. If you use anex-post measure of inflation, who knows what real interest rates are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement suggests that the United States is likely to have low real interest rates compared to other countries, but acknowledges the uncertainty when measuring real interest rates using an ex-post measure of inflation.


Passage number 46.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Sternlight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but you have not provided a passage for me to analyze.


Passage number 47.
MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement by Mr. Sternlight.


Passage number 48.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple question and does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 49.
MS. SEGER. Peter, do you sense that commercial banks havecashed in a lot of their paper profits in their bond holdings. Orhave they just been playing it by ear and taking their time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a question asking for Peter's opinion on whether commercial banks have cashed in their paper profits in their bond holdings or if they have been taking their time.


Passage number 50.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I think there has been some move to captureprofits on some longer-term investments and to move somewhat shorterin the yield curve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses a strategy related to capturing profits on longer-term investments and moving towards a shorter yield curve.


Passage number 51.
 I think they're staying invested, though--MS. SEGER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 52.
 Oh, I didn't mean that they're weren't stayinginvested but--MR. STERNLIGHT. --especially given fairly weak loan demand.And that also would be characteristic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker interrupts to add their perspective, suggesting that the previous statement might not be accurate because of weak loan demand.


Passage number 53.
MS. SEGER. How about their trading accounts. How are theyrunning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply presents a question about the trading accounts without any conflicting opinions or contrasting viewpoints.


Passage number 54.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, they have been taking their lumpsrecently as market prices have moved down. There are some losssituations around--nothing super heavy among the bank dealers that I'mfamiliar with, but there are some adverse experiences.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that there are some loss situations and adverse experiences, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement. It is simply presenting information about the market.


Passage number 55.
MS. SEGER. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statement or indication of contention or disagreement. It simply shows that Ms. Seger is expressing gratitude.


Passage number 56.
5/20/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other questions. We have to ratifythe transactions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply suggests that there may be further questions before proceeding to ratify the transactions.


Passage number 57.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the statement "So moved." This phrase is typically used in a meeting or discussion to indicate agreement or approval with a motion made by someone else. It simply acknowledges and supports the motion without expressing any opposition or disagreement.


Passage number 58.
MS. SEGER. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states "MS. SEGER" without providing any additional context or information that would suggest contention.


Passage number 59.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Mr. Kichline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage "Without objection. Mr. Kichline." This statement indicates that there was no disagreement or opposition to whatever was being discussed or proposed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 60.
MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

In this passage, Mr. Kichline is making a statement, but without providing any context or further information it is impossible to determine if there is contention or disagreement involved.


Passage number 61.
]MR. PARRY. Did that revision in the first quarter make yousomewhat more pessimistic about the second quarter in terms ofinventories.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a question asking for clarification or confirmation of a fact or opinion.


Passage number 62.
MR. KICHLINE. Not much. We had available all of the dataexcept for retail trade inventories when we put the forecast together,and they came in significantly higher than we thought. The CommerceDepartment will release tomorrow the detail on how it fits together,so we have much of this. We really were [not] surprised, frankly. Wethought, given the degrees of freedom that they have in that area,that they might not have taken all of the implied revision intoaccount; but our reading of the inventory side was that inventoriesgenerally were lean, with the exception perhaps of some major retailtrade [firms]. So, we would not want to change very much as a resultof this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker states that they had all the data except for retail trade inventories when making the forecast, and the retail trade inventories came in higher than expected. However, the speaker says that they were not surprised by this and their reading of the inventory side was that inventories were generally lean. They do not indicate any disagreement or contention with others.


Passage number 63.
MR. BLACK. Jim, do you have the numerical figure on finalsales.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black is simply asking Jim if he has the numerical figure on final sales.


Passage number 64.
MR. KICHLINE. Final sales had been minus 0.4 percent. Theyare now minus 0.7 percent. But I should give you another number:final sales excluding CCC purchases, because they are the big mover.If you exclude the Commodity Credit Corporation operations they hadbeen rising 2.6 percent and now they are indicated to have risen 2.2percent. The changes in these final sales are really quite small.Personal consumption expenditures, net exports, and residentialstructures were revised down, each by a small amount.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing numbers and statistics without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 65.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. CCC is way down in the first quarter onthese estimates, but is that still positive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that CCC is performing lower than expected in the first quarter, but questioning if this still counts as a positive outcome.


Passage number 66.
MR. KICHLINE. Yes, it's just much less positive than before.The offset shows up in federal purchases, of course, if the accountsare kept straight. Federal purchases were up 23 percent at an annualrate in the fourth quarter and are now indicated to have declined 30percent in the first quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents contrasting information about the change in federal purchases between the fourth quarter and the first quarter.


Passage number 67.
MR. JOHNSON. Which side of the trade account was revised.Or was it both.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking for clarification about a trade account.


Passage number 68.
MR. KICHLINE. Imports were less negative and exports wererevised down a bit. So the contribution of net exports is a littleless than had been projected before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply providing information about the revision of imports and exports and how it affects the contribution of net exports. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 69.
MR. PARRY. Jim, with regard to the forecast, if one were toassume tax reform roughly similar to the Packwood proposal, given thedifference in timing between the elimination of exemptions and the5/20/86effectiveness of the lower tax rates, how would that affect yourestimates of real growth in 1987.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a question being asked by Mr. Parry.


Passage number 70.
MR. KICHLINE. I think we were asked that question yesterday[at the Board meeting] and I suggested after a long answer that Idon't know. Do you want the short answer or the long answer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kichline is simply stating that he doesn't know the answer to a question that was asked at the previous Board meeting.


Passage number 71.
MR. PARRY. A short one will do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker just asks for a short response, indicating that a brief answer is sufficient.


Passage number 72.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess we can take whatevercomments people have on the business outlook generally. Mr. Parry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage seems to be accepting and open to the opinions of others without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 73.
MR. PARRY. My view about the outlook is very similar to thatpresented by Jim, both in terms of real growth and also inflation. Iwould also agree that the dichotomy between what appear to be veryfavorable fundamental factors and the current sluggish performance ofthe economy clearly persists. However, in one area--the dollar--itwould appear as though the favorable fundamentals for growth haveimproved, as Sam indicated. The dollar is now 6 to 7 percent lessthan it was in early April when we last met. On the other hand, Ifeel as though the current greater likelihood of tax reform indicatesthat fiscal policy may move in the direction of somewhat greaterrestraint than we have in our forecast and perhaps in Jim's as well.In the Twelfth District we feel as though there areconvincing signs of improvement. Southern California appears to be inthe midst of a broadly based expansion, with particular strength inresidential construction. In the Pacific Northwest, the forestproducts industry is posting its best performance in several years,with prices of some products up 22 percent over year-ago levels. Thesemiconductor industry is improving somewhat and strengthening ordersfor commercial aircraft have benefited companies such as Boeing inSeattle as well as many subcontractors in California. Finally, lowergasoline prices and concerns about terrorism abroad are expected toboost tourism revenues very substantially, especially in the Northwestwith the added draw of Canada's Expo. Just as an aside, we know froman Alaskan banker that there isn't a room available in Anchorage forthe entire summer as a result of the pickup in tourism activity. Socancel that city from your list. Areas heavily dependent onagriculture and energy continue to suffer, however. In California,drilling and rig activity are down very sharply and Alaska has beenparticularly hard hit. Estimates are that each dollar decline in oilprices costs the state of Alaska about $150 million in revenue loss.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with Jim's view about the outlook and the sluggish performance of the economy. They also agree with Sam's view that the favorable fundamentals for growth have improved in terms of the dollar. The speaker then provides their own perspective on the Twelfth District, stating that there are signs of improvement in various industries but also mentioning that areas dependent on agriculture and energy are suffering.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 74.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: Without the full passage, it is difficult to determine the exact content, but the presence of "Mr. Keehn" suggests the involvement of at least one individual, which could potentially lead to contention or disagreement.


Passage number 75.
MR. KEEHN. Conditions in our part of the Midwest also arevery largely unchanged from the last meeting. There is that generalexpectation that the third and fourth quarters will be significantlyimproved, but I must say the current level of activity is considerablyunder those expectations. As always, the areas that have been strongcontinue to be strong. I note particularly the real estate side,which is growing very, very rapidly pretty much across the board. Andthat, of course, pervades all of the related activities such asmaterials manufacturers, suppliers, and the like. Office building inthe suburban Chicago area is beginning to slow down, but in thedowntown Chicago area the projects are being completed and newprojects are under way; I am quite surprised by the continuation of5/20/86the heavy building in the commercial office building area. On theresidential side in our District--and I guess this is typical of manyparts of the country--over the last three months new permits forhousing starts are up by some 40 percent over a similar period lastyear. So housing starts are growing very, very rapidly.Alternatively, on the weak side, there is no reallysignificant improvement in heavy manufacturing. Almost surprisingly,the decline in the dollar has not yet worked its way through in termsof a substantial pickup in orders and production. The environment isbetter, I am told, but in terms of actually getting deals it has notbeen much of a help. An exception to this is the paper board/paperbox industry which is growing very, very rapidly; their order booksearly this year--in February, really--on the export side began to takeoff. So, they are exporting very heavily and that has been helpful.On the inflation side, I have two comments. First, onpricing: Everybody I have talked to says that the pricing in themarketplace pretty much across the board is very fierce. They arejust unable to get price increases to stick in any significant way.The labor side is consistent with what Jim has suggested. Contractsare continuing to be negotiated on very favorable terms: three-yearcontracts, with good changes in the work rules and improvement on thebenefits side, so that unit labor costs seem to be under pretty goodcontrol. So, in an inflation sense, the outlook looks pretty good.Net, our outlook is consistent with the staff forecast; but havingsaid that we would be pleased to see the whites of the eyes of thethird- and fourth-quarter numbers because they look a little remoteright now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing an overview of the current conditions in their part of the Midwest and discussing various industries and sectors.


Passage number 76.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 77.
MS. HORN. Like the previous three speakers and like thestaff, our forecast is for a pickup in the economy in the second half.But in fact we find the present situation disquieting. There is, ofcourse, no evidence today of this pickup and in fact it may bepostponed. I still believe that the past favorable developments willshow through in the economy, but sometimes I worry that maybe theyhave already shown through in part in the numbers we are seeing rightnow and that we will see less of a pickup than we all are forecasting.I certainly would feel better if we were seeing movement in somethingbesides the housing numbers.Like other parts of the country, we are seeing good housingnumbers in our District. I remind myself that under normalconditions, if I saw these kinds of economic statistics after such along economic expansion, I normally would not be hopeful about thefuture. But the incoming employment numbers keep me somewhat morehopeful, perhaps. If I have special concerns today, I think theycenter around the trade numbers and the inventory numbers. On thetrade side we expect a turnaround, and I would say that the businesscommunity expects a turnaround. In the Fourth District the businesscommunity, in spite of flat performance, is quite optimistic on thetrade turnaround side and on the overall economic outlook. I do find,however, that there is beginning to be a difference between theexpectations of the business community and of some of the economists Italk to who are beginning to be discouraged, particularly on the tradenumber, and who are talking about the need for the foreign exchange5/20/86rate to go down further. On the inventory side, of course, goodinventory numbers depend very much on what business expectations are.And I am concerned that, if this positive business mood I see beginsto slip, we may then be in for an inventory correction. While I thinkour patience will be tested over the next several months, I remainoptimistic about the second half; but with each passing month I growmore uncertain about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Horn, expresses her concern and uncertainty about the future economic outlook, particularly in regards to the trade numbers and inventory. She mentions that the business community is optimistic, but some economists she talks to are becoming discouraged. This difference in expectations between the business community and economists indicates a disagreement.


Passage number 78.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 79.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, we all seem to be pretty much oflike mind this morning. In view of what we know now, I guess that isnot unpredictable. We wouldn't have any difference at all with thestaff's forecast for the balance of this year. Our guess would be--and of course it's purely a guess--that if in fact we do achieve thosefigures, we might be moving a little more strongly as we go into nextyear than the staff has projected, but just a tad more than what theyare saying. I am somewhat cheered by the feeling that inflation willbe down over this period, but I do think that we might justifiablyhave some concern about the sharp rise in the price of nonfuel importsin the first quarter of 1986. That was not the first quarter in whichthat has taken place. It is pointed out in the Greenbook, page 21 inthe second part, that this could be a first step in the inflationaryfeedback we might expect from the substantial depreciation in thedollar that we have had over the last year or so. That is somethingthat I think bears watching.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the staff's forecast for the balance of the year and stating their own opinion that the economy may be stronger than projected for the following year. The speaker also expresses some concern about the rise in price of nonfuel imports and the potential inflationary feedback from the depreciation of the dollar. However, the speaker does not indicate any disagreement with the overall viewpoint presented.


Passage number 80.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about Mr. Forrestal, so it is impossible to determine if there is contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 81.
MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, the situation in theSoutheast is not very different from that expressed by other speakers.On average in most sectors of the [District] economy and in mostgeographical areas there has been increasing strength in the firstquarter and presumably through the second quarter as well. Thenotable exception, of course, is Louisiana. Generally, residentialconstruction is quite strong in the Southeast as a result of lowermortgage interest rates. Refinancing has gone on at a very, veryrapid rate. Commercial construction--and I should say it's reallyindustrial construction--also is moving ahead rather strongly. Therehas been a shift from commercial development to industrial parkdevelopment because of the high vacancy rates in commercialdevelopments. Tourism also has improved as you might expect; and theexpectation is that that's going to continue with the canceling oftrips to Europe. Parenthetically, Eastern Airlines had anticipatedadding--or perhaps they already had--one flight from Miami to Madrid;but that has been cancelled completely because of the lack ofbookings. Consumer spending increased in March. So, in general thosesectors appear to be very good.As I indicated, the big exception is Louisiana. It now hasthe highest unemployment rate in the United States at a little over 13percent. The rig count is the lowest since 1975 and the situationthere is really quite serious. One of our directors reported that theonly happy person in the state of Louisiana is Governor Edwards afterthe trial. The situation with respect to oil and energy has spreadinto the Gulf Coast areas of Alabama and Mississippi, which are alsoinvolved in those [activities], so that's going to be a negative areaas well. In agriculture there is not very much new. It's a difficult5/20/86situation and that situation has been exacerbated by the very severedrought that we have experienced--the worst drought, apparently, inover a hundred years. I have already talked about commercial realestate.On the inflation side, we still get sporadic reports aboutprice increases due to the decline in the value of the dollar, mostlyin terms of Japanese goods. But those reports are very sporadic andthere really is not very much evidence that the decline in theexchange value has worked its way into higher prices at this point.Wage negotiations continue to be moderate, although inflation in acouple of our cities like Miami and Atlanta is a bit above thenational average. In general, the feeling around the District seemsto be one of optimism--again, with the exception of Louisiana. Peopleare looking for a strong second half and they are looking for a good1987.More generally, we agree entirely with the staff forecast.While the evidence is not yet in the statistics, we think that all ofthe fundamentals are in the pipeline--lower interest rates and all ofthe other things that we have talked about--to give us the kind ofgrowth that the staff is forecasting for the second half of the year.We have no quarrel with that and we also agree with the inflationnumber. So in general, with the few exceptions that I noted, theSoutheast looks pretty good and we think that we are going to get thekind of growth that the staff is forecasting throughout the nation inthe second half of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Forrestal, agrees with the overall positive outlook on the Southeast economy and the staff forecast. He mentions a few exceptions, such as the situation in Louisiana, but overall he agrees with the positive outlook for growth.


Passage number 82.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 83.
MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, our picture is a littledifferent in that it is not looking too good. Economic activity isdeclining. The data for the first quarter show that while the declinehas been modest it certainly is widespread. We expect thedeterioration to be more severe in this quarter and also in the thirdquarter. The energy sector has been referred to already; of course,it has been very hard hit. The rig count is the lowest since WWII.The employment in that area, though, has not come down quite as muchas one would have anticipated; it was down about 7 percent in March soour view is that we still have a lot more of that coming as we goalong. Oil prices have come back a little, but it doesn't seem thatthe increase, at least yet, is enough to give drillers muchencouragement. We would anticipate that prices probably could turnback down as we get on past summer. Construction is continuing tosubside, particularly on the nonresidential side. The value ofcontracts has been sliding for several months. Employment hasremained pretty strong and in fact is about at historically highlevels in nonresidential construction; so here again we expect to seea sizable reduction in the work force as the projects come off andthere are no new ones that are going to be replacing them. Othersectors of our economy are stagnant or declining. Manufacturing isaffected by the weakness of energy and construction, and agriculturecontinues to do poorly. The financial position of many of our farmersalso has been weakened further by the decline in oil prices becausethey are not getting the royalty payments from the oil wells that theyhave on their farms. Residential construction has been holding upfairly well but we would be more comfortable, as far as our financial5/20/86institutions are concerned, if multi-family construction would dropoff a bit.In sum, Mr. Chairman, we just are not really seeing very muchon the positive side in the Eleventh District. We share part ofLouisiana--the part that Mr. Forrestal doesn't have--and he reportedhow that state is doing. New Mexico we share with the Tenth Districtand that is not doing all that great either. So, we are a littlenegative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains multiple indicators of economic decline and weakness, suggesting a negative outlook for the Eleventh District.


Passage number 84.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Melzer, you will improve the spirits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a straightforward and positive one, expressing an expectation that Mr. Melzer will have an uplifting effect on the spirits.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 85.
MR. MELZER. That's right. I will have to try to offsetthis. As was reported last month--and this is somewhat dated, butright now what we have for the District are first-quarter data--thereis really strength across the board in terms of employment,construction, and consumer spending. Our District has been growing ata rate considerably in excess of the rate nationally. We have hadparticular strength in non-ag employment, including manufacturingemployment, and also in residential construction. Also, in general inour area I think the commercial overbuilding is occurring at a laterdate, so we would still anticipate strength in commercial constructionthrough this year with perhaps some slowing next year.Just talking to people in terms of what's happening on a morecurrent basis, I sense that the tone is very good in terms ofattitudes. One specific piece of anecdotal information: A retailer Italked to some weeks ago expressed some confusion as to why furnitureand consumer durable sales weren't really following the strength wehave seen in housing, which normally is expected. There is now someevidence in a couple of the major cities in the District that thoseareas are beginning to pick up.In my mind, one of the most significant developments in thisintermeeting period has been the shift in market psychology. I havejust focused on the government bond market, and I think there probablyis some good news and bad news in that. I guess the good news mightbe that market participants, broadly speaking, may be somewhat moreconfident in their outlook about this forthcoming strength in theeconomy. I would agree with what has been said about this dichotomywe have had in the current outlook and looking down the road for somestrength. I think there is some evidence in the bond market, anyway;I guess it's expressed in the form of concern that perhaps that infact is going to develop. The troublesome aspect of all of this iswhat it might imply in terms of inflationary expectations. I think itwas noted in Peter's report and in Sam's, to some extent, that therecould be a psychology emerging whereby the best is behind us in termsof oil price declines. We are beginning to feel the impact of thedecline of the dollar on prices, and perhaps we'll be moving into aperiod of cyclical recovery and have price pressures arising out ofthat. In connection with that we have had a steepening of the yieldcurve between the front end and the long/intermediate end of roughly25 to 50 basis points. There is always the possibility that this isjust congestion or indigestion from a large supply of securities,although all through this period we haven't really seen any supplyproblem showing through. I think it's significant to note this shift.5/20/86There is one other point related to the market: I attendedthe meeting of the Committee on Investment Performance about a weekago and it was interesting how many investment advisers--I would sayat least three, maybe four, and these tended to be more stock-orientedpeople--cited one of the very positive factors in their minds in termsof the outlook for the markets in general was the liquidity that wasin the economy. I think they were referring very specifically in thatcontext to what they perceived to be a generally accommodativemonetary policy. The question that raises in my mind is: If thefeeling develops that maybe the major move is behind us and thefinancial markets people start to shift some of that liquidity intospendable balances--and in fact start to spend it against a backdropof maybe some expectation of increasing prices--we could possibly beat a point where some of that liquidity that has been going into theeconomy gets pulled out for spending. That's just a question at thispoint, though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. One point of disagreement is regarding the strength of the economy in the District. The speaker mentions that there is strength across the board in terms of employment, construction, and consumer spending, and that the District has been growing at a rate considerably in excess of the national rate. However, they also mention that there is evidence in the bond market that suggests concern about the development of this strength and what it might imply in terms of inflationary expectations. This indicates a disagreement or contradiction in the assessment of the strength of the economy.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 86.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just inject a question here. Therehave been a number of references to what favorable wage performancesare signaling, which I certainly think has been true in themanufacturing or goods-producing side of the economy. However, that'sa minority of the economy these days. What do you see going on in theservice side where wages and salaries have been relatively high. Isthere any improvement there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges the favorable wage performance in the manufacturing sector but doubts if the same improvement is happening in the service sector. This indicates a contention or disagreement about the wage situation in different sectors of the economy.


Passage number 87.
MR. MELZER. I might comment on that. I think there is anexpectation that the rates of increase will be lower this year than weexperienced last year but still will be on the order of maybe 5percent, down from 6 percent or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Melzer is simply providing his own perspective on the expected rates of increase, suggesting they may be lower than last year but still around 5 percent.


Passage number 88.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only states the name "Mr. Boehne" and does not provide any information or context that could indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 89.
MR. BOEHNE. On the national level, I think the issue hasbeen stated as the dichotomy between the strength of the fundamentalsand what that says about the outlook versus the sluggishnesscurrently. The issue is how patient we will be to wait for thosefundamentals [to show through]. As I look down the list of monthlyindicators, while there is no strong evidence, I see a few straws inthe wind. For example: the retail sales figure in April showed anincrease that was the best since December; the housing start increasewas the best since January; the industrial production increase was thebest since January; the nonfarm payroll employment increase was thebest since January; the [unintelligible] increase was the best sinceDecember. Now, that does not make a trend but I think there is amessage there that maybe at the fringes we're beginning to see someevidence that [the expansion] might be picking up and that the lull inFebruary and March may be behind us.As far as my own District goes, we are better off than thenation. Philadelphia has an unemployment rate of 5-1/2 percent; it islower in New Jersey and lower than that in Delaware. I was strucklast weekend, as I was driving around running some errands, by thenumber of help wanted signs in the various store windows. So, I thinkthe area is doing well. The attitude among business people is thatthey feel this lull but that the situation is really pretty good inthe lull. Their attitude is positive; I wouldn't say it's robust. Wefeel the same boom in tourism: the Jersey shore, the Delaware shore,and the Poconos Resort areas are overbooked, if anything.5/20/86As to the question about wages in the services sector, lastyear I think the increases were running around 5-3/4 to 6 percentgenerally and in the financial area they were probably 6 to 6-1/2percent. I would think it would be a touch lower, maybe broadly inthe 5-1/2 to 6 percent area or perhaps a bit lower; but those marketsare still fairly strong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information about the current state of the economy and expressing their own observations and opinions. There are no conflicting viewpoints or arguments presented.


Passage number 90.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the question to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 91.
MR. STERN. Well, in the way of a description, I would startoff by saying that the two-tiered economy or whatever term you want touse that has characterized our District for a long time continues todo so. Agriculture and the small part of the energy sector that wehave continue to be under some significant pressures, and certainlythat has spilled over into small-town retail trade and real estate,and so forth. Most of the rest of the District, though, continues todo well--unspectacular, but reasonably well. Expansion is fairlygeneralized in the rest of the sectors. What struck me between thismeeting and the last one is that attitudes really seem quite good;they are distinctly on the positive side. I know many of you like tokeep in touch with some of the more obscure parts of your Districtsand we have obscure parts. One indication of the positive attitudesis that second home sales in northern Minnesota--in the MinnesotaLakes areas--have really picked up in the last few months. Thatbusiness is just doing very, very well in places like Brainerd andPequot Lakes, some of those kinds of locations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing a description of the current economic situation in different sectors of the District, including agriculture, energy, retail trade, and real estate. They also mention positive attitudes and an increase in second home sales in certain areas. There is no conflicting information or differing opinions presented.


Passage number 92.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. There are too many people going intothese areas of Alaska and northern Minnesota now. They're going totake all the fish out of there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage presents a statement about the number of people going into certain areas of Alaska and northern Minnesota and their potential impact on the fish population. It does not include any opposing viewpoints or conflicting arguments.


Passage number 93.
MR. STERN. The second homes sales report was really quitestriking to me, because I think it is indicative of some of theactivity and the attitudes that exist in some of the more remote partsof the District now, actually northeastern Minnesota. Despite theproblems, the Iron Range is undergoing something of a renaissance atthe moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the author's observation and opinion about the second homes sales report and the current state of the Iron Range in northeastern Minnesota.


Passage number 94.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're not very good at manufacturing butwe are really good at second homes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that the subject is not very good at manufacturing but is good at second homes.


Passage number 95.
MR. STERN. Apparently, yes. More fundamentally, I think theeconomy is likely to perform largely along the lines of the Greenbookforecast, although my own hunch is that we will probably get somewhatmore growth, in real terms, in the second half of this year and earlynext year. But as time goes on, there is at least the risk--and Ihave some concern about it--that the mix will shift and willdeteriorate in favor of more rapid price increases and less realgrowth. I must say that the tax reform proposal does strike me assomething of a wild card, although presumably that front-loadingissue--thinking about it in some form of permanent income context--ought not to be a big factor. At least that's where I come out. I doworry that as the expansion goes on--if we get the kind ofacceleration in real growth that I think we will--that will in somesense start to sow the seeds, or at least raise the risks, of apronounced deterioration in price performance over time. What ishappening on the import price side right now and the state of-12-5/20/86liquidity in the economy are probably some of the straws already inthe wind.As far as your question about service sector wages, I don'thave any first-hand information on that. But I will say that, atleast in the Twin Cities, the help wanted signs in those kinds ofestablishments are very prominent and have been for quite some time.I would infer from that, at least, that there will be some continuedupward pressure on wages as a consequence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is expressing the speaker's opinions and concerns about the economy.


Passage number 96.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Johnson.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage "Governor Johnson" as it only states a title or position without any specific context or information to suggest disagreement or controversy.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 97.
MR. JOHNSON. I just want to make two brief [observations].I generally agree with what has been said so far on the staff'sforecast, although there are a couple of areas on which I differ alittle. I am generally optimistic; I do see things picking up in thesecond half of the year. But I think we are going to be disappointedon the trade side. What I keep seeing in Europe and Japan indicatesto me that we are going to get less growth out of the rest of theindustrial world than we had been expecting and, therefore, our exportmarkets are just not going to be there as strongly as we hadanticipated. So, to the extent that we built that into our GNPestimates, I think it is not going to materialize as strongly as wemight have thought. I do think things are going to look betterdomestically, although not as strong on our export side as we mighthave hoped.My other concern is that velocity, or the demand for money,still seems to be a major factor. I think a lot of this is acarryover from the sharp decline in interest rates we have had andfrom the oil price situation, which has broken inflationaryexpectations another small notch. So we're having an increase indemand for other checkable deposits as a result. Just yesterday thestaff was indicating that velocity growth has been around minus 9percent for the second quarter. That is really a hefty decline, sowe're on a similar--if not even sharper--trend than last year. Iexpect that to turn around a good bit in the second half of the year,but it has a lot of turning around to do. My expectation would bethat this velocity weakness will probably squeeze nominal GNP a littlefurther, so I am relatively optimistic about it. I hope that comesmore out of the inflation side than the real GNP side;` but given whatis going on and my expectation on the trade side, I think that weprobably will see a lower nominal GNP performance and maybe some sortof balanced squeezing between inflation and real GNP in the secondhalf.But once again, I think there is reason to be encouraged. Ijust think we are going to be disappointed on the trade side becauseJapan and Germany don't seem to be willing to pursue the kind ofstimulative policies that we might like. I am talking about the factthat they have slack and potential from the oil price declines becausethey are major importers; I am not talking about demand driven typepolicies. They have a lot of potential and a lot of slack. Even ifthey are willing, they have some problems--institutional problems that[make them] resist being more stimulative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In this passage, Mr. Johnson expresses disagreement with the rest of the staff's forecast on the trade side and also expresses concern about velocity, or the demand for money.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 98.
 Germany, as I said, isboxed in by the EMS; they are at the bottom on the currency[arrangement] so they are in danger of falling outside their range ifthey try to get rates lower unless France goes along. Japan seems to-13-5/20/86be resisting lower interest rates through their postal saving systemand there are a lot of other institutional areas of resistance. Ithink they are eventually going to adjust; they are just going to beslow to adjust. I think political pressures will be brought to bearafter the elections in Germany, but hopefully it won't be the wrongkind of expansion. I am a little troubled by the idea of a publicworks project as a fiscal stimulus--being the source of expansion. Ithink they will be slow to adjust. I think our trade sectors aregoing to come around slowly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses concern about Germany being boxed in by the EMS and the potential danger of falling outside their range if they try to get rates lower without France's agreement. They also mention Japan's resistance to lower interest rates and other institutional areas of resistance. The speaker also expresses their own uncertainty and concern about the idea of a public works project as a fiscal stimulus for expansion.


Passage number 99.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You talked about the trade sector. Justlooking at these figures, the staff has a pretty healthy decline inthe trade balance over the next 18 months. Would you explain that,Mr. Truman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply asks for an explanation and there is no indication of disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 100.
MR. JOHNSON. That's what I was getting at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Johnson, appears to be agreeing with or clarifying the point made by another person.


Passage number 101.
MR. TRUMAN. We are expecting, with the help of some growthabroad and the lagged effects of exchange rate change, to see a ratherpronounced impact in terms of slowing of imports.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not seem to contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating an expectation.


Passage number 102.
 Imports willcontinue to rise in nominal terms and we expect a rise in exports, soI think as far as the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What kind of rise in exports do you have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion about the expected rise in exports without any conflicting information or opposing viewpoints mentioned.


Passage number 103.
MR. TRUMAN. Just in terms of the trade balance itself, wehave nominal imports rising at a 12-1/2 percent annual rate over thefour quarters of 1986 and nonagricultural exports rising at a 12-1/2percent annual rate over the four quarters of this year. We had a 16percent annual rate, we think, in the first quarter. So the balanceis somewhat lower, 3 percent a quarter. For non-petroleum imports, weare looking for small declines--maybe in the 2 to 4 percent annualrate range for the balance of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the data and projections for the trade balance without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 104.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You actually have declines in the rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 105.
MR. TRUMAN. In nonagricultural, non-oil, imports. On theoil side, we had a big drop in the first quarter and we will get quitea big snapback for three reasons: one, just the variability of thenumbers and the big drop in the first quarter when they wererebuilding; second, gasoline and energy consumption are going up; andthird, domestic production is going down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states three reasons why there will be a snapback in imports in the oil sector.


Passage number 106.
 So there is quite a push onthe quantity side of the import side in the short run--less in the wayof a nominal trade balance than we would have--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How do you measure a decline in domesticproduction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas. It is simply discussing the push on the quantity side of imports and how to measure a decline in domestic production.


Passage number 107.
MR. TRUMAN. It is very hard to estimate these things. I'lllook it up and will give you at least an accurate estimate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Truman will look up the information and provide an accurate estimate.


Passage number 108.
 We havesomething on the order of several hundred--I am not sure whether it is[unintelligible]--MR. ANGELL. Are these data coming in or are they a forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 109.
MR. TRUMAN. It's a forecast. We have domestic productiongoing down by 300,000 barrels a day over the four quarters of 1986.5/20/86already in the notion of what these countries are able to do. And Ithink we have to begin to look more at this impact [unintelligible].But the possible pressures that may occur in some countries, includingthe [major] ones--not from one year to the next but over severalyears--could begin to [present a different] and more difficult pictureof these outcomes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement about the forecast of domestic production going down and the potential impact it may have on certain countries over the years.


Passage number 110.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's turn to Mr. Kohn and get themonetary side of the equation, and then have a doughnut.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage suggests a plan or suggestion to hear Mr. Kohn's perspective on the monetary side of the equation and then enjoy a doughnut. However, it does not mention any conflicting opinions or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 111.
MR. KOHN. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The mention of MR. KOHN's statement suggests that there are different perspectives or opposing views being presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 112.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just raise one question that Iraised yesterday, which you probably don't have any answer for at thispoint. You mentioned the great liquidity in the economy; some otherpeople have mentioned that. Yet, if you look at our liquid assetsseries, it hasn't been doing much. Can you explain that dichotomy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker points out a discrepancy between the claim of a great liquidity in the economy and the lack of significant activity in the liquid assets series. This suggests that the speaker is questioning or challenging the idea of there being ample liquidity.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 113.
MR. KOHN. I think there are two things that explain it. Ifyou look at the components, you can see that this must be a seasonaladjustment problem more than anything else. Short-term Treasurysecurities, which were very strong in November and December, have beenrunning off on balance in this seasonally adjusted series in 1986.Now, the Treasury clearly has continued to rely on coupons for most ofits financing but I don't believe there has been a change in its basicfinancing pattern here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: There is contention or disagreement in this passage as Mr. Kohn suggests that the seasonal adjustment problem is the main explanation for the running off of short-term Treasury securities in 1986, while also stating that he does not believe there has been a change in the Treasury's basic financing pattern. This implies a disagreement or differing perspective on the causes of the observed trend.


Passage number 114.
 So, L was stronger in the fourth quarter oflast year than it is now, and it's partly I think--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Basically a phenomenon of how many billsthe Treasury is issuing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply offers an opinion and explanation regarding the strength of L in the fourth quarter of last year compared to its current state.


Passage number 115.
MR. KOHN. Well, the Treasury has been paying bills down abit, about $400 [million] an auction over the last couple of auctions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only provides information about the Treasury paying down bills, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 116.
MR. ANGELL. Is it the number. He should have the number onthe U.S.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement. It is a simple question about a number on a document.


Passage number 117.
 residents--MR. KOHN. Well, this would be the number of short-termTreasury securities owned by [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply presents a statement or response without any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments being expressed.


Passage number 118.
MR. ANGELL. Consequently, if you had an increase in foreignholdings, that would result in a reduction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements that suggest disagreement or contention. It simply presents a cause-and-effect relationship between an increase in foreign holdings and a reduction in something, without any conflicting viewpoints or conflicting statements.


Passage number 119.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there was a big change, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply suggests that if there was a significant change, without specifying what that change is or presenting opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 120.
MR. MORRIS. But I think if you look at the trend in totalliquid assets in the last two years, the trend is down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states that the trend in total liquid assets in the last two years is down. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 121.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: That depends on the passage you are referring to. Without the passage, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 122.
MR. MORRIS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the statement "MR. MORRIS." It is simply a name or title being mentioned.


Passage number 123.
 So, I don't think you can explain those twoyears--MR. KOHN. No, the other phenomenon that I was going to noteis the runoff in commercial paper this year. Partly we're seeing thatbankers' acceptances were weak in March and partly we're seeing theshift to longer-term financing by businesses. They are issuing morebonds and issuing less short-term paper. And the public is shifting5/20/86something about it now. And I don't know if I have the courage to go,in terms of tightening monetary policy, to where it ought to betightened if that staff forecast is correct. So, I'm in a realdilemma. I just can't feel any satisfaction in being a participant ina monetary policy that might lead to those kinds of results. But Iguess I want to see the whites of the eyes of this third-quarterrecovery; and if it's there, then I think we might have to take someaction. I'm somewhat more optimistic on prices, but I don't trustmyself against the rest of you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 124.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage "Governor Rice" does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 125.
MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, I'd just like to join thegeneral agreement that has been expressed around the table that thestaff forecast is right--that the current economic indicators aremixed and that the current sluggishness that we seem to be seeing willgive way to acceleration in the second half. But I suppose the mainquestion is: What would be the timing of the acceleration and the sizeof it. I myself would expect that we will see this accelerationsooner rather than later--that is to say, that we'll certainly seesome strong evidence of it in the third quarter rather than the fourthquarter. And I would expect the acceleration to be strong rather thanmoderate. I also share some of the concerns expressed around thetable that, with the likely increase in import prices and theacceleration that I anticipate, we may begin to see some inflationarypressures emerging but not in the near term. I would be concernedabout the possibility of inflation much farther out into the secondhalf of 1987. But my concerns would be there and I think that's afactor we should not lose sight of. On that I would see the riskspretty predominantly on the up side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the general agreement that the staff forecast is right and that there will be an acceleration in the second half of the year. The speaker also shares some concerns about potential inflationary pressures, but overall there is no disagreement among the speakers.


Passage number 126.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only states the name "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" without providing any additional information or context to suggest disagreement.


Passage number 127.
 If nobody else has any comments--MR. FORRESTAL. I might just go back, Mr. Chairman, to yourquestion about wages. When I mentioned wages and prices in theSoutheast I had in mind manufacturing; in the services sector we'relooking at 5-1/2 to 6 percent increases, but substantially higher inthe financial services area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing additional information and clarifying their previous statement.


Passage number 128.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I haven't heard a lot of concernexpressed--although there has been some--about the impact of this taxbill on commercial construction, which is in a vulnerable positionanyway we keep saying. A couple of people have mentioned it but theydidn't put enormous emphasis on it. I don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that they have not heard a lot of concern expressed about the impact of the tax bill on commercial construction, but acknowledges that there has been some concern. They also mention that a couple of people have mentioned it, but did not place significant emphasis on it. Overall, there is no disagreement or contention expressed.


Passage number 129.
MR. PARRY. It should be substantial in terms of changes indepreciation regulations. Also, for rentals I think the maximum lossone can write off is $25,000, which is not very large.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It solely provides information about depreciation regulations and the maximum loss that can be written off for rentals.


Passage number 130.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is certainly a change in the taxincentives for all these partnerships and so forth. I don'tunderstand it all, but it's a big change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that there is a change in tax incentives but admits not fully understanding all the details.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 131.
MR. WALLICH. May I say a word. The [forecast for] theUnited States seems entirely plausible but it might be quite differentfrom what many objective viewers think, and I think we have to takemore account of [unintelligible]. If we don't, we're going to get anincrease in the negative trade [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is indicated by the phrase "it might be quite different from what many objective viewers think." This suggests that the speaker's perspective differs from that of the objective viewers, implying disagreement.


Passage number 132.
 We're seeing it now5/20/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what business or who they areattracting. Governor Angell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 133.
MS. SEGER. Yes, but they attract a lot of retiredexecutives.5/20/86machinery, and oil fuel equipment are all depressed sectors. Again,it's a mixed bag. Commercial construction in Kansas City and Omahalooks very good and suburban Denver is still going pretty strong.Downtown Denver, Oklahoma City, and Tulsa aren't [unintelligible] likeHouston and perhaps Dallas will be someday. Residential constructionis following that trend; that is to say, in the urban areas in whichthere has been low unemployment and good activity--for example, KansasCity and Denver--residential construction is very, very strong. Butit is severely depressed in Oklahoma, whether it be Tulsa or OklahomaCity.One of the things I would like to call attention to, andMartha has already referred to it, is the revenue shortfalls that arecoming out of this depressed agriculture/energy economy. Oklahoma,Kansas, Wyoming, and Nebraska all are experiencing shortfalls inrevenues. And this is sort of a double-barreled effect in the sensethat the revenues are not coming in and the states and othermunicipalities are looking for revenues and are increasing taxes,whether sales taxes or otherwise. It is impacting those states andwill keep them largely depressed--unless some other good events suchas Chernobyl happen, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a description of different sectors and areas of the economy.


Passage number 134.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage mentioned. It only provides the name "Mr. Corrigan" without any additional information or context to suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 135.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Just a couple of brief comments: Onthe general outlook, I find myself in the same ballpark as the staffforecast. I look at the situation right now using that forecast as abenchmark and I guess it's one in which I see some downside risks andsome upside risks; I think they are fairly well balanced. The bigdownside risk is the one that Governor Johnson pointed to: the tradeside. I've looked at those forecasts for the trade accounts byproduct, by country, and any other way I can look at them, and I am alittle skeptical that we can see the kind of improvement that I thinkis built into most forecasts. The other side of the coin is that ifindeed we begin to see the kind of recovery take hold that is builtinto most forecasts--not just Jim's--I think we've got to keep in mindthat it's a forecast in which on balance the growth in consumerspending is modest in real terms, business fixed investment issluggish in real terms, and inventories generally are rather modest.And the question, of course, is if things start to roll will thoserather modest increases in consumer spending, fixed investment andinventories all begin to gain their own momentum. So, there are riskson both sides and I wouldn't want to try to choose which are thegreater risks.As a matter of perspective, we either just passed or areabout to pass the 3-1/2-year mark in this expansion. Over the pastyear I think we've been a little lucky, in a somewhat curious way, inthat different sectors of the economy have carried the load at variouspoints and for various periods of time. Right now there's no questionthat housing is carrying the load. I think we've been lucky in somesense in the way that things have phased in and out and kept theoverall momentum distinctly on the plus side, though not as robust asperhaps some would wish.Looking at the situation more from a Second Districtperspective, I think a couple of things stand out. Outside of NewYork City itself we really do get the sense that the medium-size5/20/86a severe labor shortage situation because we have a number of newplants under construction, mostly in the defense/electronics area,that will have to be manned. If capital spending rises or thecomputer industry bounces back and if our exports in this countryrise, we would gain strength from that as well because we export moreof our manufactured products than any other part of the country. So,as I see the New England situation, we are heading toward a hyperfully employed situation. There is a lot of diversity in this countryat the moment, particularly between Mr. Boykin's District and mine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 136.
MR. BLACK. Do you think it would help to relieve thesituation if you took a bunch of Texans up there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply a question posed by Mr. Black.


Passage number 137.
MR. MORRIS. I think we could import Texans if they can finda place to live.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses a suggestion or idea.


Passage number 138.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the following passage without any specific context or information provided. Please provide more information or the actual passage for a more accurate analysis.


Passage number 139.
MR. BOYKIN. Strangely enough, in far north Dallas I was outon the weekend and went into 14 houses, brand new, that are on themarket for sale at prices ranging from $475,000 to $800,000. And theythink they are going to sell them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement evident in this passage. The statement simply presents an observation made by the speaker about houses for sale in a specific area at certain price ranges.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 140.
MR. BLACK. Did you settle on yours.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of the word "did" implies that there was a difference in settlement or decision between Mr. Black and the other person involved in the conversation.


Passage number 141.
MR. BOYKIN. Oh no, I just like to see what they are doing.That is way out in the country.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that Mr. Boykin is interested in observing what "they" are doing in a remote location.


Passage number 142.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How are land prices doing, Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This question simply asks for information about land prices and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 143.
MR. GUFFEY. They are continuing to fall, Mr. Chairman. Asfar as agricultural land values, from the survey that we take at theend of every quarter, they are down another 5 to 6 percent across theDistrict; that would be roughly 50 percent of their highs in 1981.With respect to the agricultural sector, the winter wheat crop is ingood shape; it's perhaps a very good crop. The other plantings thatwould take place in the spring are going forward well ahead of theusual schedule. There are about 5 to 7 percent of agriculturalborrowers that will not get credit this spring and, as a result,something will have to be done with respect to foreclosure. They willnot be able to put in a crop. So, there is some good and bad in thesense that the crop is good and commodity prices are up marginally,largely because of the Russian disaster. On the other side of thecoin, red meat prices are down largely because of governmentalprograms with respect to the dairy herd buyout which depressed redmeat prices very substantially.In the energy sector, the story has already been told. Whathas happened to Bob Boykin's District has happened to the TenthDistrict in spades. For example, the rig count as of January 1 in theTenth District was at 550; in May it was 236. And that [compares with]a number of about 1700 working rigs in the District at the height ofthe oil boom. As far as manufacturing is concerned, again, it's amixed picture. Missouri, as I think you know, is second only toMichigan in auto assemblies. Those plants are going full out so thatin the urban areas, particularly Kansas City, things are looking verygood and unemployment is lower than the national average. On theother hand, general [unintelligible] aviation aircraft, farm-17-5/20/861, if maybe we won't have to see some more paring back in the thirdquarter because they are at close to 2 million units and that isprobably 400,000 to 500,000 units above where they would like to havethem. Have they taken enough out of production schedules to achievethat, given the current sales pace. Again, I don't know the answers;these are just questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker presents both positive and negative aspects of the current economic situation, indicating that there are both good and bad factors at play. For example, the speaker mentions that the winter wheat crop is in good shape, but also notes that a significant number of agricultural borrowers will not get credit and will face foreclosure. Similarly, the speaker mentions that auto assemblies in Missouri are going well, but suggests that there may be a need for further paring back in production schedules.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 144.
MR. KICHLINE. It depends, obviously, on what they do withtheir incentives and whether they are going to gin up some more salesby doing something on the price side. In the GNP sense, in billionsof dollars, the second-quarter change in the automobile sector isworth about $15 billion in real terms. We have [projected] another $3or $4 billion in the third quarter which indicates that, yes, they aregoing to have to take more out. Now, that assumes that they havealready [unintelligible] the working off of current-quarter productionschedules; we think that they will have to do more. One of thedifficulties that I might note here is that the Commerce Departmentuses seasonal factors that some might doubt. But using ourinformation, they have their seasonal auto production going from 9million units in the first quarter to 7.3 million in the secondquarter. So it's a big dip. And we assume that a small further cutwill occur in the third quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker mentions that there might be doubts about the seasonal factors used by the Commerce Department in determining auto production levels. This suggests disagreement or uncertainty about the accuracy or validity of the data and how it is being used.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 145.
MS. SEGER. Okay. Another thing that has suddenly started tobug me is the feedback of these weak sectors on the Treasuries ofvarious states and what that may do to their urge to spend. Iunderstand that several states already are noticing the problems withtax collections. Is this not something else that could change andcontribute to some sort of drag on the economy. Also, the revenuesharing, I believe, is continuing to be attacked here in Washington.For many states--at least the one I am from--the revenue sharing hasfunded many, many different activities. My final question involveswhat Manley was mentioning about trade and how quickly the improvementwill actually show up in the data. My gut reaction is that the lagsmay be longer than any of us would like to see. I am not disputingyour forecast at all; I am just suggesting that maybe these are someof the matters that could in fact [unintelligible] on it. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses concern and raises questions about the potential negative impact of weak sectors on state treasuries and their urge to spend, the problems with tax collections, the attacks on revenue sharing, and the potential delay in seeing improvements in trade data. Although the speaker does not directly dispute the forecast, they suggest that these factors could have an effect on it.


Passage number 146.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no passage provided for analysis. Could you please provide the passage in question?


Passage number 147.
MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, New England remains a fullyemployed economy. Our regional unemployment rate is under 4 percent,despite the sizable decline in employment in the computer industry.The decline in employment in that industry was more than offset by therise in employment in construction and financial services. As aconsequence of a fully employed state, we find that wages are risingmore rapidly, as you might expect, in New England than in any otherpart of the country. In the financial sector, wages are rising morethan are wages in general; in that sector the average wage increasethis year is probably around 6-1/2 percent. Within the financialsector, the mutual fund industry is in a boom condition and much ofthat is centered in the Boston area. One other fallout of the fullyemployed state has been an explosion in housing prices. Boston realestate on average is up by 75 percent in the past two years. Andcompanies are finding it difficult for the first time to transferpeople into Boston from other parts of the country because of the costof housing. We are now at or slightly above the San Francisco housingmarket.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker presents information and provides evidence to support their statements.


Passage number 148.
 The prospects for New England in the year ahead could well be-16-5/20/86MR. ANGELL. Do you have any hard data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply asks if there is any hard data available.


Passage number 149.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, there are quite a lot. The productiondata lag, but there is a large amount of anecdotal information aboutthe shutting of stripper wells, which account for some 80,000 barrelsa day of total production in the United States.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that there is a large amount of anecdotal information about the shutting of stripper wells, but it does not indicate any disagreement or contention about this fact. It is simply providing information.


Passage number 150.
MR. ANGELL. Well, it is true that in Kansas they areshutting wells that are coming in under a half a barrel a day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a fact about the shutting down of wells in Kansas.


Passage number 151.
 But Ifind that--MR. TRUMAN. The estimates range from [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The given passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement. It seems to be a partial statement that is not complete enough to determine any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 152.
 Whenyou say something like 50 barrels a day at $15 a barrel--MR. PARRY. On the point that you made, Mr. Chairman, aboutthe reduced growth among our trading partners: Related to that is thefact that their currencies have appreciated even more, so that initself is a factor that may be an offset.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation:
The passage does not show any direct contention or disagreement. It consists of a statement and a related point made by someone.


Passage number 153.
MR. JOHNSON. I agree that that is something of a favorableoffset. It is just that the discussion we have had here andeverything I've ever read suggest that the income effect is reallymuch stronger up front than those exchange rate effects; and the lagsare long on those exchange rate shifts. It would be some time beforewe got an offset from that, if the demands were to fall seriouslybehind in Europe and in Japan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating that there is agreement on the fact that the income effect is stronger upfront than the exchange rate effects, and there may be a time lag before any offset is felt from changes in demand in Europe and Japan. There is no evident contention or disagreement.


Passage number 154.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Seger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 155.
MS. SEGER. Well, I won't repeat the comments I have heardabout the unevenness, the 2-tiered or 3-tiered [economy] or whateverit is, and the lots of tears in Dallas. I agree with the staffforecast of a pickup in growth in the second half of the year. What Iwould like to concentrate on are some question marks that I see--things that may prevent that pickup from happening, even though Iwould like to see it happen and I don't know that it won't. One thingis this whole issue of tax reform. Practically every business personthat I have talked with seems to be discussing that. Last week Ichatted with a homebuilders group. They had done a survey and it maybe interesting to hear what they concluded--this was based on theSenate Finance bill--about the impact on the overall economy. Theimpact on single-family housing would be positive, but they thoughtthat the impact on multifamily housing for sale and on rental officebuilding and commercial and industrial construction would be negative.And a substantial group thought it would be very negative. Anyhow, itis impacting on a lot of decision-making and is causing many decisionsto be postponed. I don't know how that will work out for the rest ofthis year--whether in fact it will bring about some extra activitylate in the year. If we know, for example, that certain changes willtake effect on January 1, maybe we could get a blip late this yearfollowed by a little hole the beginning of next year. I just think itis something to look at. As Jim said, our econometric models don'tgive us good answers as to what this will do, but I think it is worthconsidering.In the auto sector, I believe Jim mentioned that the auto[production] cutbacks had cost us about 1-1/4 percentage points inthis quarter. I wonder, given the size of the inventories as of May5/20/86its asset holdings from short-term paper into bonds. We see this inM2 also. M2 has been depressed in part because the public has shiftedinto these mutual funds that President Morris has commented on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing different factors that may impact economic growth.


Passage number 156.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would you conclude that it had any policyimplications or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 157.
MR. KOHN. I don't think it has particular policyimplications beyond what you might garner from the fact that M2 isalso running weak in the range--that is, that the buildup in liquiditybroadly measured isn't that large. But it's very, very concentratedat the very liquid end of the spectrum: in M1 deposits, savingdeposits, MMDAs, and such.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their opinion on the policy implications of the information presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 158.
MR. JOHNSON. That trend is consistent with a decline ininflationary expectations I would think, so you're still left withthat major question about velocity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The passage suggests that there is a disagreement or contention between two individuals discussing trends and inflationary expectations. The mention of "that major question about velocity" implies a difference of opinion or conflicting viewpoints on the topic.


Passage number 159.
MR. PRELL. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to just note that L ratherconsistently has grown a little faster than M3 over the past 3 yearsand that the first-quarter pattern is the same again. It was one halfpercentage point faster over 1983; 1.4 percentage points faster over1984; 0.8 points faster in 1985; and 0.7 points faster in the firstquarter. So the trend really isn't any different thus far this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 160.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's have a break.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The statement "well, let's have a break" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests taking a break without any opposing views being expressed.


Passage number 161.
MR. BLACK. You pretty well have said it all, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is acknowledging and agreeing with the Chairman's statement.


Passage number 162.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You've got to be a little more specificthan that. Mr. Parry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for more specifics. There is no conflicting opinion or argument being presented.


Passage number 163.
MR. PARRY. I would choose alternative B, which I feel isconsistent with growth of around 3-1/2 percent in 1987 and furtherdeclines in unemployment. It seems to me that alternative A is not asdesirable because of my concerns about the value of the dollar and itsinevitable inflationary implications. Also, if we were to choosealternative A, it would come in the context of already very favorablefundamental factors; those that we've mentioned would include lowerinterest rates, lower oil prices, a value of the dollar that isconsiderably lower than expected, and of course, the strong growth inM1. Alternative A does not appear to me to be consistent with a goalof longer-term price stability. Also, at this point I would not favor"C" because I think it runs the risk of not permitting good growth in1987. On the other hand, my concern about the future direction ofinflation and also the persistent strength in Ml would lead me tofavor variant III of the directive. To inform financial markets thatthere is concern on our part about the growth of money would seem tomake some sense.The other point I'd just add parenthetically is that I cancome up with a scenario where M2 and M3 may become somewhat more of aproblem. Over the last 6 months to a year we've seen an awful lot ofmoney going into mutual funds, stocks, bonds, and municipals, and wheninvestors believe that the interest rates are going to turn thosefunds are going to come back to short-term assets. And if they comeback short, they're going to go into M2 and M3 and we could see much5/20/86faster growth in M2 and M3 at that point--primarily as a result ofportfolio shifts. It would not necessarily indicate that people aregoing to be using these [funds] for transaction purposes. But Iwouldn't derive a great deal of comfort by the well-behaved pattern ofM2 and M3 at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It consists of one person expressing their opinion and presenting their reasoning for their preferred alternative and their concerns. There is no rebuttal or counterargument presented.


Passage number 164.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just say a word about thesedirectives. One can debate the particular language but we are so faroff the numbers in the directive labeled "alternative draft I," whichis the same as the one we had last time, that that seems to me to be akind of bare-faced evasion of responsibility. [We should be] reacto what has happened in a somewhat more sophisticated way than justputting in different numbers in the existing directive, which raisesthe question of what has been happening here. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about the directives, specifically expressing the belief that the numbers in the directive are off and that putting in different numbers is a way to avoid responsibility.


Passage number 165.
MR. KEEHN. Well, I'd also favor alternative B, largely forthe reasons Bob stated. I came to the meeting wondering whether wemight not fiddle with the words "might" and "would;" but based on theconversation I would not. I would make it symmetrical on both sides.I'd favor the second draft alternative. That seems to me aresponsible way of dealing with the aberrations that we'veexperienced. I just have a slight fear that if we drop the numbersaltogether, as called for in the third alternative draft, it might bea bit [unintelligible] for doing anything like that. We might savethat for the July meeting. So, I'd be in favor of "B" with thewording proposed in the second alternative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 166.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions "Mr. Forrestal" without providing any statements or information that could imply contention or disagreement.


Passage number 167.
MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I came to the meeting with acouple of questions in mind and one was, though I agree with the staffforecast: Do I really believe it's going to happen. I also had aquestion about whether I should continue to believe in the lags thateveryone keeps telling me are going to catch up with us one of thesedays. But I guess I come out feeling, for all of the reasons thatwere discussed before, that I probably should believe the forecast.Given that belief, I do think we are going to get the kind of growththat we are looking for. And that leads to another question which is:If we do in fact achieve that kind of growth, should we attempt topush the economy a little further to stimulate it more. I think thatthere are some dangers in doing that; I think that would tend to pushus beyond the long-term trend of the economy. To me the risk at themoment is an overstimulation and the reigniting of inflation andinflationary expectatio As has been noted, we already have somedangerous inflation in the service sector of the economy.So, having gone through that analysis I come out, as youwould expect I suppose, for alternative B--not to change policy at themoment. I was struck, though, by the discussion around the table. Wehad some remarks earlier on that we are expecting this kind of growthbut we are not really seeing it showing up in the statistics. Itseems to me that we heard this morning that that kind of growth isperhaps beginning to surface, at least in some parts of the country.There was a lot of divergence, but at least in my own area--and Iheard others say this--we are beginning to get some statisticalevidence that the growth we're looking for is perhaps coming on line.So again, Mr. Chairman, I would choose alternative B with a 5 to 9percent associated federal funds rate. And I suppose that would5/20/86suggest to me a borrowing level of about $300 million. I too wouldlike to have a directive that would take account of what has beenhappening to the monetary aggregates: I think not to acknowledge thatovershoot would not be responsible. I had originally thought that thebasic drafting of alternative I would be acceptable with the inclusionof the language about the monetary aggregates shown in alternative II.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It mainly consists of the speaker expressing their thoughts and opinions on various topics.


Passage number 168.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. (Explanatory response not applicable)


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 169.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I share the optimismabout growth over the second half of the year and, as a result, thelack of good evidence at the moment creates an uncertainty thatsuggests to me that alternative B is the appropriate prescription forpolicy in the period ahead simply because we don't know what ishappening and that alternative pretty much holds the current position.As to the directive itself, I would favor draft alternative II for thereason that there is a recognition of the rapid growth in theaggregates that has already taken place and that we would expectthrough the second quarter. And it places M2 and M3 first, withsimply a recognition following that of the M1 growth. Lastly, it doessuggest or maintain the idea that some firming could take place in thefuture given that rapid growth, if the economy begins to perform as wewould anticipate and the pressures begin to show up in prices. Allthose things to me seem to be consistent with (1) what we think andhope the outlook will be, and (2) a realization that M1, M2, and M3are outside [their ranges] and that the numbers are somewhat differentthan last month, but nonetheless we maintain them as guideposts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses uncertainty and advocates for alternative B as the appropriate policy because of the lack of evidence. However, they also favor draft alternative II for the directive, which suggests some firming in the future based on rapid growth.


Passage number 170.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They're somewhat different all right.That's an understatement of the situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It acknowledges that the subject being discussed is different, with the phrase "That's an understatement of the situation" indicating that the difference is significant. However, it does not imply any disagreement between parties.


Passage number 171.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, draft directive III has no numbers in itat all with respect to any of the aggregates. I think that's a rathermarked departure from what we've done in the past and one that I wouldnot feel comfortable with.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Guffey simply expresses his opinion and discomfort with the lack of numbers in the draft directive.


Passage number 172.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or statements that suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 173.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, as you indicated in the beginning--and I think you pretty well said it all--the economy is being pulledin a lot of different directions. And it seems to me that this is atime when perhaps we should stay about where we are. Looking at theeconomic factors, there doesn't seem to be any reason for easing ifwe're half-way right in our assessment of what the economy is doing.And Ml, as we know, has been going through the ceiling and now thebroader aggregates seem to be picking up a good deal. We have thesespecial problems with particular sectors like agriculture and othermanufacturing, but as you pointed out those are not things that we canaddress very well with monetary policy. If we tried to nudge thedollar down, for example, it might well backfire on us and we'd reallyachieve no improvement in our balance of payments. So, I've come downto the point that I think we ought to stay about where we are. Iwould go with "B," although in the absence of a sharp deceleration ineconomic activity I'd be real happy if the aggregates came in at "C"or even below that. But if we get a clear signal that activity isbeginning to accelerate beyond what any of us seem to expect and ifthe aggregates also are strengthening more than we anticipate, then Ithink we're going to have to be prepared at some early point to think5/20/86in terms of moving in the direction, anyway, of restraint. I wouldnot say restraint, but in that direction. I think alternative III--and this probably will surprise most of you, knowing my past views--really captures the posture. I think we ought to take it at thispoint; I hasten to add, however, that I would want to reinsert theshort-term numerical targets for the aggregates when we get around toaddressing the longer-term aggregates at our July meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 174.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Melzer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 175.
MR. MELZER. I'd be in favor of maintaining the existingdegree of restraint right now but I definitely would have a bias inthe direction of a somewhat firmer policy. In other words, at thispoint in time, I think it's more likely that we will have to firm thanease, as you said earlier. What concerns me is that there is alwaysthe possibility that when we see the "whites of their eyes" it will betoo late. I am not sure that this is the time to begin to get some[unintelligible] back in, but we may be getting close to that time.And I would be particularly concerned if we did see some pickup ineconomic activity and that didn't flow through to a firming in thedollar; I think Sam said before that the trend in general still seemsto be downward. That would concern me--if there really came a timewhen almost no matter what we did we couldn't easily turn that tide.In any case, I would be in favor of the existing degree of reserverestraint, but would favor language that would indicate somethingother than symmetry--language that would indicate possibly movingtoward a firmer policy down the road.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion and preferences regarding monetary policy, without explicitly contradicting or disagreeing with anyone else.


Passage number 176.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions "Mr. Stern" without providing any context or information about his views or actions, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 177.
MR. STERN. First of all, I gathered from trying to piecetogether a few comments in the Bluebook and the Greenbook that thestaff views at least the upper end of the M1 target as beingconsistent with the GNP forecast and that that can be achieved atroughly today's interest rates. So that implies a significant slowingin M1 over the balance of the year without any action on our part. Ifall of that is right then I, too, favor alternative B. As far as Ican judge, it will take us about where we want to go. I do think, asothers have commented, that the directive language perhaps matters agreat deal this time around. I have a strong preference for the thirdalternative principally because, at least in my mind, that is theclearest statement of what we intend to do if growth in the aggregatesdoesn't slow as expected; and I think it's probably important to makethat point. I also think that we can insert a sentence in there withsome numbers if that's desirable; certainly that's doable. I am alittle concerned about the language in there having to do with lesserreserve restraint because it points to things like slowing moneygrowth or the foreign exchange markets whereas I think that slowingmoney growth and a stronger dollar might at least in the short run bemore than welcome. I am not sure that I would want to respond tothat. Beyond that, it also refers to sluggish economic performanceand I think we have largely conceded that growth in the second quarterat least is going to turn out to look kind of sluggish--real growth of2 percent, given the adjustment that is still going on in the energysector and so forth. So I would be a little concerned about that kindof language--that such developments might prompt a policy response,and I don't find that appropriate at this juncture.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker seems to be expressing agreement with alternative B and discussing their preference for certain language in the directive. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 178.
-28-5/20/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 179.
MR. BOEHNE. I think alternative B is the right policy coursegiven the mix of hopes and anxieties and uncertainties that we face.As to what we do about an M1 that has blown out of its targets: Ithink we do have to acknowledge it, and I think something along thelines of variant II for the operational paragraph is right. To go allthe way to variant III I think is premature. We will be having ameeting in July in which we will have to reevaluate the aggregates forthe second half of the year. It may be prudent at that time--or itmay not be--to change the target ranges. It may also be appropriateto acknowledge a different weighting; but it seems to me that a mid-quarter meeting is not the appropriate time to do that. So, I wouldacknowledge that [monetary growth] is over the target and then have amore fundamental look at the normal point in the calendar in July.There is also the advantage in July that [your Congressional]testimony would be following our decision fairly promptly and whateverwe do can be wrapped around the appropriate words.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing his opinion and discussing potential actions, but there is no direct contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 180.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris. Mr. Morris has stepped out.Governor Angell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply provides information about Mr. Morris and his absence.


Passage number 181.
MR. ANGELL. I also favor alternative B and I prefer draftII. I would want to be a little clearer on the fourth line of draftII to say rapid M1 growth and weakness in M1 velocity. I am not surethat M2 is rapid when it's right in the middle of our range andexpected to be in the middle of the range. I do believe, however,that there is another immediate policy move that needs to be made toreflect the weakness of the dollar and the undesirability of furtherweakening of the dollar at this point. I would think it would be justideal if the Chairman could negotiate with the Secretary of theTreasury so he would be willing to have intervention on behalf of thedollar, provided the Japanese and Germans cut their discount rates 1/2point. So, I would like to see something take place in thisenvironment; and I think that would be a step that would be helpful toeveryone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their preferences and suggestions, but there is no opposition or conflict with any other viewpoint.


Passage number 182.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we discuss the attitude towardintervention a little after we get finished with this instead ofmixing it up. If you want to discuss it, I think it may be a goodidea. We will reach this decision and then discuss that. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no disagreement or contention in the passage. The speaker is suggesting discussing the attitude towards intervention after completing something else, and then they state that discussing it might be a good idea. There is no conflict or disagreement mentioned.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 183.
MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I also support alternative B butfor different reasons, it seems. The stronger growth projected in thesecond half is really entirely a function of the improvement in thetrade balance, and our ability to forecast the timing and magnitude ofchanges in the trade balance is not so great that we can haveconfidence that we can forecast it extremely well this time. If wedon't get a third-quarter improvment in the trade balance, I think wewill continue to have a pretty sluggish forecast. I don't seeanything else that is going to pull the economy [up] very rapidly.So, I don't think we can move on the anticipation that the thirdquarter is in the bag yet. As a lot of people have said, we have tosee the whites of the eyes of this narrowing trade deficit.I question whether we are in fact putting excessive liquidityinto the system now. I proposed, when we were last talking about thelong-range targets, that we set targets for M3 and total liquid-29-5/20/86assets; I assumed a minus 1 percent velocity for 1986. As I look atthe fourth-quarter [and] the first-quarter rates of growth that wouldbe compatible with a growth of 6 to 6-1/2 percent for nominal GNP Idon't see that; the only thing in the picture that would lead one tothink that we are building excessive liquidity is M1. I am not verysure that we understand the meaning of that growth of M1 for futureeconomic growth.On the inflation front, I am more optimistic I think thanmany around the table, but I have been looking at what I call the"core" inflation rate and that is the price indexes eliminating foodand energy. If you do that, you see that there hasn't been anydeceleration in the inflation rate in 1985; and if you look at theprojected inflation rate for 1987, it doesn't look at all bad becauseit is not much different than the core inflation rate now. It justdepends on what set of numbers you have gotten used to looking at. Ithink quite clearly the recent sets of numbers for the CPI and thewholesale price index had a lot of one-shot effects from food andenergy that are not going to be repeated; we have to understand thatthis is an aberration. And when the inflation rate gets back to thecore rate, we shouldn't be too much alarmed because that was thefundamental situation all along.With respect to the directive, I appear to be the only onefavoring draft directive I. The reason is that it seems very clear tome that when we meet in July, we're going to look at the growth rateof M1 and either we will have to eliminate M1 as a target or rebase itagain. I think that is clearly in the cards. And if that is thecase, I don't see any reason to equivocate in letting the market knowwhat they already know: that we are discounting M1 in monetary policy.I don't think we kid anybody if we think the market feels otherwise.I don't think we can tell the market a different story with a[different] form of the directive than the former directive because Idon't think we really mean it. Are we really going to tighten upmoney and tighten up interest rates in a sluggish economy in order toget the M1 growth rate down. If we are not, then it seems to me it'stime to recognize that fact; and it seems to me directive I is anideal way of beginning to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains some disagreement between the speaker (Mr. Morris) and others in the discussion. Mr. Morris expresses his support for alternative B, but with different reasons than the others. He questions whether excessive liquidity is being put into the system and whether the growth of M1 is a reliable indicator of future economic growth. He also has a different perspective on inflation rates and suggests that the recent numbers may be an aberration. Finally, he disagrees with the others about the content of the directive and argues for the need to be transparent with the market about the role of M1 in monetary policy.


Passage number 184.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You leave me totally confused, if I maysay so. I would think the thrust of your comments would lead you towant to change directive I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It expresses confusion and a potential difference in opinion, but there is no direct conflict or argument present.


Passage number 185.
MR. MORRIS. Well, directive I is where we talk about theexpected rates of growth of M2 and M3 and it has language, which comesin after that, to the effect that the growth of Ml is uncertain. Thatsuggests to me a downgrading of the significance of M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply describes the content of directive I and the implication of the language used in it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 186.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. People can read the same thingdifferently, but I think the interpretation of keeping alternative Iwould be that nothing has changed in relative emphasis because wehaven't changed the language. If we want to change the relativeemphasis we would change the wording of the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The author states that people can interpret things differently, suggesting that there may be differing opinions on how to interpret the concept of "keeping alternative I." The author also suggests that changing the wording of the directive would be necessary to change the relative emphasis, which could be a point of contention if others believe that changing the language alone can alter the emphasis.


Passage number 187.
 The [draft]wording may not be perfect, but--MR. MORRIS. Well, I would be happy to make that suggestionalso. If you accept the proposition that we are going to have to do5/20/86something in July, it seems to me to make sense to start doingsomething now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and suggesting that action be taken now rather than waiting until July.


Passage number 188.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't want to argue the point insubstance. All I am saying is that if you want to make a change, Iwould think that the last thing you would want is the old directiverepeated again, which says we are not changing anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion about making a change and emphasizing that the old directive should not be repeated if change is desired.


Passage number 189.
MR. MORRIS. Perhaps I inferred that drafts II and III implythat we are going to give a lot more emphasis to Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the passage, Mr. Morris is expressing his own opinion or interpretation by using the word "perhaps." There is no evidence of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 190.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think they're implying that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 191.
MR. MORRIS. Well, maybe these things are getting so obscure,Mr. Chairman, that we ought to decide what they mean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris is simply suggesting that the group should come to a consensus on the meaning of certain things that may be unclear.


Passage number 192.
MR. ANGELL. I think that's pretty close to the truth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Angell simply expresses agreement with the previous statement.


Passage number 193.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Seger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 194.
MS. SEGER. Well, I would support maintaining the existingreserve pressure but I have the same problem with the alternativespresented today as I did a few months ago, and that is that thereseems to be so little difference among them. I would like Bob Parryto give me the model that shows the impact in 1987 of a difference inM1 growth in this quarter of 3/4 percentage point at annual ratebetween "A" and "B" and another 3/4 percentage point between "B" and"C," and 1/2 percentage point between the alternatives for M2, and 1/4point between those for M3. I would like you to tell me how thosemarginal changes will impact on inflation, trade, auto sales, housing,etc. in 1987. I think these are very, very, tiny differences. As Isay, I'm totally willing to go with maintaining the existing reservepressure; but "A" doesn't send a message to me that it is a big changein the easing direction, nor does "C" seem like a big change the otherway, particularly when we are talking about [a quarter point on these]numbers. Maybe I am missing something or maybe you are hiding thoseequations from me, but I haven't seen that kind of forecasting abilityaround here. Anyhow, in terms of the problems in the economy, as Isaid, I doubt that "A," "B," or "C" will solve our trade problemsimmediately or take care of manufacturing or third world debt or allof the other ailments we talk about. So, for that reason I will stickwith the status quo. On the directives, again because we are going totake a fresh look at this in July, I would just go with alternativeII.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their lack of difference between the presented alternatives and their preference for maintaining the existing reserve pressure. They mention wanting more information and forecasting ability but do not disagree with the presented options.


Passage number 195.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Johnson.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 196.
MR. JOHNSON. I also would agree that alternative B is theright approach. However, I generally agree with what Frank was sayingon the directive. I don't know exactly what the right language is,but I would prefer to be as neutral as possible on the directive. Icertainly wouldn't want to acknowledge the growth of M1 at this pointbecause right now we are still trying to determine whether that growthis a response to the decline in interest rates and whether the demandfor money might lead us actually to want to increase bank reserves,rather than cut back on the growth of Ml, to accommodate a furthershift in the demand for money--at least an increase in the quantitydemanded because of some [unintelligible]. I certainly wouldn't want5/20/86to send out the red flag about the fact that we're concerned it isgrowing too fast when we don't even know yet whether this is aportfolio shift or whether what's going on is a result of declininginterest rates and inflationary expectations or whether it issomething to be concerned about. There are only six weeks before thenext meeting, and I'd say we certainly don't have to get stewed upabout the aggregates when we can address this whole issue verycarefully in July. We can decide then what we are going to do aboutthe targets when we have a better chance to judge whether anything ishappening to the economy as a result. Right now all around the tablewe have said very clearly that nobody sees any strong evidence thatanything is going on. We're still in this 2 percent pattern. We areall hopeful with regard to the forecast, I agree; I too am optimisticabout the second half of the year. But until we get a little evidenceat least in the orders data--or something to indicate that there's apickup--I would like to remain absolutely neutral in the directiveabout where we want to go. I wouldn't want to send out any signalwhatsoever to the market at this point. I would wait six weeks andsee what we want to do then. That's when we ought to have a littlemore time to decide whether the second half of the year is going to bethe kind of situation we are hoping for.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Johnson is expressing his preference for a neutral approach in the directive and his desire to wait for more evidence before making any decisions. He is not disagreeing with anyone else's opinions or arguments.


Passage number 197.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: This passage. Does not contain enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 198.
MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I also would agree onalternative B for all of the reasons that were given. On thedirective, I agree with Frank and Manuel's point of staying neutral;it seems to me that alternative III does that much more thanalternative I, as was discussed earlier. It does not use numbers;it's very straightforward. In fact, it says we don't know. We dohave July coming up and that's a traditional point at which we take anew look at this. This [directive] would not become public untilafter the July meeting, which I assume would be pretty close to thetime that you would be testifying. You would have the opportunity toexplain it all. It seems to me this signal of not putting any numbersin right now, as in draft directive III, is the best indication ofconsistency, [acknowledging] that we are a bit confused. And it seemsto me it gives you the opportunity to say whatever needs to be saidcome July. I would very strongly go with option III.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses agreement with alternative B and alternative III, and also discusses the benefits of alternative III.


Passage number 199.
MR. JOHNSON. My only concern about that was that it impliedthat we might have lesser reserve restraint if there was a markedslowing in money growth. I would say that we're so uncertain aboutthe money demand situation that I wouldn't want to imply that we wouldease if money growth slowed--even substantially. If we take out anyresponse to the aggregates, I would be happy with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Johnson is expressing his concern about the implication of having lesser reserve restraint in case of a marked slowing in money growth. He then states his uncertainty about the money demand situation and his reluctance to imply easing if money growth slowed, even substantially. Finally, he suggests that removing any response to the aggregates would make him happy. There is no indication of disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 200.
MR. PARRY. Are you saying that if money does not slow at allover the next six weeks and we have continued [high] growth rates,that you would not be of a mind to make a move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Parry is simply asking a question and seeking clarification.


Passage number 201.
MR. JOHNSON. That would depend on whether we are seeingsomething happen in the economy by then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement made by Mr. Johnson is conditional and does not involve any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 202.
MR. PARRY. I think that's really where the difference is. Ithink there are some people who say they would. I think that's adifference of substance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage indicates that Mr. Parry believes there is a difference in opinion or perspective on a certain matter, but does not explicitly mention any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 203.
-32-5/20/86MR. JOHNSON. Well, everybody will have a different opinion.I am just saying that's my opinion. I would want to see if theeconomy was catching on as a result of this M1 growth that we havehad. The base is not really doing anything. There has been biggrowth in M1 and I would like to see if that is catching on or ifpeople are just deciding to save out of those other checkable depositsor what is happening. In July, [unintelligible] if things were reallystarting to catch fire--if orders data and leading indicators werelooking a lot stronger--I would say that would be a good indicationthat money was being used more for transactions than we had thought atthis point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion about wanting to see if the economy is catching on as a result of M1 growth. There is no indication of disagreement or conflicting views.


Passage number 204.
MR. MELZER. You weren't doing this, but I think it'sdangerous to draw a parallel between now and year ago when we hadsimilar problems. The reason I say that is that interest rates aredown a heck of a lot more than they were a year ago, the dollar isdown, and oil prices are down. In a sense it's easy to slip into themode, in general, of thinking that this is exactly where we were ayear ago. I am not sure we are because of those other forces that areat work and what we may see down the road in terms of a possibleresumption in inflation. In my mind, it may not be as easy this timearound as it was a year ago, just from a market perspective point ofview, to abandon the targets. But I guess that's for July.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Melzer is expressing his own perspective and raising concerns about drawing parallels between the current situation and the past year.


Passage number 205.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 206.
MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think we ought to stay in aholding pattern and that means I favor alternative B, like everybodyelse. On the directive, I favor alternative II. I also favor beingneutral. And I see no conflict in being neutral with allowing themarket to know that we acknowledge what's happening with theaggregates without making a judgment; we just let the market know thatwe know this. I think not to do that would risk giving the wrongsignals. So, I would prefer alternative II. While I think we now areprobably closer to the time when we may feel some need to snug up abit, I would be careful not to give any indication to the market thatI felt that way, because it just might make it happen; it might giverise to something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. One indication of this is the statement "I favor alternative B, like everybody else." This suggests that there may be differing opinions on alternative B. Additionally, the speaker mentions being neutral and not wanting to give any indication to the market that they feel a certain way, which implies there may be differing views on how to approach the situation.


Passage number 207.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions "Mr. Corrigan" without providing any context or further information.


Passage number 208.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Like Mr. Parry, I am not so sanguineabout M2 and M3; and I guess the greatest concern that I have isreally even more with M3, where for Bob it was M2. The concern that Ihave about M3 relates to this question that Frank raised about liquidassets or whatever you call it. We have a situation right now wherethere has been a tremendous burst in longer-term financing; but wealso have a situation in which there has been a tremendous burst inboth intermediate- and short-term financing as well as the long-term,through which the banks' role in that process is one of a contingentsource of liquidity through standbys and guarantees and[unintelligible] and all of these other things. So, one of thereasons M3 looks so sanguine and indeed why liquid assets, or whateverthat is called, look so sanguine is because the nature of therelationship of the banking system to this process is different. Whatis there now is a very substantial and very rapidly growing contingentliquidity [unintelligible] on the banking system. And I think that issomething that bears on the way in which some of these broader-33-5/20/86measures of liquidity and financial expansion look. So, I put that ontop of Bob Parry's earlier argument. I for one am not so sanguineabout what M2 and M3 are telling us, and I am of the view that when wetake account of conventional liquidity plus what I would loosely callcontingent liquidity that we have kind of a paradox in that thecontingent liquidity--what [financing] could have to be produced--doesn't show up in a lot of the conventional measures we are used to.Another quick point: Though none of us may be very impressedwith Ml, and I am not either, I think it's worth noting that for thefirst time in months and months and months, people in the market arelooking at Ml both in the United States and abroad. Nobody is gettingalarmed or anything like that, but there is a change in that peopleare looking at it again. They are not reacting to it but they arelooking at it, and I don't think we should kid ourselves about thateither.As far as policy is concerned, I would certainly very muchput myself in the "B" camp. I also have a little bias in thedirection of the need to be more sensitive to the possibility of "B"with a bit of a bias toward greater restraint, or "C." I don't knowwhat is going to happen between now and the next meeting either, but Icertainly could envision a set of circumstances in which even in thatintermeeting period we might feel the need to snug a bit. Because Ifeel that way, I favor directive III. I think directive III, with acouple of modest word changes, can be made compatible with the pointthat Governor Johnson made, which I think has some validity, by makingthe first conditional sentence something like: "If such a slowing doesnot develop, somewhat greater reserve restraint would, or might, beacceptable in the context of a pickup in economic growth" and puttinga reference to the monetary aggregates in there. But the part that ismore important to me is the somewhat lesser reserve restraintsentence. The only thing that would move me in the direction ofsomewhat lesser restraint that I really can think of right now wouldbe if the balance of the quarter materialized in a way in which theeconomy itself were distinctly sluggish. So, I would either want toget rid of the lesser restraint sentence altogether or just have thatsentence limited simply to a distinctly more sluggish economy ratherthan all of this other stuff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It discusses different views and concerns about M2 and M3, as well as opinions on policy and potential scenarios, but there is no direct contradiction or argument between the speakers.


Passage number 209.
MR. JOHNSON. That was exactly the point I was trying tomake. If the economy were showing a lot of strength--even if M1dropped off quite a bit and it indicated that the velocity reallywould rebound sharply--we wouldn't want to ease under thoseconditions. I agree with that, but the opposite applies too. Theeconomy could be growing strongly but if velocity were showingcontinued weakness, we wouldn't necessarily want to tighten.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Johnson is explaining a scenario and presenting two different perspectives based on different conditions. The statement "I agree with that" suggests that the speaker acknowledges and understands both perspectives.


Passage number 210.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage provided is incomplete as it only states "Mrs. Horn." Therefore, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement without further context.


Passage number 211.
MS. HORN. I favor alternative B and the number II statementof the directive, although I could take number III with both thesuggestions that Jerry has made with regard to saying something aboutthe aggregates. That is why I mildly favor II: because I don't wantto indicate at this point that we are turning our back on theaggregates or that we are not being watchful of them. I also agreeabout the change in the sentence on somewhat lesser restraint, because5/20/86I do think the one thing that could happen that might make me wantsomewhat lesser restraint would be a remarkably sluggish economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. HORN expresses her preference for alternative B and agrees with Jerry's suggestions about the aggregates and the change in the sentence on restraint. She explains her reasoning for favoring option II and agrees with the proposed changes.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 212.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich, you can interrupt allthis unanimity for Alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The statement suggests that there is unanimity among the individuals being addressed, but the speaker is inviting Governor Wallich to interrupt that unanimity. This indicates a potential disagreement or contention among the group.


Passage number 213.
MR. WALLICH. Well, I don't have much [to say] for the "B"notion because of the problems about the situation. People are unsureabout [unintelligible], and that is particularly the situation--whenone feels unsure about the sensitivity of what one is doing--where itis better in that moment simply to go to "C." I know this could havea bad effect, but initially it will reduce some of the errors that onemight make if one began with "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich is discussing the uncertainty and sensitivity of the situation and suggesting that it may be better to start with option "C" rather than option "B" to avoid potential errors. He acknowledges that this approach may have negative consequences but believes it can help reduce initial mistakes.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 214.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You want to tighten up a little.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains the phrase "tighten up," which suggests a need for improvement or correction. The word "little" indicates that the person being addressed may not be fully aware of the extent of the adjustments required. This implies disagreement or difference in opinion about the level of tightening needed.


Passage number 215.
MR. WALLICH. Yes, and I have had a hard time coming to this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage provided.


Passage number 216.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, with that exception, the easy partis alternative B. The difficult part is what that means. I haveheard considerable expression that the wording of the directive oughtto be changed, with only one exception. We have to look at thesecarefully to see what the difference is. Just to speak for myself, Iam not sure I am alarmed--if that would be a fair way to express it--over Ml. Three consecutive months of high numbers do give me a littlepause, however much I deemphasize M1. Even if I don't pay anyattention to it at all, this is a time for a little perking up of theears anyhow, particularly with some rumblings [unintelligible] in M2and M3, although not at a serious level as yet. I also have to agreethat it's very hard to see what would make us ease during this periodexcept reasonably clear signs of softness in business activity. Tosee M1 falling below the particular M1 number would not impel a greateasing at this point with nothing going on in the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and opinions about the situation, but there is no direct disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 217.
 However--MR. RICE. Who needs much more than 20 percent growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is a statement expressing a belief or opinion without any conflicting viewpoints mentioned.


Passage number 218.
MR. JOHNSON. I bet we could. I wouldn't want to, but Ithink we could.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers seem to agree on the possibility of a certain action, despite one of them expressing personal reluctance.


Passage number 219.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll see what the salient differences arein these directives here. The first sentence is going to be the sameanyway--"maintain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they will observe and analyze the notable differences in the directives being discussed.


Passage number 220.
"MR. BOEHNE. I wonder, Mr. Chairman, if I might make asuggestion as to something that might make most people happy. Itseems to me that most people want some acknowledgement that Ml isovershooting but people--at least the majority--also want to betotally neutral about what we might do, in order to not tip the scalesone way or the other before the July meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 221.
 One way to achieve thatwould be in--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't accept that as a premise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "I don't accept that as a premise" indicates a disagreement with the suggested strategy of achieving something.


Passage number 222.
MR. BOHNE. All right. Well then, there is no use havingwhat I suggest.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It seems to suggest agreement or consensus in the statement "there is no use having what I suggest."


Passage number 223.
5/20/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only states the date and title of Chairman Volcker, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 224.
 The Committee may decide that, but Ididn't think there was necessarily all that much unanimity that underno conditions would we change--MR. BOEHNE. Not under no conditions. What I meant was thatat this point we just don't bias the directive one way or the other.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The two speakers are clarifying each other's statements and expressing uncertainty about the decision of the committee.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 225.
MR. JOHNSON. I do agree with that point. If we acknowledgethe overshooting of M1 growth, which may be appropriate, I think we atleast ought to balance our acknowledgement of the growth of M1 withthe two possible meanings associated with that growth. One is that wehave a big bulge in money demand for various reasons associated withlower interest rates, declining oil prices, and all those things. Butit also can mean the opposite; it could be a warning of too muchliquidity. We don't know right now, it seems to me, which one ofthose meanings to apply to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Johnson acknowledges the growth of M1 but discusses two possible meanings associated with that growth - one being an increase in money demand and the other being a warning of too much liquidity. This indicates that there is uncertainty and differing views on the interpretation of the M1 growth.


Passage number 226.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, I think Governor Johnson is right. Oneway to deal with that is just to drop the sentence at the bottom ofpage 12 in draft alternative II that says, "This action is expected tobe consistent with a deceleration in money growth over the balance ofthe quarter." If we just take that sentence out and then in the nextsentence drop "however," it simply acknowledges that we have had rapidgrowth. Then we could follow the numerical specifications by saying"somewhat greater or lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable"etc. It seems to me that that says: Look, we have overshot M1 and weare not sure what it means; we may respond one way or the other, butwe are not at this point saying which way we might go. We will waituntil developments unfold.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with Governor Johnson's suggestion and proposes specific changes to the draft alternative to address the issue of rapid growth.


Passage number 227.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If that's what we wanted to say, that'sthe way to say it. But I think a lot of people would not say that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion about how some people might not agree with the statement being made.


Passage number 228.
MR. PARRY. I think I wouldn't want to say that. What Iwould want to say is that if money continues to grow, I have aconcern. I think you're saying that if money continues to grow youdon't have this concern until you see some other things occurring. Iam not so sure that I could support that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Parry expresses a difference in opinion or perspective but does not necessarily disagree or argue with the statement being made. He simply states that he is not sure if he can support the idea mentioned.


Passage number 229.
MR. JOHNSON. Well, we were just making an offering.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Johnson, is simply stating a fact or describing a situation without any opposition or contradiction.


Passage number 230.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There are a zillion contingencies asusual, but just on this point, I guess there is a question: Ifmonetary growth continued at the recent rates--I'm talking about allof the aggregates now--with Ml averaging about 15 percent if we userecent months, and M2 projected now for the second quarter at 9-1/2percent and M3 at 8-1/4 percent, are we highly neutral about thosegrowth rates or not. We had 13 or 14 percent growth in M2 in Apriland 11 percent in M3. Are we really saying that if growth continuedat that rate of speed, just looking at the monetary aggregates alone,that we're neutral.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply presenting data and asking a question for clarification.


Passage number 231.
MR. PARRY. Well, it depends on what happens to the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing a conditional situation or uncertainty.


Passage number 232.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All other things equal at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "All other things equal at this point" suggests that there are no disagreements or contentions in the passage. It implies that everything is consistent and similar, without any conflicting variables or factors.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 233.
MR. PARRY. But even there I have a problem because these arenot contemporaneous events. If one is expecting the real developments-36-5/20/86to follow what has happened with regard to the aggregates to someextent, then if we are waiting for that kind of confirmation and itoccurs, we may have to do a lot more later than we would like to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Parry, expresses his problem with the expectation that the real developments should follow the events regarding the aggregates. He suggests that if they wait for confirmation and it occurs, they may have to do more later than they would prefer. This implies a disagreement or conflict about the timeline and the necessary actions to be taken.


Passage number 234.
MR. JOHNSON. Bob, I agree with what you are saying, but I amjust asking: How long have we been sitting around here waiting for thelags now. We have been watching.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 235.
MR. PARRY. It's obviously closer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Parry's statement does not provoke any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 236.
MR. JOHNSON. I don't know whether we are closer or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any clear contention or disagreement. It seems to be a statement expressing uncertainty or lack of knowledge.


Passage number 237.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know how close we are, but I doknow that these rates of growth of the aggregates have picked upsubstantially from what they had been.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of uncertainty and observation.


Passage number 238.
MR. ANGELL. Isn't there some point in time that the Mlgrowth path in and of itself gets to be fast enough. Particularly ifwe are moving down the demand curve due to the interest rate declines,I would expect that at some point in time--that is, if interest ratesdon't drop--we ought not to be getting that kicker any more, so wewould expect M1 to decelerate. It seems to me that it's more logicalthat M1 is going to decelerate. The question is: How much. I guess Iwould like to have Jim's comments on that. How long after we bringinterest rates down do we expect to get the quantity demand responsejust due to the lower interest rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 239.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, I think Don has the econometric resultsthat we used. There is a lot of uncertainty, but we have variousmodels. You are looking at the numbers, Don.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Kichline has the econometric results and there is uncertainty, but they have various models. Don is looking at the numbers.


Passage number 240.
MR. KOHN. According to the models, for what it's worth, theinterest rate effects would be expected to begin tapering off to acertain extent in May but mostly in June and then even more going out.We are not sure that the models have captured the interest rateeffects all that well, given that we're at levels of opportunity coststhat we have just never experienced before with respect to NOWaccounts. But certainly the pattern ought to be one of tapering off,and that's what we built into the paths.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that there may be uncertainty in the models' accuracy but still agrees that the interest rate effects will taper off.


Passage number 241.
MR. ANGELL. Let's say you estimate that 5-1/2 percent of theM1's recent path might be explainable simply by the interest rateresponse. That response is going to disappear at some point in time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Angell, discussing the potential disappearance of the interest rate response.


Passage number 242.
MR. PARRY. Governor Angell, I think we all agree that ifmoney begins to grow more slowly, we would have some degree of comfortin that. I think the first issue, and one where we seem to have somedisagreement, is what if it doesn't. What does that imply in terms ofwhat we say and do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any specific disagreement or contention. The speaker acknowledges that there may be some disagreement on the second issue, but the disagreement itself is not mentioned or explored.


Passage number 243.
MR. ANGELL. I want you to understand that if Ml begins togrow slowly, [unintelligible] if we get it down to the 5 percent pathafter we have been at 15 percent and we don't see any evidence. Wecan do all the talking that we want to about the economy's growthpath, but the hard evidence is that the economy is still on a 2percent real growth path. That's all the hard evidence we have. Ifwe don't have any evidence and we get into the third quarter and the-37-5/20/86third quarter still looks like 2 percent or drifting to 1-1/2 percentor slower growth, we've got to ease.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the current growth path of the economy and emphasizing the need to take action if growth continues to slow.


Passage number 244.
MR. PARRY. Of course.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not involve any disagreements or contention.


Passage number 245.
MR. JOHNSON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage only mentions "Mr. Johnson," but there is no information provided about any specific opinions or conflicting points of view.


Passage number 246.
 Unless the inflationary picture--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] to hear you say that. Idon't know what the growth path is, but frankly I'm not sure there isall that much difference between II and III. The first point we mayconsider is: Do we expect whatever action we take here, which is notmuch change at the moment, to be consistent with a deceleration ofmoney growth. That's what we are told, as a simple forecast; and Iguess we would like to see it happen. If that doesn't happen, wemight tighten, depending upon the strength of business. That's themost important thing. I think that's what people are saying; but itis dependent upon the strength of business.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing possible actions to address inflation and stating that the decision to tighten monetary policy will depend on the strength of the economy. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument present.


Passage number 247.
MR. JOHNSON. The nub of the problem is that everybody startsguessing what growth rate that means. What's the third-quarter numberthat will make us do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement discussing a problem and the uncertainty surrounding it.


Passage number 248.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wouldn't rely upon a third-quarternumber which nobody knows.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No
Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply expressing doubt or skepticism about relying on a specific piece of information.


Passage number 249.
MR. JOHNSON. Well, I agree. That's what I am saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage shows agreement between the speaker, Mr. Johnson, and an unidentified person.


Passage number 250.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'd need a variety of hard evidence--say,some pickup in orders, continued strength in housing, and automobilesales continuing strong. With regard to the projections of nextquarter's GNP there's a certain amount of skepticism, although thesecurrent indicators tend to get reflected in those projections. I amnot talking about fine tuning the language. It needs to be finetuned, but I would have thought that you captured the essence of whatpeople were saying. Yes, we do expect a deceleration [in monetarygrowth]; if that doesn't develop, we are going to be a bit worried butwe are not going to be worried enough to change things unless thedeceleration is accompanied by some feeling that the economy is [not]doing reasonably well. And the only thing that would make us ease, asnear as we can see now, is a clear sign that the economy is not doingwell relative to current expectations. If that is the essence of whatwe are saying we ought to be at both II and III have the [prima facieevidence] of that, or more than the [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their expectations and criteria for making decisions, but there is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 251.
MR. GUFFEY. It seems to me that there is only one issue, Mr.Chairman, and that is whether or not we want to maintain some rangefor the aggregates, particularly as set out in alternative II--keepingM2 and M3 as the first targets and indicating that M1 is sort ofuncertain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of opinion by Mr. Guffey about the issue at hand.


Passage number 252.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that could be incorporated in III.The difference in the wording as it starts out is not much insubstance, as near as I can see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their observation that the wording at the beginning of III is not significantly different in substance.


Passage number 253.
MR. PARRY. To me the phrase "if such a slowing does notdevelop" was the one that made the difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion on a particular phrase, but there is no indication of any disagreement or opposing views.


Passage number 254.
5/20/86MR. MORRIS. The one big difference is that I read III tomean that we are reemphasizing Ml, because in last month's directivewe emphasized M2 and M3 and then we noted that M1 was uncertain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is simply stating a difference in interpretation regarding the emphasis on Ml in relation to M2 and M3. There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 255.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it was meant to reemphasizeMl; it's a recognition that M1 is the one that is growing at a jetpropulsion rate of speed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is stating an opinion or belief, rather than engaging in a disagreement or presenting conflicting viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 256.
MR. GUFFEY. I read III as Frank does--that M1 is in some wayelevated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The disagreement is between Mr. Guffey and Frank regarding the interpretation of M1 being elevated in some way.


Passage number 257.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have two different things: what's theinherent rate of Ml, which I don't think anybody is intending tochange here, and what is way out of line with respect to what wasexpected, which clearly M1 has been. It's like price and incomeeffects. It's a low-weighted aggregate way the heck out of line.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that there are two different things to consider: the inherent rate of M1, which they believe nobody intends to change, and the unexpected behavior of M1 which is out of line with expectations. The comparison made to price and income effects further emphasizes the separate factors being discussed but does not indicate disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 258.
MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that we could make some progressif we decide which draft we want to alter. Draft II has theaggregates mentioned and I slightly prefer to have the aggregatesmentioned. If we start from draft II, then let's make the changes.If everybody wants to start from draft III, okay, but I don't think wecan work from both of them at the same time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Angell expresses a preference for starting with Draft II and making changes, while acknowledging that others may prefer Draft III. This suggests a disagreement about which draft to use as a starting point for alterations.


Passage number 259.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think you're probably right.Let's start with one or the other; I don't think that there is thatmuch difference. I can alter in either direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate contention or disagreement. The speaker agrees with the other person's opinion and suggests a compromise.


Passage number 260.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We can put in anything we want withthe numbers. What matters to me is the kind of contingent operationalapproach between now and the next meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and emphasizing the importance of a specific approach.


Passage number 261.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you want to start on II.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply asking a question about starting on something.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 262.
MR. ANGELL. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from Mr. Angell's response, which indicates that he holds a differing opinion or position from what was previously mentioned.


Passage number 263.
MR. JOHNSON. I am not really picky anymore. I would beworried if this were to be released immediately.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their lack of pickiness and potential concern about the immediate release of something, but there is no conflicting viewpoint or argument.


Passage number 264.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The first sentence is "maintain. Then"This action is expected to be consistent with a deceleration in moneygrowth over the balance of the quarter." That's a statement of fact.The next sentence is a simple statement of fact too. We could say "Inview of the rapid money growth thus far in the quarter and apparentweakness in velocity, the Committee anticipates faster growth in themonetary aggregates [than expected at the last meeting], particularlyfor Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statements presented are straightforward and do not involve opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 265.
"MR. ANGELL. That would be fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that something would be fine.


Passage number 266.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, what numbers are we putting in therefor M2 and M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear disagreement or contention in the passage. The statement is simply asking for clarification about the specific numbers being used for M2 and M3 variables.


Passage number 267.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Alternative B would say 10 percentand 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply presents two alternatives without indicating any disagreement or contention between them.


Passage number 268.
MR. KOHN. Well, alternative B says 10 percent and 8-1/2percent for M2 and M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement apparent in this passage. The speaker is simply stating the percentages mentioned in alternative B without expressing any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 269.
-39-5/20/86VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. 8 to 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 270.
MR. ANGELL. Alternative B says 10 percent; it would have tobe 9 to 11 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply states different percentages mentioned in two alternatives and points out that option B specifically suggests 10 percent, while mentioning that it would have to be 9 to 11 percent. There is no conflicting opinion expressed.


Passage number 271.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. M2 and M3 are expected to expand atrates in a range of 8 to 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states the expected expansion rates for M2 and M3 without any conflicting information or contrasting viewpoints.


Passage number 272.
MR. ANGELL. That's all right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention in the passage. Mr. Angell's statement conveys agreement or acceptance.


Passage number 273.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is a slight peculiarity in that itsays M2 and M3, and as it works out M3 is expected to be 8 percent andthe 10 percent is for M2. If we put in 8 to 10 percent, it soundsjust the opposite according to this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a slight peculiarity or inconsistency in the way M2 and M3 are mentioned. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument being presented.


Passage number 274.
MR. BLACK. 10 to 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a numerical figure without any contradictory statements or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 275.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The broader aggregates are expectedto expand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanat


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 276.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would we say M3 and M2. This says"respectively;" you didn't mean that. We want to take out the word"respectively.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation:
There is contention or disagreement indicated in the passage. The statement "This says 'respectively;' you didn't mean that. We want to take out the word 'respectively'" shows disagreement about the use of the word "respectively" and the intention behind it.


Passage number 277.
" M1 growth at an annual rate of--MR. ANGELL. 12 to 14 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states the growth rate of M1 without any conflicting opinions or conflicting information provided.


Passage number 278.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 279.
MR. PARRY. That is one of the nice things about alternativeIII.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not include any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply mentions an aspect of Alternative III that the speaker finds nice or positive.


Passage number 280.
MR. RICE. Are you changing your mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 281.
MR. PARRY. I never was off it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Parry, is simply stating a fact about himself.


Passage number 282.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Growth at the fantastic annual rate of--.Have we ever had a quarterly growth rate that big.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply asking if there has ever been a quarterly growth rate as big as the "fantastic annual rate."


Passage number 283.
MR. ANGELL. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The assistant cannot accurately answer this question without more context from the passage.


Passage number 284.
MR. MELZER. Nothing ever got written down this way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of fact without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 285.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What did you say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage "What did you say?" This is a simple question asking for clarification or repetition of something that was said, without any disagreement or contention implied.


Passage number 286.
MR. ANGELL. You had that happen in 1980.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of a fact or event that occurred in 1980.


Passage number 287.
MR. MORRIS. Why don't we say "The behavior of M1 continuesto be subject to unusual uncertainty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This statement is simply expressing uncertainty about the behavior of M1.


Passage number 288.
"MR. ANGELL. "Unusually rapid growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It simply mentions "unusually rapid growth" without stating any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 289.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 290.
 This illustrates the problem of--MR. JOHNSON. It grew about 13 percent all year last year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 291.
MR. ANGELL. No, 12 percent; it was 11.9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply corrects a specific percentage.


Passage number 292.
MR. JOHNSON. Okay, 12 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "Okay, 12 percent" is a simple acknowledgement or agreement without any conflicting opinions expressed.


Passage number 293.
-40-5/20/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 


Passage number 294.
MR. ANGELL. 12 to 14 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is a statement of a percentage (12 to 14 percent) without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 295.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 12 to 14 percent appears big[unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states a fact or an observation about the percentage being high (12 to 14 percent), without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 296.
MR. ANGELL. There is no use denying it; it's there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a fact without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 297.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the real problem is the next twosentences.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the statement. The phrase "Well, the real problem is the next two sentences" is simply introducing a new point or argument without expressing disagreement with the previous statement.


Passage number 298.
MR. MELZER. With those kind of numbers there, I don't seehow we can give it symmetrical treatment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Melzer is simply stating his opinion or observation about the numbers.


Passage number 299.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Even with those numbers, I don't seeit as symmetrical.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is expressing a personal opinion and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 300.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me just suggest that we pick upthe two sentences with some modifications from the other directive,and say "If the anticipated slowing in coming weeks does not develop,somewhat greater reserve restraint would or might be acceptable in thecontext of a pickup in the growth of the economy, taking account"--keep the rest of that. Then "Somewhat lesser reserve restraint mightor would be acceptable...
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: In this passage, the speaker is suggesting modifications to a directive. The overall tone is cooperative and there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 301.
"MR. MORRIS. Why don't we just eliminate that, Paul. Why dowe need to talk about less reserve restraint. I don't think that isone of the options we are considering now, is it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris is suggesting eliminating a certain topic of discussion and clarifying if it is part of the options they are currently considering.


Passage number 302.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that is all right with me if it isacceptable to others. I don't know; some people may want to put it inthere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement suggests a willingness to go along with others' preferences without expressing any personal disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 303.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'd only want it in if it is limitedto more sluggish economic [activity] or something like that. I wouldprefer it out, but if it were limited to "lesser reserve restraintmight be acceptable in the face of a distinct slowing in the economy,"then I could live with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a preference for a specific condition or limitation for something, but there is no indication of opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 304.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's work on the second sentence."Somewhat lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable should therebe"--do you want to leave in the marked slowing of money growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence is asking for clarification on whether or not to include the phrase "marked slowing of money growth."


Passage number 305.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Money growth could be zero and itwouldn't hurt my feelings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that the growth of money at zero wouldn't have any emotional effect. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 306.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would be acceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 307.
MR. ANGELL. I am not sure of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. Mr. Angell states that he is not sure about something, indicating his uncertainty rather than disagreement.


Passage number 308.
MR. RICE. Me neither.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "Me neither" is an agreement with the previous statement, indicating that the speaker also does not have the same feeling or experience. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 309.
MR ANGELL. [Unintelligible] these aggregates[unintelligible] one path and it changed from 15 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 310.
MR. RICE. Because of the vagueness of it, you don't knowquite what it means. How much lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion about the vagueness of something.


Passage number 311.
-41-5/20/86MR. JOHNSON. And for how long.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not contain any contentions or disagreements. It is a partial statement without any specific context or information. It does not provide any indication of disagreement or contention between parties.


Passage number 312.
 If it were just a month ortwo, I could stand zero, but--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In a six-week period, what is goingto make you want to ease.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that they could handle "zero" for a month or two, but they are questioning what would make them want to ease in a six-week period.


Passage number 313.
MR. RICE. I would be prepared to drop it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Rice is simply stating that he would be prepared to drop a certain matter.


Passage number 314.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Somewhat lesser reserve restraint mightbe acceptable in the context of a marked slowing in money growth andpronounced sluggishness of economic performance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is stating that a lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable in certain circumstances. It is not expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 315.
"MR. ANGELL. That is right. That will be fine. I don't seewhat is wrong with the way that is stated. It says about the samething. Slower monetary growth than unexpected, especially of thebroader aggregates, and sluggish economic performance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their agreement with the way something is stated and mentioning that they don't see anything wrong with it.


Passage number 316.
MR. PARRY. "Pronounced" makes the difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the word "pronounced" is significant or makes a difference in some way.


Passage number 317.
MR. MORRIS. How about using the word "only". "It would beacceptable only in the context of--." .
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris is simply suggesting using the word "only" in a specific context.


Passage number 318.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we could say "it would be acceptableonly." Or "might" carries that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The sentence simply presents two different possibilities or options without expressing any disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 319.
MR. ANGELL. "And pronounced sluggish economic performance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence simply states a fact about the sluggish economic performance.


Passage number 320.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Sluggishness of economic performance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply describing the sluggishness of economic performance without expressing any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 321.
MR. RICE. Not "pronounced.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "MR. RICE. Not 'pronounced'" simply clarifies the correct pronunciation of the word "rice."


Passage number 322.
"MR. ANGELL. I like that better--"sluggishness.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by Mr. Angell expresses his personal preference and does not oppose any other viewpoint.


Passage number 323.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now the previous sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The sentence is a fragment and does not express any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 324.
MR. ANGELL. And a period after "performance," right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that there should be a period after the word "performance."


Passage number 325.
MR. JOHNSON. Are you going to strike the rest.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question.


Passage number 326.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Somewhat greater reserve restraint"--doyou want to put "would" or "might" in there.SEVERAL. "Would.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification or preference between using "would" or "might" in a certain context.


Passage number 327.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --"be acceptable in the context of apickup in growth of the economy." Presumably if we did either,particularly easing--well, I'm not talking about some very minorthing--but if we wanted to make any pronounced move we'd have aconsultation anyway. Let's see now, reading from alternative II, "Inthe implementation of policy for the immediate future, the Committeeseeks to maintain the existing degree of pressure on reservepositions. This action is expected to be consistent with adeceleration in money growth over the balance of the quarter.However, in view of the rapid money growth thus far in the quarter andthe apparent weakness in velocity, the Committee anticipates fastergrowth for the monetary aggregates, particularly M1, than expected atthe last meeting. M2 and M3 are expected to expand over the periodfrom March to June at annual rates of about 8 to 10 percent. While5/20/86the behavior of M1 continues to be subject to unusual uncertainty,growth at an annual rate of 12 to 14 percent over the period is nowanticipated. If the anticipated slowing in monetary growth"--do youwant to put in there "particularly M2 and M3".SEVERAL. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker seems to be explaining different alternatives and discussing the potential outcomes of each option.


Passage number 328.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "If the anticipated slowing in monetarygrowth does not develop, somewhat greater reserve restraint would beacceptable in the context of a pickup in the growth of the economy,taking account of conditions in domestic and international creditmarkets and developments in foreign exchange markets. Somewhat lesserreserve restraint might be acceptable in the context of a markedslowing in money growth and pronounced sluggishness of economicperformance." And then we have to stick in a federal funds rate here.There is a question of whether you want to make that 5 to 9 percent,which is centered on the present rate. We haven't changed that [6 to10 percent] forever.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The author is discussing the possibility of adjusting reserve restraint based on different scenarios of money growth and economic performance. The mention of considering a federal funds rate centered on the present rate does not indicate disagreement but rather a consideration of maintaining the current rate.


Passage number 329.
MR. ANGELL. 5 to 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It just states a numerical range.


Passage number 330.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 5 to 9 percent sounds reasonable to me,but I think we ought to put something in the policy record that statespretty clearly that that in itself implies no change in policy,because the press picks that up as a change in policy. So long as weare clear about that: that this is a purely technical change to centerit around the existing rate. I think all this implies no change, aswe said. We aim [for borrowing of] around $300 million--recently it'sbeen below $300 million--as long as these monetary aggregates are sostrong. We are not going to move anything for some weeks unlesssomething very unusual happens. If we have a combination of continuedstrong growth in money and clear signs, whatever they are, of somepickup in the economy, we might consider snugging up a bit. If thatbecame significantly more than a $100 million [snugging], let's say,we'd certainly have a consultation. Is that all understood.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 331.
MR. ANGELL. Well, it seems to me that we are just notcertain at this point what is going to happen. It seems to me aslikely to be in one direction as another direction. If the economydoes grow slowly--does not pick up from the 2 percent path--the bondmarket is going to know as soon as we do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Angell is simply expressing uncertainty about the future and stating that the bond market will react based on the information available to everyone.


Passage number 332.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are we ready to vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any specific issue or debate that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 333.
MR. BERNARD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only mentions "MR. BERNARD" without providing any further context or information.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 334.
Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Guffey YesPresident Horn YesGovernor Johnson YesPresident Melzer YesPresident Morris YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Seger YesGovernor Wallich No5/20/86CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. Now, we had some question about theintervention that we might discuss for a moment. Do you want todiscuss this operational issue of yours, Mr. Sternlight. Somebodymentioned to me that you'd like to have a biweekly report.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The governors and presidents are split on their opinions, as evidenced by the multiple "Yes" and "No" responses.


Passage number 335.
MR. STERNLIGHT. If I may take a minute on that, Mr.Chairman. The domestic account management has been submitting weeklyreports to the Committee since 1922, describing the week's open marketoperations and the market background against which they wereundertaken. While not best-sellers, they have provided a usefulcurrent review and an important historical resource when researchingpast developments. Since going to the two-week reserve maintenanceperiod a couple of years ago, it has occurred to us that a two-weekreporting period would also make more sense. This would provide amore meaningful time interval on which to report how we've gone aboutmeeting the Committee's reserve objectives which are set, of course,on a two-week time frame. Moreover, preparation of the report everysecond week should permit better use of staff resources to work onother assignments and possibly achieve staff savings. But I don'twant to dangle any hopes on this score, Mr. Chairman. Committeemembers will continue to get daily reports on actual Desk operationsand market developments and also a brief summary report sent outbefore each Committee meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply proposing a change to the reporting system for the Committee's reserve objectives.


Passage number 336.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To bring you up to date on one aspect ofthis dating from 1922: I don't remember just when, but when I was inNew York I once thought that it might be a good idea to drop theweekly report altogether and just report for the intervals betweenmeetings. But this is a half way [alternative].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing a personal thought or idea the author had in the past but does not present any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 337.
 It seems to make alot of sense, but I--MR. WALLICH. In some sense it would. I know not everybodyreads it--not even I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: Although there may be a slight difference in opinion (since the speaker mentions that not everyone reads it), there is no strong contention or disagreement evident in the passage.


Passage number 338.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just out of curiosity: How many members ofthe Committee read it. [Secretary's note: Quite a few hands went up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses curiosity and the secretary confirms that many committee members have read it.


Passage number 339.
]MR. BLACK. All the time or just some times.SPEAKER(.). Most of the time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Black and the speaker agree that something happens "most of the time."


Passage number 340.
MR. JOHNSON. Once in a while.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement mentioning someone named Mr. Johnson occasionally doing something.


Passage number 341.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is interesting. Well, I don't[unintelligible] for discussion. This seems not unreasonable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses interest and then states their opinion about not having enough information for a discussion. They also mention that the topic seems reasonable.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 342.
 Itpasses conveniently into the reserve--MR. ANGELL. Two weeks makes sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage shows disagreement as the phrase "It passes conveniently into the reserve" suggests one viewpoint, while the next phrase, "Two weeks makes sense," introduces another perspective or opinion.


Passage number 343.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It makes sense to do that. I think thatthe new schedule is accepted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that the speaker believes the new schedule is accepted and that it makes sense to do whatever is being discussed. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 344.
MR. JOHNSON. I might request a slightly less technicalsummary--maybe even just a one-page executive summary that would justsort of [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Johnson is simply expressing a preference for a less technical summary.


Passage number 345.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. There is another historical aspectof this that should be mentioned that the Chairman didn't mention.-44-5/20/86There is more than one person in this room who at some point in hiscareer had the responsibility of drafting the weekly report. What isinteresting about that is that after having drafted it, no one waspermitted to read it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply adding additional information that wasn't mentioned by the Chairman.


Passage number 346.
MR. ANGELL. Sounds appropriate to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no indication of disagreement or contention in this passage. Mr. Angell simply expresses his agreement with the statement without any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 347.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's discuss this interventionquestion a little. I don't know if you really want to be operationalabout this, but some sense of the Committee's mood, I think, would beuseful. We have these concerns about the dollar from time-to-time,including quite recently, and the question of coordinated interventionto support the dollar arises. I think it is fair to say thathistorically, although the Committee has not been all that gung ho byand large, in many particular periods we have been more receptive tointervention on either side--certainly including for several yearsrestraining the rise of the dollar--than the Treasury has been. Isuppose one way of expressing this is that neither of us has chosen toact, although we have independent powers, when the other side has notbeen ready to act. If the other side is more reluctant than we are,we don't act. The most reluctant party has a natural advantage underthose conditions. But the question has arisen at times, just as inthe most recent context, as to whether there wouldn't be someusefulness in intervening. This question has not been pressed veryhard. Governor Angell may have some opinions of his own; he had amore detailed proposal. But the question arises as to how useful youthink this tool is and whether we should be sympathetic in the rightconditions--meaning a weak dollar in these circumstances--towardperhaps providing some support for the dollar. It is probably notrelevant right now in terms of our present decision, but at some timeit may inhibit us from being as easy in monetary policy as we wouldotherwise like to be for fear of its effects on the dollar. We maynot quite be in that mode right today, but we could be at some othertime--even in the [near] future, if the second contingency sentence inthe directive came to bear. How do you feel about that possibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the question of coordinated intervention to support the dollar and is simply providing some background information and thoughts on the topic.


Passage number 348.
MR. JOHNSON. Can I ask you to clarify something for me. Iassume we are talking only in terms of sterilized intervention, sinceotherwise it would have a bearing on what we just did earlier.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 349.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I hate to discuss this in terms ofresponding [unintelligible] sterilized or unsterilized interventionbecause I think we've got to make those decisions separately and expost. The intervention may be unsterilized but not in the technicalsense that the amount of the open market operation is governed by whatwe do in the foreign exchange market. It may coincide with a periodof easing and in some broad sense you can say it was unsterilized. Wehave this kind of separable decision. The contingency that mightarise--the one that I cited--is where we might be in at least aslightly easy mode and want to intervene in the opposite direction. Iguess it would be more than sterilized; in that particular case, itwould be--I don't know what the term is--"antiseptically sterilized."We would be putting money into the domestic market and taking it outof the foreign exchange market; we would be going in the oppositedirection. Call it "sanitized" or "insulated.""Ultra-sterilized".-45-SPEAKER(.).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is mainly discussing different terms and possibilities related to intervention and sterilization in the market.


Passage number 350.
5/20/86MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that we might have some doubtsabout the U.S. economy, but there is a lot out there that tells usthat the Third World is [unintelligible] debt. [Given] Japan's andGermany's growth rates, it seems it would be very desirable to havesome further easing of monetary policy in Japan and Germany, and Ijust don't think we ought to give up. I don't think we ought to givethem what they want, which is a little help on intervention, withoutgetting a step from them. I am not willing to do it unless they makethe move we want them to make.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's opinion and stance on the topic of monetary policy in Japan and Germany.


Passage number 351.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are putting it in a negotiatingcontext, which could arise, but I don't know whether I absolutely wantto limit the question to that context. One of the difficulties inworld economic situations generally is that appreciation in theircurrencies, in fact, tends to depress their economic growth in theshort run. One other reason you get as much weakness there as you getis because their currencies have appreciated so much that theirbusinessmen have not been as eager, at the margin anyway, to expand asthey otherwise might be. And that tends to support an idea that goesin your direction, in terms of some kind of trade-off, at some point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It merely discusses the potential impact of currency appreciation on economic growth and business expansion.


Passage number 352.
MR. JOHNSON. The only question I have on the point that youmade is that you have to be clear what you mean. Does "somecoordinated intervention" mean we are talking about a slighttightening of monetary policy here to support the dollar while theylower their interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Johnson is seeking clarification on a specific point, but does not express disagreement or contention with the speaker's statement.


Passage number 353.
 I am not sure we want to do--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] forecast. I am thinkingprimarily of intervention to support the dollar. If we weretightening monetary policy here, however slightly, one ordinarilywould think narrowly that that might strengthen the dollar a little initself and we wouldn't have to intervene. We wouldn't have anyinterest in intervening on that side. I think the more operationalcase, although it is not the case right at the moment, would occur ifwe were running quite an easy monetary policy or easing further, or ifmonetary policy were unchanged and the dollar was declining anyway,making them unhappy. We would be raising some questions ourselves; wemight want to intervene to support the dollar. One could imaginecircumstances--let's say we were tightening policy [unintelligible] orfor other reasons the dollar was strengthening. I [don't] think thatis immediately ahead, but who knows. We might want to intervene onthe other side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 354.
MR. PARRY. This intervention is not directed at somemomentary instability in the market. You are talking about somethingto change the direction of the currency.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 355.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not talking about massive operations.If we have a massive operation, that is another kettle of fish.Presumably we couldn't leave that alone anyway until [unintelligible].I think of it more as a change in the kind of attitude we have towardintervention. One particular reflection of that might be if thesituation arose the way I described; that might make it operationalbut there might be other contexts too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It discusses the speaker's perspective on intervention in different contexts.


Passage number 356.
MR. STERN. At the margin, another tool in the kit seems tome to be a good idea as long as it is going to be sterilized most ofthe time. I don't think we ought to expect a lot out of it, but it5/20/86certainly may have some signal effect, sentiment effect, or somethinglike that. It strikes me as a good idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not have any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the viewpoint of Mr. Stern, who believes that having an additional tool in the kit could be beneficial.


Passage number 357.
MR. JOHNSON. I have no objections as long as it isconsistent with the monetary policy agreed to by the FOMC. I wouldthink that we would have to cash those chips in few and far between tomake it a credible change. It would have to be a moment that wasreally creating the right psychological impression.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Johnson expresses his agreement and supports the idea of making a change, as long as it aligns with the monetary policy agreed upon by the FOMC. He also suggests that any change should be implemented sparingly and in a way that creates the desired psychological effect.


Passage number 358.
MR. MELZER. In a sense, to have any fundamental impact inthe long run, it would have to be unsterilized and run fundamentallycounter to the policy--in talking about the situation you described.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a statement made by Mr. Melzer, and there is no indication of any disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 359.
MR. ANGELL. The foreign exchange market may have beensomewhat dominated in recent months by market uncertainty as towhether or not our policy leaders in the United States would prefer alower dollar. It seems to me at this point in time, [given] the timelags that we have in regard to knowing what we have accomplished, thatit is not a desirable move for us to have an appreciably lower dollarand [we should] take away that question of uncertainty. Right nowsomeone thinks someone is going to try to push it lower. Just takingthat away might create a more stable climate, which would give us moreoptions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Angell, expresses his opinion about the foreign exchange market and states that it is not desirable to have a lower dollar. There is no opposing viewpoint presented in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 360.
MR. MELZER. You said we could take that away unilaterally.It would have to be in the context of the agreement with the Treasury.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is potential contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of the word "unilaterally" suggests that one party (presumably the speaker) believes they have the authority to make a decision without the agreement of the other party (presumably the Treasury). This could create a disagreement or contention between the two parties regarding the decision-making power.


Passage number 361.
MR. ANGELL. I think that's [unintelligible] maybe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker's statement is cut off, so it is not possible to determine the intent or content of what they were saying.


Passage number 362.
MR. MELZER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any context or specific information about it.


Passage number 363.
 In which case there might be so much confusion--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] could have a big fightabout it. More generally, putting the question operationally, therehave been times in the past when, quite on its own, the Open MarketCommittee was not very eager to intervene and--to exaggerate a bit--had to be dragged kicking and screaming to the table. I don't sensethat such an atmosphere exists now, under the appropriatecircumstances, but I want to confirm that. That's just the broadestway to put it. A more active mode in which to put it is to take oneexample, one Wayne took: If we see a positive desirability of doing itif we can get something out of the [other countries], that is onepossibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing past situations and questioning whether there is currently any reluctance or resistance from the Open Market Committee. They are seeking confirmation rather than expressing disagreement.


Passage number 364.
MR. BOEHNE. I think Gary has said it right. It is an extratool in the kit. There may be times when we can use it in the bestinterests of the United States and we ought to do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing agreement with Gary's point about the tool being extratool in the kit.


Passage number 365.
MR. GUFFEY. But in very modest amounts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is a statement made by Mr. Guffey.


Passage number 366.
MR. JOHNSON. I am still unclear as to what we mean by that.Does that mean that we would let the funds rate drift up through ouractive intervention to strengthen the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Johnson is simply expressing his confusion and seeking clarification on a specific point.


Passage number 367.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Barring some other decision, I think wewould conduct a net of open market operations, domestic and foreign,to meet whatever the Committee decided upon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion and suggesting a course of action if no other decision is made.


Passage number 368.
5/20/86MR. ANGELL. Roger, I remind you that we don't have a greatbig stock of yen. We don't have as many as I would like us to have;I thought we should have bought more in 1984, but--. So, we are notgoing to intervene a whole bunch because we don't have that many yento take profits on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Angell explaining the limited stock of yen and the decision not to intervene heavily due to this limitation.


Passage number 369.
 But it might come time to take a little profit--MR. PARRY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply mentions the possibility of taking a profit without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 370.
 The purpose of this is to communicate to themarket what we think--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that clearly would be one possiblepurpose; another would be the kind of thing that Wayne described.Independent of that, if we really thought the weakness of the dollarwas constraining what we wanted to do in reserve provision, we mightwant to send out signals. Whether that would be very powerful or notwe don't know. But would it be useful to send a signal that says:"Yes, we are worried about the dollar". If we want to ease anyway, wecould try to give ourselves room to ease by giving a counter signal onthe dollar. It might not work.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents different possibilities and potential strategies without any conflicting or opposing viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 371.
MR. MELZER. That is the problem I have with it in thefundamental sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The phrase "That is the problem I have with it in the fundamental sense" suggests that the speaker has a disagreement or contention with the subject being discussed.


Passage number 372.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, in some fundamental, theoretical,sense we would be moving in opposite directions. It might not work.But, given the importance of psychology in particular instances in themarket, one can make a case for trying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is discussing the possibility of moving in opposite directions and acknowledges that it might not work. However, it also suggests that there is a case to be made for trying based on the importance of psychology in certain market instances.


Passage number 373.
MR. MORRIS. In this particular market context, I thinkconcerted intervention would have an impact--at least in my judgment,based on watching the market--whether it's sterilized or unsterilized.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply presents the opinion of Mr. Morris that concerted intervention would have an impact on the market.


Passage number 374.
MR. ANGELL. Well, at this moment in time, if the Japanesewere to cut their discount rate 1/2 point, and the Germans cut theirsand we didn't cut ours and we said [unintelligible] at the same time,I don't think you'd have to worry about an impact. I think themarkets would take note of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion on how the markets would react to a hypothetical situation.


Passage number 375.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that's easy. But in the other case,suppose they didn't ease their policy and we were still stuck and wewanted to ease or not tighten and the dollar was weak.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any statements or indications of contention or disagreement. It simply presents a hypothetical scenario and discusses the different possible outcomes.


Passage number 376.
 Let's put itthat way: We weren't very eager to tighten or we wanted to tighten aslittle as possible, and they are not doing anything, and the dollar isa pain--MR. ANGELL. Oh, you might make the gesture.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply describes a lack of enthusiasm for tightening and frustration with the dollar. Mr. Angell's response suggests agreement rather than disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 377.
 I'm not sure;you might change the psychology slightly for a bit, but--MR. JOHNSON. Well, we'd only get away with this once in myopinion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Johnson expresses doubt about the effectiveness of changing the psychology, indicating disagreement or skepticism.


Passage number 378.
 And we'd have to do it in conjunction with some supportstatements by all parties, it seems to me, instead of--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that obviously would help.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement suggesting a possible course of action.


Passage number 379.
 But wecould--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm not sure about that, as a matterof fact. If you take it to that extreme where you've got to havestatements and all the rest of it, then it certainly only would workonce. I think there probably are very narrow windows of opportunity-48-5/20/86when Mr. Cross can sneak in and out of the markets, maybe with somehelp from the Japanese or something without having to go through thattribal rite, that can at least create a pause at a time that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and offering different possibilities, but there is no clear disagreement or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 380.
And we're not going to have--MR. CROSS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker seems to be making a statement or declaration without any opposing viewpoint or conflict.


Passage number 381.
 I think there have been some occasions recentlywhen--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The recent past.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It is merely stating that there have been some occasions in the recent past.


Passage number 382.
MR. CROSS. --the market was very sensitive to such a thingand it could have had considerable influence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 383.
MR. ANGELL. [Unintelligible] an impact.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any evidence of contention or disagreement. It is not possible to determine if there is any disagreement or contention without further context or information.


Passage number 384.
MR. JOHNSON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given statement "MR.  JOHNSON" does not provide enough information to determine any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 385.
 Okay, well--MR. MELZER. It seems to be in the realm of possibility,doesn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing a thought or opinion.


Passage number 386.
MR. CROSS. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MR. CROSS simply replies with a one-word agreement ("Yes").


Passage number 387.
MR. ANGELL. Your insurance goes to those people who want totake comfort in being short in the dollar.SPEAKER(.). You're underscoring too many risks in themarket.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The second person is simply highlighting that the speaker is emphasizing too many risks in the market.


Passage number 388.
MR. PARRY. What I'd like to ask Sam about is this: If youhave a situation where the French and the Germans and the Japanese didnothing and we eased policy and we intervened, I have the feeling thatthe New York traders would sell dollars.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a statement about their feelings and beliefs, without stating any opposing views or engaging in a debate.


Passage number 389.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They might.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it is not presenting conflicting or contradictory ideas.


Passage number 390.
MR. CROSS. That could surely happen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Cross is making a statement without expressing any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 391.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you're right. In all thesecircumstances, that would probably happen. But the question stillremains: Would they sell a little less eagerly and actively if we weregiving this contrary signal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging that the other person is right and expressing agreement with their point of view.


Passage number 392.
MR. PARRY. Well, if they think that it's going to come backto a natural rate then you're giving them even more profit because youtook the dollar up. They'll sell and then [unintelligible] down.Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement between the speaker (Mr. Parry) and the other party. It appears to be a statement or observation made by Mr. Parry without any conflicting views or arguments presented.


Passage number 393.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe, maybe not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no specific passage provided, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 394.
MR. PARRY. Traders very often have bet against interventionbecause intervention hasn't been very successful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement simply states that traders have bet against intervention because it hasn't been successful. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 395.
MR. CROSS. There are too many possibilities and too manysituations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there are numerous possibilities and situations.


Passage number 396.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] judgment at the time asto whether you're going to be. And it's very hard to--5/20/86Mr. JOHNSON. I do agree there are rare opportunities when itcould be useful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not clear enough to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 397.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I agree with Sam.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker explicitly states that they agree with Sam, indicating harmony of opinions.


Passage number 398.
 If youthink about the last six weeks or so--maybe the last two weeks inparticular--there may well have been a point or two in that time frameof the last six or eight weeks where we might have been able to sneakin there with the Japanese or with the Germans, or both, and get somestuff done without having to go through--MR. GUFFEY. I have a hard time envisioning, under thecurrent circumstances, that we would do intervention withoutcoordination with the Germans and the Japanese.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is simply discussing the possibility of sneaking in some work without having to coordinate with the Germans and the Japanese.


Passage number 399.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, right now, the direction we'retalking about we would get coordination with them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement suggests that there will be coordination with the mentioned party, but it does not imply any disagreement or conflicting views.


Passage number 400.
MR. GUFFEY. At least you'd have the up and up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that the person being referred to would have the up and up.


Passage number 401.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll give you one not very far removedtype of hypothesis--a situation that did arise a couple of weeks ago.Suppose we were sitting right in the posture we're sitting with and,say, we don't want to move at the moment--we want to wait for a littlemore evidence of monetary growth or an improved economy. Yet we havea little tendency in that direction as time passes, but the dollargets very weak in the meantime. So it begins forcing that decisionsooner than we otherwise would want to do it. We might say: "Well,let's try a little intervention in here because we don't really wantto take that step toward tightening but we're getting a littleconcerned, or more than a little concerned, about the dollar." Itmight work or it might not work. But I guess the question is: What dowe lose by trying to buy a little time at the very least by doing theintervention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a hypothetical scenario being presented and discussed.


Passage number 402.
MR. PARRY. But [unintelligible] with the fundamentals.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker, Mr. Parry, seems to be making a statement or expressing his agreement with something. However, the passage is incomplete as a part of it is unintelligible.


Passage number 403.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, except unresolved fundamentals. Wego against; we might be doing it in the future. We're not going toget into fundamentals.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the topic of fundamentals will not be discussed or addressed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 404.
MR. PARRY. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The word "Yes" indicates that there is contention or disagreement in the passage, but it is not enough information to fully understand the context or reason for the contention.


Passage number 405.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And that is more or less where we are now.The dollar is weak at the moment. We're slightly biased in what wesee for the future but we're not very eager to have to respond bygeneral monetary policy to a pronounced weakness in the dollar. Inthat particular situation, apart from this negotiating Waynesuggested, is that the right time to be quite willing or--dependingupon the situation--even eager to intervene.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Although there is some uncertainty about the future and the possibility of weakness in the dollar, there is no clear disagreement or contention in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their current stance and their hesitation to respond to a weak dollar with monetary policy.


Passage number 406.
MR. JOHNSON. Another--it may not [unintelligible]--primeopportunity later would be this: If it does so happen that theaggregates are growing strongly and the economy is picking up quitesubstantially and we literally do decide in July or whenever that infact we need to tap the brakes a bit, it would be a great opportunityto use that decision to buy dollars and--even though we're going to doit anyway--if Germany and Japan still are dragging their feet onstimulating their economies and it's clear that we are alone, we could-50-5/20/86offer to support the dollar and see if that might lead to a bettersituation with the Germans and Japanese.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing a potential opportunity to support the dollar and encourage Germany and Japan to stimulate their economies.


Passage number 407.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Given all the permutations andcombinations, I think I got about as much guidance as I could get inthe absence of specifics.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker received as much guidance as possible without having specific information.


Passage number 408.
MR. FORRESTAL. Does the question arise because there hasbeen a shift in the Treasury's sentiment about intervention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The question is simply asking if there has been a change in sentiment at the Treasury regarding intervention.


Passage number 409.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the question arises because therehasn't been any shift.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is solely stating a personal opinion or observation about a lack of shift.


Passage number 410.
MR. JOHNSON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 411.
 They too--MR. ANGELL. Well, of course, I have some concern here thatintervention ultimately is a monetary policy decision. I'm verysympathetic with Bob Parry in regard to that. I don't like to loseanything. Whenever you start off and do something you prove you'regoing to lose, I don't think that helps you. Personally, I would tendto prefer not to intervene on a sterilized basis unless I were willingto make a monetary policy adjustment relative to the two othercountries. It just seems to me that the Secretary of the Treasury hasbeen the person carrying the ball here on this topic. And it'ssomewhat of a monetary policy topic, so I think maybe it's appropriatefor the Federal Reserve to have the Chairman speaking on some of theseissues from time-to-time. I'm somewhat encouraging him in thatdirection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion and suggesting that the Federal Reserve Chairman should speak on certain topics. There is no indication of disagreement or argument.


