Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee December 13, 2011  A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System was held in the offices of the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, December 13, 2011, at 8:30 a.m.  Those present were the following:  Ben Bernanke, Chairman William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman Elizabeth Duke Charles L. Evans Richard W. Fisher Narayana Kocherlakota Charles I. Plosser Sarah Bloom Raskin Daniel K. Tarullo  Janet L. Yellen  Christine Cumming, Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, Sandra Pianalto, and John C. Williams, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee  James Bullard, Esther L. George, and Eric Rosengren, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively  William B. English, Secretary and Economist Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel Steven B. Kamin, Economist David W. Wilcox, Economist  Thomas A. Connors, Loretta J. Mester, Simon Potter, David Reifschneider, Harvey Rosenblum, and Lawrence Slifman, Associate Economists  Brian Sack, Manager, System Open Market Account  Jennifer J. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors  Robert deV. Frierson, Deputy Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors  Maryann F. Hunter, Deputy Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors; William Wascher, Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors  Andreas Lehnert, Deputy Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of Governors  Andrew T. Levin, Special Advisor to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors  Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors  Seth B. Carpenter, Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Michael P. Leahy, Senior Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors  Ellen E. Meade, Stephen A. Meyer, and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors  Eric M. Engen, Michael T. Kiley, and Michael G. Palumbo, Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors  David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors  Penelope A. Beattie, Assistant to the Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors  Gordon Werkema, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago  Jeff Fuhrer and Mark S. Sniderman, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and Cleveland, respectively  David Altig, Alan D. Barkema, Richard P. Dzina, Spencer Krane, and Christopher J. Waller, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Kansas City, New York, Chicago, and St. Louis, respectively  Mary C. Daly, Group Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco  Alexander L.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is simply a list of individuals present at a meeting.


Passage number 2.
 Wolman, Senior Economist and Research Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond  Samuel Schulhofer-Wohl, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis  Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on December 13, 2011  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  This is a joint meeting of the FOMC and the Board.  I need a motion to close the meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple request for a motion to close the meeting.


Passage number 3.
 MS. YELLEN.  So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is agreement. The phrase "So moved" implies that there is consensus and no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 4.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  I’d like to start with a few brief comments on FOMC information security.  As you probably know, there have been a few issues recently, and as our rules require, I’ve asked Bill English and Scott Alvarez to look into them, and when we have some resolution, I’ll certainly be reporting back to the full Committee. I also wanted, though, to mention today some press reports on the timing of our communications initiatives.  It appears that at least one report had information about the agenda, in particular, that we would be discussing those matters today and providing public information in January.  The substance of our discussions today on interest rate projections and on principles, inflation targets, and those sorts of issues, are well known.  They were in the minutes, and they were discussed by a number of people in speeches, and so on, but it does complicate the work of the subcommittee and of this Committee if the expectations of the public are for delivery of certain outcomes at certain dates.  My own sense is that there was not really any reason to intentionally leak this information, but I want to take the opportunity once again to remind people that reporters are very good at piecing together little bits of information from many sources.  When they come to you and say, “Well, I’ve heard that X,” it’s a little hard for each of us in dealing with that.  Let me take note of that and ask people, as always, to be careful in their interactions. Let me turn now to item 1 on the agenda.  With the retirement of Nathan Sheets, we need to appoint a new FOMC Economist.  There is a proposal that Steve Kamin replace Nathan until January when we’ll have our annual organizational meeting.  Is there any objection.  [No response]  Seeing none, thank you.  Our second item is “Financial Developments and Open Market Operations,” and I’ll turn, as usual, to Brian Sack.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 5.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You’ve been earning your salary, Brian.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement simply states that Brian has been earning his salary without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 6.
  [Laughter] MR. SACK.  It’s mostly your fault, but we’ll put a little bit of blame on Europe, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker is making a lighthearted remark by assigning blame jokingly, using sarcasm ("mostly your fault") and including Europe as a playful addition. There is no real contention or disagreement being expressed in this passage.


Passage number 7.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Questions for Brian.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a simple expression of gratitude and a request for questions.


Passage number 8.
 MR. LACKER.  On exhibit 2, chart 12, the middle option is “Provide SOMA Guidance.”  Because I’m not familiar with that from past Committee discussions, I’m assuming you put it in there to reduce the information content of the questions you posed to market participants.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve contention or disagreement. Mr. Lacker is simply seeking clarification about the inclusion of "Provide SOMA Guidance" as an option in the chart.


Passage number 9.
 MR. SACK.  What we’ve done with that question to reduce the information content that this question could present, is to ask about this entire range of possibilities on both the easing side and the tightening side.  And we ask about probabilities for this meeting one year ahead and two years ahead on both sides.  We wanted to present a full range of possibilities that has been discussed in the public.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is describing a process of reducing information content by asking about a range of possibilities. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 10.
 MR. LACKER.  Is “Provide SOMA Guidance” the wording that you gave them or is there something more fulsome.  I’m not quite sure what it means.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification on the meaning of a specific phrase used by the other person.


Passage number 11.
 MR. SACK.  Well, what it is intended to mean is to provide explicit guidance on the path of the SOMA portfolio.  To some extent, the Committee has already done this in that its exit principles have laid out sequencing of portfolio adjustments relative to the adjustment in the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 12.
 MR. LACKER.  Guidance would have something to do with timing, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statement or indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact or assumption that guidance would have something to do with timing.


Passage number 13.
 MR. SACK.  Right.  The exact question is “provide guidance over the period over which the SOMA will remain at the current level.”  But that’s in the wording of this question for a number of surveys now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating the exact question for a survey.


Passage number 14.
 MR. LACKER.  I think the measures you’ve taken to reduce implicit signaling are worthwhile, very good.  I applaud you on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, is expressing his approval and support for the measures taken to reduce implicit signaling.


Passage number 15.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 16.
 MR. FISHER.  First, Brian, you have all of our sympathy for the hard work you’ve done all year and the excellent work you’ve done all year.  I have four questions if I may quickly ask them, and maybe we could answer some of them outside of this meeting.  If my memory is correct, in terms of the 20-plus-year maturity allotment in the maturity extension program, roughly 29 percent of our allocated purchases would be in that area.  A lot of holders of those instruments are basically matching liabilities, are buyers and holders, and my question is:  Do you still feel comfortable with that 29 percent allotment in terms of a portion of the market. Or have you thought about readjusting that.  Are we reaching any constraints.  Then I have three other questions after this, if I may.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 17.
 MR. SACK.  We are comfortable with the performance so far.  That was an area of the yield curve that we were somewhat worried about as we structured the maturity extension program.  Of course, the reason we ended up proposing such a large allotment that far out was to get the duration effects within the maturity extension program.  Given the limits of that program, you have to shift your purchases farther out to get the effects.  But we did have some concerns because the liquidity of the bond sector is not as good as the rest of the curve, and as you saw, in asset purchase programs where we had the flexibility essentially to choose wherever on the curve we want to operate, we tended to focus more in the 2 to 10-ish sector in part because of the greater liquidity.  Having said all that, I think we’re comfortable with the performance so far.  There are no obvious problems being created by our purchases.  We’re seeing some worsening of liquidity out there in recent weeks, but we attribute that more to year-end effects, so we’ll continue to watch that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information about their views and concerns, but there is no disagreement or conflicting opinions mentioned.


Passage number 18.
 MR. FISHER.  The second question has to do with inventories being maintained by dealers in the corporate sector.  If my information is correct, they’re pretty near historic lows, and I’m wondering—again, being an advocate of stricter capital standards—if that’s a legitimate excuse, because I hear some of that, or is it something else at work in the marketplace.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating information and expressing curiosity about the reasons behind it. There is no indication of anyone challenging or disagreeing with this viewpoint.


Passage number 19.
 MR. SACK.  You’re right.  Inventories have fallen a lot, and that’s part of a story that market participants have been telling about liquidity being very poor in corporate bonds.  Some of that has likely had to do with the large shifts in investors’ risk preferences and at times with concerns about all types of risk assets.  Again, in part it may have to do with approaching year-end.  It’s something we can continue to watch, but, yes, liquidity hasn’t been great in corporate bonds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply agreeing with the statement that liquidity in corporate bonds has not been great and providing some reasons for why that may be the case.


Passage number 20.
 MR. FISHER.  It has been trending down in terms of dealer inventories.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states a fact without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 21.
 MR. SACK.  That’s correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "That's correct" suggests agreement or affirmation.


Passage number 22.
 MR. FISHER.  And then last, you talk about mortgage-backeds in your presentation.  We own roughly 15 percent of all agency mortgage-backed securities and about 20 percent of the fixed-rate conventional pass-throughs.  Is that correct, presently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking confirmation of information.


Passage number 23.
 MR. SACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I cannot provide an answer without the passage.


Passage number 24.
  You’re asking about how much of the total stock of pass-throughs— MR. FISHER.  I’m wondering what the capacity is if we were to expand and how much space there is for us to do so, because the fixed-income markets are not divided into these neat compartments.  We often think about them that way, but that’s not the way they actually operate.  I’m trying to get a sense of were we to come forward with a proposal to expand the portfolio there, how much resistance or how much impact do we have in the marketplace, not simply the MBS portfolio, but all fixed-income activities, particularly given the inventory levels that are being maintained by dealers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is discussing the potential for expanding the portfolio and the possible impact on the marketplace.


Passage number 25.
 MR. SACK.  Right.  Alternative A in the Tealbook has an asset purchase program of $500 billion focused in mortgage-backed securities.  We made a judgment that that was within the capacity of the Desk, in terms of the flow and the stock that we’d end up taking out under that program.  If the Committee were interested in scaling up the program meaningfully above that, we’d have to explore just how far we think we could go, but at a minimum it would certainly require extending the duration of that program so that it’s executed over a longer period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining the potential options and considerations related to scaling up a program.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 26.
 MR. FISHER.  So the two numbers here, that would probably push us to 25 or 35 percent.  Is that the rough ballpark.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is indicated by the use of the word "probably," which suggests uncertainty or differing opinions about the specific percentage of two numbers.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 27.
 MR. SACK.  The $500 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. It is not clear what the disagreement is about from this sentence alone, but the use of the phrase "The $500 billion" suggests that there is some discussion or disagreement regarding that particular amount of money.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 28.
 MR. FISHER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The presence of "Yes" indicates that there is contention or disagreement in the passage. However, without further context, it is not clear what disagreement or contention is being referred to.


Passage number 29.
 MR. SACK.  Probably not quite to 30 percent, but we could check the number and let you know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Sack is simply stating that he is unsure of the exact percentage but is willing to verify and provide the correct information.


Passage number 30.
 MR. FISHER.  The last question is:  What is a “fully convincing resolution” of the European crisis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the last question is about the definition of a "fully convincing resolution" of the European crisis.


Passage number 31.
  [Laughter] MR. SACK.  We struggled with this.  I will admit that’s not an overly precise question.  [Laughter]  We wanted to at least try to calibrate some of the effects of Europe in the baseline forecast, and it was actually hard to write a question to do that.  We wrote it in terms of measuring how things would improve if there were a policy solution, but of course, we couldn’t be overly precise by what we meant by a policy solution.  Take that question for what it’s worth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It mainly describes the difficulty of formulating a precise question related to the effects of Europe in the baseline forecast. The laughter seems to be in response to the acknowledgment of the challenge.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 32.
 MR. FISHER.  Or the ECB is going to hire Brian away because he has the answer and he’s not sharing it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The statement implies that Brian knows the answer to a certain question or problem, but is refusing to share it with others. This could potentially cause disagreement or tension between the ECB and Mr. Fisher.


Passage number 33.
 MR. SACK.  We gave some sense of the calibration of these effects, but we’re all realizing it’s not a very precise question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that the question being discussed is not very precise.


Passage number 34.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is a simple expression of gratitude and does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 35.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Other questions for Brian.  Yes, President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply expressing gratitude and indicating that there are other questions for Brian. The mention of President Plosser does not imply any disagreement or contention either.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 36.
 MR. PLOSSER.  To follow up on Richard’s question, one of the things that strikes me about the dealer survey questions—particularly this one about how is GDP going to be affected by the European play-out—is it’s not clear to me that the dealers themselves are the right population to be surveying on the answer to that question.  There are other groups, other economists, and other types of groups in the financial markets and outside the financial markets that might have something useful to say in response to that.  The question I’m asking is:  Have you given any thought to expanding the survey to different groups that might be a little outside the dealer network, if you will, to broaden the perspective on the types of answers you might get to at least some of these questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. This can be seen in Mr. Plosser's statement that dealers may not be the right population to survey on the impact of the European play-out on GDP. He suggests that other groups, including economists and those outside the financial markets, may have valuable insights. This contradicts the assumption that the dealers are the most appropriate group to survey.


Passage number 37.
 MR. SACK.  We have primarily been interested in using the survey to get the views of financial market participants.  At times we’ve gone beyond the primary dealers to include a number of buy-side firms who would have views, but again, still in a set of respondents closely associated with financial markets.  I’d like to view the purpose of this survey as really trying to gauge the expectations incorporated into asset prices.  That doesn’t mean there are not other groups beyond financial market participants who have very informed views about these issues, but I wouldn’t leave it to the Desk to explore those.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the purpose and scope of the survey, and stating that while they primarily focus on financial market participants, there may be other groups with informed views as well.


Passage number 38.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Let’s turn to item 3, “Economic and Financial Situation.”  Steve, will you be leading off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement or question about who will be leading off the discussion on the topic of the "Economic and Financial Situation."


Passage number 39.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Questions for our colleagues.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a polite expression of gratitude and a request for questions from colleagues. There is no indication of any contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 40.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Two questions.  If you looked at the estimated stall probability and put down your forecast for Q4, what would it look like.  That’s question number one.  Question number two is the saving rate—if you look at the personal saving rate, it has declined a lot, but if you look at other measures like flow of funds, they don’t show commensurate kind of declines.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents two questions for discussion.


Passage number 41.
 MR. WILCOX.  The stall probability would come down some, not a lot, because we’ve only got growth proceeding about in line with its potential in the near term.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact or opinion about the stall probability and growth potential.


Passage number 42.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  GDI in the fourth quarter should be quite a bit better I would guess because you have inflation coming down.  You have okay employment growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 43.
 MR. WILCOX.  Yes, but going forward over the next couple of years, we’ve got the economy expanding only slightly above its potential rate.  Those probabilities will stay probably not as elevated as this, but I would suspect pretty high. With regard to the personal saving rate, it is down.  As I mentioned in my text, we have discounted that to some extent.  Once we have all the data in hand and they’ve been benchmarked using tax returns and other sources of information that would become available only with considerable hindsight, that lower level of income would cause us to take down consumption spending by more than we did at the moment.  We haven’t unmoored ourselves entirely from the personal saving rate.  There is measurement uncertainty as you suggest; the personal saving rate from the flow of funds accounts is higher.  Discrepancies between the flow of funds account and the national income account are commonplace and can often be quite sizable.  But we were loath to buy into a rigid view in reaction to those lower income numbers for a variety of reasons encompassing both model uncertainty and a recognition that the data with respect to both consumption and investment are imperfect and subject to considerable subsequent revision.  We went part way, but not all the way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing economic data and acknowledging the uncertainties and potential revisions in the data. They mention measurement uncertainties and different sources of information, but there is no direct disagreement or argument presented.


Passage number 44.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Okay.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response is expressing gratitude for something without any conflicting opinions or conflicting ideas being conveyed.


Passage number 45.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage only states the position or title of "President Lockhart" without any specific information or context, so it does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 46.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  David, I think you just answered my question, but I noted in yesterday’s Wall Street Journal two comments in an article; one, that the Federal Reserve, using a different set of data, said last week that the saving rate rose markedly in the third quarter to 7.4 percent, and the second comment was that Fed data suggest that income may be rising faster than preliminary reports from the Commerce Department.  I think you just answered that, but can you summarize what your bottom line is in trying to sort out these indicators.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply summarizing information and asking for clarification.


Passage number 47.
 MR. WILCOX.  The source of those other estimates is the flow of funds accounts, and historically we’ve keyed our projection more off the internally consistent framework provided by the national income accounts.  But we’re trying to be sensitive to the fact that we’re operating in a world where none of these concepts is measured with precision.  It will be years until these numbers are benchmarked and settled down.  Moreover, different model specifications give us different guidance about how strongly we should react to surprises in income, and for all of those reasons we were reluctant to apply a rule-of-thumb kind of marginal propensity to consume to that decrement in income.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is simply explaining the challenges and considerations involved in making projections and applying a rule-of-thumb to a decrement in income.


Passage number 48.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  David, are there valuation adjustments in the flow of the funds that could account for some of the difference or is it conceptually consistent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 49.
 MR. WILCOX.  In principle, Larry Slifman or Michael, either one or both of you, can answer—two former chiefs of the Flow of Funds Section here.  In principle, one can adjust the flow of funds data to a conceptually similar basis to the national income accounts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that either Larry Slifman or Michael, who are former chiefs of the Flow of Funds Section, can answer the question. Additionally, it mentions the possibility of adjusting the flow of funds data to a conceptually similar basis to the national income accounts.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 50.
 MR. PALUMBO.  The conceptual differences are fairly small.  Both of the measures are missing lots of important pieces of data.  The flow of funds accounts are missing a tremendous amount of data for the third quarter.  The quarterly variation in the flow of funds saving rate is even more residually derived than the national income accounts saving rate.  We don’t take very much signal from the quarterly pattern at all.  Nonetheless, as you suggested, over longer periods of time, they move generally together.  They tell similar rather than dissimilar stories.  I haven’t looked at a detailed parsing from the most recent data to see what was going on in the third quarter. One of the things that is conceptually different in the saving rates is the way that the accounting of liabilities on the household balance sheet works into flow of funds saving versus the expenditure-based measure in the NIPAs.  It’s possible that is still driving a wedge that’s making the flow of funds saving rate higher.  Essentially, households are still having a large amount of debt charged off their balance sheets; that could show up as a saving concept in the flow of funds accounts, but not necessarily so in the national income accounts.  But I don’t think that’s a third-quarter source of difference.  In general, we don’t put a lot of signal content on the quarterly frequency flow of funds data, especially on these early vintages where there’s a lot of missing information. It’s something that I generally pay only a little bit of attention to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker acknowledges that there are conceptual differences between the flow of funds accounts and the national income accounts. They mention that the flow of funds accounts are missing a lot of data for the third quarter and that the accounting of liabilities on the household balance sheet affects the measurement of saving rates differently in the two accounts. This indicates a disagreement or contention between the two measures. However, the speaker also acknowledges that over longer periods of time, the measures generally move together and tell similar stories.


Passage number 51.
 MR. WILCOX.  Michael, to the Chairman’s question, using flow of funds accounts, one can construct a measure of personal saving that strips out capital gains on equity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply provides a statement or explanation in response to a question.


Passage number 52.
 MR. PALUMBO.  Actually, the headline measures of the saving rates from the flow of funds accounts do not have a capital gains component in them.  The only real conceptual difference is with regard to net investment in consumer durable goods, and we even show a number in the table that takes out our estimate of that bit.  The other thing that can be an issue—as I think I suggested—was how the charge-offs end up being a form of saving in the flow of funds accounts.  I don’t think that has a counterpart in the national income accounts, but the capital gains—depending on what they are reporting, and I think they are reporting the flow of funds saving basis—is not in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing an explanation of the differences between the saving rates from the flow of funds accounts and the national income accounts. There is no evident disagreement or contention.


Passage number 53.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of simple expressions of gratitude and acknowledgement towards President Plosser.


Passage number 54.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I want to follow on this same theme with a little different take.  Particularly on the real gross domestic income side, one of the observations that we have is that certainly over the past four months—and actually longer than that—there have been substantial revisions upward to the establishment survey employment numbers, like 250,000 jobs relative to the initial estimates.  I think the establishment survey goes into calculating initial estimates of wage income, and so forth, that go into the NIPA accounts.  Is there a role for the fact that those revisions have been so large in recent months.  Does that feed into gross domestic income in a way that might be consistent with the fact that we are underestimating consumption, or have been.  They seem to be moving in the same direction.  Is there any separate linkage there into the forecast that we might be concerned about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and seeking clarification or information on a specific topic. There is no argument or conflicting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 55.
 MR. WASCHER.  That’s right, there have been upward revisions to the establishment survey employment numbers, and those are used to construct the initial estimates of wage and salary income in the NIPA.  For example, for the third quarter—and then for our estimate for the fourth quarter because we have data through October—we would use those to construct our estimates of personal income.  It is also the case that BEA later gets estimates from the unemployment insurance tax system on basically a universe count of wages and salaries in the economy.  That is the big downward revision that David referred to in Q2.  There is some possibility—and this is one of the reasons we discounted some of the income surprise in making our forecast for consumption—that we will see an upward revision to Q3.  The statistical analysis suggests that there is some negative correlation in the revisions, so it does seem possible that we will see an upward revision to income in Q3.  Again, that is one of the reasons we did not take full signal from the downward revision to personal income.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and explaining the process of estimating wage and salary income. They also mention the possibility of an upward revision to income in the third quarter.


Passage number 56.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I have a second question.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Plosser simply thanks the speaker and states that he has a second question.


Passage number 57.
 MR. WILCOX.  Can I summarize.  The Q2 number for compensation is a pretty good number, because that is based on a universe count of employers.  In Q3, the BEA has folded in everything we know, including the upward revisions to employment and all of that.  We have done the best that we can to translate all the latest information about those upward revisions in jobs numbers into the income numbers that we built into this forecast.  Now, what the future may hold, of course, is anybody’s guess.  We have given you our guess, but we have tried to take into account all of the information.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is summarizing the process of calculating income numbers and acknowledging that future predictions are uncertain.


Passage number 58.
 MR. PLOSSER.  It was the serial correlation part of it that I was asking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Plosser indicating his curiosity about the serial correlation part of a certain topic.


Passage number 59.
 MR. WILCOX.  Yes.  I am not aware that we think there is any statistical inefficiency in the estimation procedure that the agency is bringing to bear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker explicitly states that they are not aware of any statistical inefficiency in the estimation procedure.


Passage number 60.
 MR. PLOSSER.  A slightly different question.  I really appreciate your discussion about Europe.  Who knows whether the sovereigns will be Lucy and pull the ball away from the ECB once again.  We will have to wait and see.  But having said all of that, Dave, you mentioned exports, and you talked a little bit about the asset price changes and the heightened uncertainty.  I would like to see if you can give me a little more quantitative measure of each of those.  For example, if U.S. exports to Europe fell, your standard error of the consequence of that is probably small relative to perhaps some of the other variables that you are mentioning.  Now, I want to see if I can get you to break down a little bit for me:  You’ve marked down the forecast pretty substantially, and surprisingly a lot compared with what I anticipated.  I’m trying to get a handle on what is the most important channel quantitatively and the magnitude of it.  Can you elaborate a little bit on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a series of questions and requests for more information.


Passage number 61.
 MR. WILCOX.  Yes.  You asked me if I could break down, and I may proceed to do so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wilcox is simply answering a question and indicating his willingness to proceed.


Passage number 62.
  [Laughter] MR. PLOSSER.  You have such great anticipation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions laughter and anticipation, there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 63.
  [Laughter] MR. WILCOX.  I’m going to air our dirty laundry.  I’m going to give you a sense of precision here that will be misleading because around all of these estimates, I am just going to give your our best guesses.  We had to put a guess around all of these numbers.  We guessed that the bulk of the downward weight on the GDP projection will occur in 2012.  Four-tenths was what we put down as a total on the growth of GDP, and then an additional negative two-tenths in 2013, so some spillover.  Even though the situation is improving, the all-clear signal hasn’t been given.  Now, the bulk of that is occurring through the dollar effects and the weaker activity abroad.  The dollar is taking off a couple of tenths worth each year, and weaker activity abroad is taking off another tenth.  Those two effects combined are worth minus three-tenths in each year.  Then as a placeholder, we took another divot, the tenth of 1 percentage point for uncertainty and risk aversion in 2012.  Then, we had that coming back, and so we added back in one-tenth in 2013.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining their estimates and guesses for the downward weight on the GDP projection.


Passage number 64.
 MR. PLOSSER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 65.
  So if you took the potential appreciation of dollar— MR. WILCOX.  But it then switches—we have already seen a substantial part.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is not conflicting with any other information or expressing disagreement with any other viewpoint. It simply mentions the switch in the topic of discussion, without presenting opposing arguments or contradictory opinions.


Passage number 66.
 MR. PLOSSER.  No.  But if you look at your standard error estimates associated with that forecast, how big is the standard error—what did you say, of two-tenths.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question followed by a clarification request.


Passage number 67.
 MR. WILCOX.  Yes, at least.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Wilcox agrees or confirms something.


Passage number 68.
 MR. KAMIN.  Are you talking about the uncertainty about what the dollar is going to do or the uncertainty in terms of the mapping from the change in the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It consists of a question clarifying the subject of uncertainty.


Passage number 69.
 MR. PLOSSER.  The uncertainty of the mapping.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the uncertainty of the mapping, but there is no indication of disagreement or differing opinions.


Passage number 70.
 MR. KAMIN.  Yes.  We have different models, but looking at our partial equilibrium model of trade, we estimate models that link U.S. exports to foreign activity and the real exchange rate.  Those models have performed relatively well in the past, but the standard error, we will have to admit, is reasonably large.  It is also reasonably large in the neighborhood of large turning points in the economy.  That is most relevant right now to the elasticity of our exports with respect to foreign output, but it is probably also present in terms of the responsiveness to the dollar.  Now, to amplify on that slightly, in the development of our export forecast, we decided that the standard elasticity of our exports with respect to foreign GDP basically ends up being in the neighborhood of 1 percent, although it might be a little bit larger than that because we observe that around deep recessions in the global economy trade usually falls by even more than the long-run elasticity.  We have a little bit of that built in, but not too much.  All told, yes, the uncertainty is fairly large.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing the uncertainty and potential errors in their models and forecasts, but there is no disagreement or conflict being expressed.


Passage number 71.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Probably substantially bigger than your point estimate, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Plosser asking for confirmation about the point estimate being larger.


Passage number 72.
 MR. KAMIN.  You mean bigger than the contribution of net exports.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This passage is a statement or question, not an argument or a debate.


Passage number 73.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 74.
 MR. KAMIN.  Possibly in that neighborhood, I would have to look into that.  But in terms of our point estimate for exports, our export growth is going to be 5 to 6 percent.  The uncertainty is not going to be larger than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is acknowledging the need to verify a specific detail but expresses confidence in the overall point estimate for export growth.


Passage number 75.
 MR. WILCOX.  I would venture a slightly stronger statement:  In partial equilibrium, do we think a stronger dollar is better for or worse for our trade position.  I don’t profess a lot of uncertainty about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Wilcox is expressing his opinion about the impact of a stronger dollar on the trade position. He mentions that he does not have much uncertainty about his stance. There is no evident contention or disagreement.


Passage number 76.
 MR. KAMIN.  No, I certainly don’t profess any uncertainty about the direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they do not have any uncertainty about the direction.


Passage number 77.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  A little certainty.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a vague expression of agreement or acknowledgment ("Okay") and a statement of certainty.


Passage number 78.
 MR. FISHER.  A comment, Mr. Chairman, and a question.  First, the comment is how different the conversation is at this table now than under the previous regime.  It was noteworthy that Steve led off the presentation, and coming full circle to the conversation we have just had. It is wonderful that we think in globalized terms.  In thinking in globalized terms, Steve, going back to your presentation, obviously, we are concerned about Europe presently, but we are also seeing significant price declines the past two months in Chinese real estate—actually plunging sales.  We’re monitoring the employment in that sector informally through one of our contacts, and we are also seeing people laid off significantly in terms of the brokers.  As you know, shadow banking has a huge role in the Chinese system.  Most of that shadow banking, we think—we don’t know—has gone into real estate.  I am not going to ask for a breakdown.  We can’t afford to have both of you break down at the same time.  But do we at least have a sense of how much impact that might have on the Chinese economy, are we monitoring it, and might it come back to bite us in some way, shape, or form.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making a comment and asking a question about the potential impact of the Chinese real estate market on the Chinese economy and its potential consequences for the United States.


Passage number 79.
 MR. KAMIN.  We are certainly monitoring that situation pretty closely, and I have to say that there are some different factors in play in terms of our thinking about the outlook for Chinese GDP growth.  First, just to get this clear, we have long predicted the so-called soft landing for the Chinese economy, right.  And we have frequently been surprised on the upside as GDP growth continues to be greater than we were penciling in.  It’s against that background that I think we have to look at future developments. The evidence on credit creation is a little bit on the mixed side in the sense that if you just look at the standard measures of bank loan growth to China, they have certainly softened a bit from the previous year, but they are still running at around 15 to 16 percent, which is a healthy pace.  At the same time, there are some broader measures of loan growth that include some of the off-balance-sheet types of items, and that seems to have slowed down a little more.  That seems to be consistent with the story that, earlier on, Chinese authorities clamped down on this loan growth, and they also introduced macroprudential measures like lower loan-to-value ratios that also clamped down.  We are seeing some evidence of that, in that the property market in China seems to have been taken off the boil a bit.  The property prices have flattened out in recent months.  There are some mixed signals, but all told, it does look like there is some slowing in the property market. Most recently over the intermeeting period, the Chinese authorities lowered their reserve requirement a notch, so that is like indicating that maybe they think that the tightening cycle has gone far enough.  Putting all of those things together, we are looking at some slowdown in Chinese growth to a more sustainable 8¼ percent pace.  Personally, I wouldn’t be surprised if China surprised us again on the upside.  That said, the combination of those slowing credit aggregates, plus the decline in manufacturing PMIs and the other evidence you point to, does support the view that growth is sliding.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 80.
 MR. FISHER.  But you wouldn’t foresee a housing price collapse.  You don’t think they would allow it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fisher is questioning someone's perspective but without expressing any disagreement or conflicting opinion.


Passage number 81.
 MR. KAMIN.  First of all, we almost never end up correctly calling that event.  I think it would be premature at this point to develop much certainty about that very adverse scenario, aside from the fact that all we have seen so far is some flattening of prices in recent months.  Property prices in China, as measured by the 70-city survey, are still 4 percent above their year-earlier level.  It is also true that the market in China is a little bit different than in the United States, in the sense that a lot less of the residential market is financed by heavy leverage or loans and a lot more of it by cash.  Furthermore, in the context of a very rapidly growing economy, a little excess capacity is less worrisome than it is in a more slowly growing economy.  Right now, we are not calling for a property crash that could lead to more adverse consequences.  But that is certainly an important risk to the outlook in China, and if it weren’t for the Europe situation, that could be getting close to the top of the list.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating facts and providing their analysis of the situation.


Passage number 82.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The phrase "Thank you" is simply expressing gratitude and does not convey any form of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 83.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The last name I have on my list is President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of fact or information.


Passage number 84.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have several questions here.  I am going to proceed from the simplest to the most complex.  The simplest one is: For real GDP we don’t have a confidence bound, is that intentional or is that a misprint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is simply asking a question about the absence of a confidence bound for real GDP.


Passage number 85.
 MR. WILCOX.  That’s intentional.  I showed four-quarter percent changes for real GDP, and I showed one-quarter percent changes for both measures of inflation.  And on the fly, we couldn’t construct the confidence intervals correctly for the four-quarter changes.  In previous editions of this, I have shown quarterly GDP growth.  Because of our fiscal assumptions, there is some unseemly and distracting quarterly variation that I thought wasn’t, frankly, very informative.  We smoothed through that at the cost of losing our confidence interval.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining their decision to present data in a certain way and the trade-off they made in the process.


Passage number 86.
 MR. BULLARD.  I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement by Mr. Bullard.


Passage number 87.
  So you are hiding an unseemly—[Laughter] MR. WILCOX.  I am hiding the unseemly variation in the baseline forecast because I think that is wholly irrelevant for your policy decision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 88.
 MR. BULLARD.  Part of the story that you told is that some of the inflation developments earlier this year were temporary.  You said that some of the energy and food price movements fed through to the core prices.  In the past, we have always told the story that when those kinds of prices go up, they do not feed through to the core, and so this is not something that we need to worry about.  Is this a change in the view of the staff about the pass-through to core inflation when energy prices, in particular, go up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Bullard, is questioning a change in the view of the staff regarding the pass-through to core inflation when energy prices go up.


Passage number 89.
 MR. WILCOX.  I don’t think that’s right.  Our story has been that the energy price pass-through has been small, but the import price pass-through is something that survived relatively well through the past 20 years or so of data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wilcox simply expresses his opinion by saying "I don't think that's right." It doesn't imply any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 90.
  We had a pretty significant surge in the area of, what, 7 or 8 percent in import prices in the first half— MR. BULLARD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is just stating a fact or statistic about import prices in the first half. There is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 91.
  —non-energy import prices— MR. WILCOX.  Yes, core import prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a response ("Yes") to a statement or question.


Passage number 92.
 MR. KAMIN.  Yes, exactly.  It was 8 percent in the first quarter and 7 percent in the second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating two different percentages for two different quarters, without expressing any contradictory opinions or arguments.


Passage number 93.
 MR. WILCOX.  That was a very significant factor, we think, in driving up core goods prices in the first half of the year.  I don’t think that is a change in our story.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wilcox is simply stating his opinion on the matter.


Passage number 94.
 MR. BULLARD.  Well, those are core prices, so it’s not really pass-through from energy to core.  They’re import core, that’s what you’re saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard is simply clarifying that the prices being discussed are import core prices, not pass-through prices from energy to core.


Passage number 95.
 MR. WILCOX.  Right, we think import prices contributed about three-tenths to core inflation this year, and energy prices contributed only about one-tenth or so.  By far, the much bigger influence was on the import price side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it states the percentage contributions of import prices and energy prices to core inflation without any conflicting views or contradicting statements.


Passage number 96.
 MR. BULLARD.  And that is going to moderate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact or making a neutral observation.


Passage number 97.
 MR. WILCOX.  Yes, it already has.  We think we have already seen that in core goods inflation and in motor vehicle prices, for example, in particular, which represents the unwinding of some of the supply chain disruptions that took place after the Japan earthquake.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact or observation without any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 98.
 MR. BULLARD.  We were talking earlier about foreign real GDP growth, and I would like to hear more about the role of the dollar in that kind of calculation.  We said foreign real GDP would decelerate from a high rate to a somewhat lower rate.  Is that a PPP calculation.  Is that a current exchange rate calculation.  How much difference would it make if the various exchange rates go in different directions from the ones that you have talked about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is simply seeking clarification and asking for more information.


Passage number 99.
 MR. KAMIN.  The foreign GDP forecast that we make is based on using the real foreign GDP aggregate values for each of the economies of our trading partners.  That is not converted to dollars, that is just real euros, real Canadian dollars, et cetera.  For every one of our trading partners, we have a projection of what their real GDP is and their real GDP growth.  Then, we take those growth rates, and we basically aggregate them up, weighting by their shares in U.S. trade.  In that way, that calculation is purely separate from any consideration of exchange rates, except insofar as the trade weights that we use are based on the current dollar value of our trade with them.  We have a more or less exchange-rate-free measure of foreign GDP growth, and that has a particular effect on our projection for U.S. exports.  Then, separately, we have a measure in our models for the value of the U.S. dollar converted into real terms using our and their CPIs, and that represents basically the trade competitiveness channel.  We have both of those measures in our model.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply explaining the methodology used for forecasting foreign GDP and the value of the U.S. dollar.


Passage number 100.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you.  And, finally, on these regime-switching models on page 1 of the handout, the bottom right has an estimated stall probability of about 50 percent right now.  My sense of this is that there are a lot of regime-switching models that try to estimate recession probabilities.  All of the ones I have seen have much lower probabilities than this one.  Of all the models that you could present to the Committee, you have chosen the one that has the very highest probability.  What is it about this model that says that it is a better model than the 10 others that are out there that have been published and have established track records.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is simply a statement by Mr. Bullard expressing his sense that the presented model has a higher probability compared to other models, and he asks for clarification on why this particular model was chosen.


Passage number 101.
 MR. WILCOX.  I completely agree with you.  The different specifications, as I had mentioned in my text, can deliver different results.  It’s simply not the case that this is the specification that delivers the highest probability.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both parties are in agreement that different specifications can deliver different results and that there is no specific specification that guarantees the highest probability.


Passage number 102.
 MR. BULLARD.  I’m sure you can construct one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard is expressing confidence in the ability to construct something, implying a positive or agreeable sentiment.


Passage number 103.
 MR. WILCOX.  We can deliver to you a probability of 100 percent.  I would make two claims on behalf of this specification.  One is it puts quite a bit of weight on GDI, and we have a pretty solid body of research done by staff members now that points to the signal value of GDI in helping to home in on the underlying state of real activity, and some preliminary work suggesting that GDI is more helpful in that regard than early estimates of GDP.  They are both, after all, attempting to measure the same underlying concept, and so it’s an empirical question as to which might be more informative, and this body of work suggests that a pretty good case can be made on behalf of GDI.  The second claim I’d make on behalf of this model is that it is the same specification that generates the red line.  So the simple message I’m telling you is that there is a middle-of-the-road specification of these models that keys off the much weaker trajectory for GDI in the second and third quarters and arrives at a conclusion that the underlying thrust of the pace of activity remains quite tenuous.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making two claims on behalf of a specific model and presenting evidence to support those claims. There is no mention of opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 104.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only includes a person expressing gratitude, there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 105.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Why don’t we turn now to our economic go-round, and I have first on the list President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a statement suggesting a change of topic to discuss the economic go-round with President Lockhart.


Passage number 106.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Since the November meeting, the data have mostly surprised positively to the upside, and the economic environment feels better, but despite somewhat better-than-expected incoming data—and I would add the tone of reports from Sixth District directors and contacts—I have not changed my outlook from the November FOMC submission. As regards to directors and contacts, they’re saying that business is good, but they also don’t seem to be buying it yet as a trend.  My baseline, which is broadly in line with the Tealbook through 2012, sees GDP growth next year at around 2.7 percent, inflation contained at or below the Committee’s 2 percent objective, and unemployment continuing to decline slowly, notwithstanding the recent sharp fall in the household survey.  In short, a pretty much mainstream outlook of moderate expansion. The key restraining factors that are materially influencing this outlook are three in my mind.  First, the situation in Europe constitutes both a factor incorporated into my forecast for the real economy in the near term and a downside risk.  I think the discussion in the Tealbook does a nice job of distinguishing among the export channel, the asset price channel, and the financial linkages channel.  The export channel effect seems to be already largely baked into the outlook.  The asset price channel effect and the prospect of severe financial market disruption propagated through financial linkages are more contingencies in my mind and, therefore, part of the balance of risks equations. Second, we continue to hear the repeating theme of uncertainty and its companion theme, weak business and consumer confidence, as a restraining force on the recovery.  Whether or not the times are actually more uncertain than in the past, our contacts clearly think they are.  To gauge the current uncertainty mental map, if you will, in our District, we polled our 44 directors and other District contacts during the intermeeting period on the question of sources of uncertainty influencing business decisions.  Two uncertainties dominated:  economic performance, defined as the sustainability of demand; and economic policy, and this being mostly nonmonetary matters such as regulation and taxes.  Other unknowns, such as global economic and financial conditions (you can read that as Europe), credit availability, and health care costs seem to be considerably smaller influences on current decisionmaking.  I think it’s realistic to conclude that the uncertainties that are contributing to a conservative approach to investment in fixed capital and labor are likely to be part of the economic picture for quite a while. A third factor is the lattice, you might call it, of recognized conditions and structural elements that are or likely will be drags on growth in employment.  These include housing sector factors like home prices, construction activity, and continuing foreclosures; fiscal drag; labor market dysfunction; weak income growth; and PCE growth, drawing on a saving rate that may not be sustainable. Because of the tenuous character of the current situation, I give more-than-normal attention to the downside alternatives laid out in the Tealbook.  The “European Crisis with Severe Spillovers” scenario continues to be plausible.  I am less concerned about the “Homegrown Recession” scenario absent a shock from Europe.  The “Further Disinflation” scenario cannot be dismissed, given the apparent global slowdown and the current limitation on the potency of monetary policy.  I perceive downside risk to the economic growth outlook.  For now, I’m holding to the view that the risks to the inflation outlook are balanced.  The “Further Disinflation” scenario frames the downside.  On the upside, I’m taking into account my District’s most recent business inflation survey that reveals a growing concern about price pressure from labor costs. To summarize, momentum in the economy seems to be building, but the outlook is really very cautiously positive.  There are a number of restraining forces already detailed.  I see downside risk to economic growth and the inflation risks as roughly balanced.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply providing their perspective on the current economic outlook.


Passage number 107.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It consists of a polite expression of gratitude towards President Plosser.


Passage number 108.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given statement is amicable and appreciative in nature, with no elements of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 109.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage is not clearly stated, so it is difficult to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 110.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This response is a simple expression of gratitude from President Rosengren. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 111.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The data this fall have been somewhat more positive than I expected, in part because of the diminished expectations created by the weak data we received over the summer.  Like the Tealbook, I see an extended period of only moderate growth that is insufficient to significantly reduce the unemployment rate or prevent the PCE inflation rate from undershooting 2 percent inflation over the medium term. The discussions with businesses in my district are quite consistent with this forecast.  Most businesses are seeing moderate current sales and hoping to see modest increases over next year.  However, along with uncertainty about the durability of the domestic private recovery, the uncertainty in Washington and Europe makes them acutely aware of the downside risks to their outlook, and they are delaying investment and employment decisions until the outlook is clearer.  The modest hiring by small businesses and the weak small business lending noted in the Tealbook are consistent with my discussions with community bankers and small businesses.  I am increasingly hearing that to make risky small business loans in this environment will take a more energized effort by the Small Business Administration.  Businesses are not reporting wage or price pressures, and most businesses have reported overwhelming applications when business expansion requires hiring additional workers, despite New England performing better than the rest of the country. I find very few academics or financial market participants who expect the European situation to be a problem only in the near term.  An academic from a prestigious economics program highlighted that there is an internal office pool on when the first country leaves the euro.  And there is no money on “never,” though I would note that it is difficult to see just when “never” would pay off.  [Laughter] Financial market participants are reporting increased attention to counterparty risk.  They are particularly reducing their exposure to French banks and are taking a hard look at U.S. broker–dealer organizations with elevated CDS spreads, including Jefferies and Morgan Stanley.  While the Tealbook discusses some of the European linkages to the U.S., I would add a few more that are hard to capture in standard models, should things progress unfavorably.  First, I am concerned that the broker–dealer model of financing might not survive a severe European shock.  This is one reason why a company like Goldman Sachs has such an elevated CDS spread.  Were a crisis to occur, financial institutions would quickly abandon counterparties with risky funding strategies.  As we saw in the earlier crisis, even secured lenders run from troubled counterparties.  This poses a significant risk to any firm that has a large broker–dealer. Second, I have spent time at previous meetings discussing risks with funding structures that are not supported by domestic capital, such as money market funds, non-2a-7 funds that operate like money market funds, and foreign branches.  All of these structures would be severely challenged in a crisis. Third, I want to amplify on something that was mentioned only briefly in the Tealbook.  The asset-backed commercial paper market is stressed.  This market has declined dramatically from levels before the crisis to a market that is now a little over $320 billion.  Nevertheless, it has been an important market for securitizing short-term commercial paper.  It is also a market that has had a significant European presence.  European banks have sponsored a surprising number of conduits and often provide liquidity support.  Liquidity support entails serving as an alternative funding source in the event a conduit is unable to issue new asset-backed commercial paper—a constraint that many conduits associated with European banks are currently facing.  Consistent with this concern, asset-backed commercial paper maturities have declined and rates have risen.  This is another example of a financing structure that might not survive a European crisis and could cause a tightening in U.S. markets. The baseline outlook is sobering, but increasingly the more severe European outcome is becoming part of the baseline forecast rather than a stress scenario.  The Tealbook highlights that we will likely miss on both elements of the mandate.  Should Europe worsen, as in the alternative scenarios, disinflation or deflation is quite possible, implying that we very significantly miss on both objectives.  Now is the critical time, both to shore up our financial institutions, but also to promote as much growth in the economy as possible.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information and opinions on the current economic situation and potential risks, but there is no clear contention or disagreement within the passage itself.


Passage number 112.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Bullard.


Passage number 113.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  By the way, Happy Birthday, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply wishing the chairman a happy birthday.


Passage number 114.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a polite expression of gratitude.


Passage number 115.
 MR. BULLARD.  I hope you are having a fun day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard is expressing a positive sentiment and wishing someone well.


Passage number 116.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I wouldn’t want to be anywhere else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a personal preference and there is no conflicting viewpoint mentioned.


Passage number 117.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Thank you" indicates gratitude or appreciation and does not express any disagreement. The mention of President Evans also does not imply any disagreement.


Passage number 118.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, President Evans.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Thank you, President Evans. President Pianalto" is simply acknowledging and thanking two individuals, President Evans and President Pianalto.


Passage number 119.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The economic data have continued to come in a little better than I was anticipating, but the environment for growth next year still looks very challenging with critical risks for both the international and domestic outlooks.  Under the circumstances, I left the basic contour of my forecast for GDP growth unchanged, but I did lower my projections for output and inflation.  That leaves me with an outlook fairly similar to the Tealbook.  I have real GDP growth for 2012 at 2½ percent and growth for 2013 at 3 percent. Like others, I was surprised by the large dip in the November unemployment rate.  While some of this dip was driven by a decrease in labor force participation, some portion also reflected a meaningful gain in employment, as measured by the household survey.  As David mentioned in his remarks, compared with the payroll survey, the household survey has been showing stronger employment gains for the past few months.  We have seen many episodes in which the payroll and household estimates deviate from one another for a while, so I am not placing too much stock in the household survey just yet.  What is more important is that even at the stronger pace of employment growth that is embodied in the household numbers, it would still take a long time to recover the jobs lost during the recession and even longer to get the employment level up high enough to absorb the expansion of population over the past few years. A number of headwinds are still holding back the pace of recovery, as others have mentioned.  And while I have commented on this issue before, and Presidents Lockhart and Williams have already noted, my business contacts do continue to emphasize that in the current environment uncertainty is importantly affecting their decisions.  They suspect that a large decline in European economic growth would directly affect demand for some U.S. products.  More worrisome, however, is their concern that a European crisis could shatter U.S. consumer and business confidence at a time when many people thought we had finally come safely off the bottom.  In addition, uncertainty over health care reform, tax policy, and energy policy are causing businesses, especially hospitals and energy companies, to hold back on spending initiatives. Small businesses are obviously feeling the effects as well.  The Tealbook had a nice summary of small business hiring patterns, which suggests that tight financing conditions are hampering hiring at small businesses and new businesses.  Our research at the Cleveland Fed clearly shows that declines in real estate valuations have made it more difficult for borrowers to meet collateral requirements.  But in more recent work that is being done by my staff using the NFIB data, they found that increases in measures of economic policy uncertainty predict reductions in the expansion plans of small businesses, and we are currently in an environment of heightened policy uncertainty. Turning to the inflation outlook, I have adjusted down my PCE inflation projections.  I now expect both core and headline inflation to dip below 2 percent in the first half of next year.  Behind these projections are softer incoming inflation data for a broad range of goods, commodity prices that are no longer trending higher, and ongoing restraints in labor compensation.  The latest GDP release revised labor compensation sharply lower.  It is now evident that compensation growth has remained quite low in recent months, even while labor productivity growth has recovered.  Such an environment, combined with competitive product markets, should keep inflation low.  We may need to start paying attention to how much inflation slows.  For now, inflation expectations appear to be stable and remain below 2 percent for more than a decade. In summary, the economy is still making gradual progress, but it is fraught with fragility.  Europe’s crisis keeps extending further and further, both in terms of the calendar and the map of Europe.  As Europe’s problems continue, our own situation looks more worrisome.  For that reason, I judge the risks to growth to be primarily to the downside, while the risks to inflation remain balanced.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 120.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  It’s 10:30.  I understand that coffee is ready, so why don’t we take a 20-minute break.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude and suggesting a break, but there is no indication of any conflict or disagreement between the speaker and the listener.


Passage number 121.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Why don’t we recommence.  I will start with President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply suggests taking a break and then recommencing, with the speaker offering to start the discussion.


Passage number 122.
 MR. PLOSSER.  They couldn’t afford a coach.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a simple statement of fact.


Passage number 123.
  [Laughter] MR. FISHER.  That’s right, or to pay the college players what we pay them.  One other thing, Mr. Chairman, that I would like to work in here, and we could talk about this at another time, but I remain deeply concerned that we could have a significant correction in stock markets.  If you go back to the pre-Greenspan years, and you look at the 10 bubbles that later were burst, it typically takes 14 years to recover the old trend.  Quickly looking at those 10 episodes, if that were to occur presently—and we have surely been of assistance, through your administration and through Chairman Greenspan’s administration, in moving quickly enough to have an impact on equity markets—my personal calculations are that we could easily go back to 800 on the S&P.  There are very few money managers who have lived through any one of those 10 periods, which means mistakes can be made, perhaps tripped off by an exogenous shock, which may occur from China while we’re looking at Europe or may occur from Europe, whatever it may be.  Again, I’m very concerned that we don’t have overt, at least at this table, contingency plans for such a sharp reversal.  If we had the S&P correct to 800, it would undermine enormously the achievements that we have made through our emergency programs, and if we were to observe the typical 14-year pattern to full recovery, then we would be presented with significant challenges.  I don’t think that tinkering with our communications policy is sufficient to prepare us for that possible tail risk adverse scenario, and I’d like to have deeper conversations about that at another point.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing concern about a potential stock market correction and discussing the need for contingency plans.


Passage number 124.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage simply states "Thank you" and "President George," without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 125.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Tenth District economy continues to expand at a moderate pace.  Growth in manufacturing slowed in November, but is expected to move higher over the next six months.  Drilling activity is responding to higher oil prices and farm incomes are strong.  Real hourly wages in the District were below year-ago levels, and contacts expect only limited wage pressures in the months ahead. Over the past few months, employment growth has picked up in the Tenth District with growth strongest in states with large exposures to energy production and agriculture.  Employment growth is also returning to other areas, such as Kansas and New Mexico, where growth was minimal earlier this year.  Strong farm incomes have bolstered farm investments and farmland sales in recent months.  While farmers remain the primary purchasers of farmland, business contacts indicate that institutional investors have lowered their return expectations for farmland from 5 percent to 4 percent, which could foster more investor purchases in the future.  With farmland values soaring and loan-to-value ratios holding steady, purchasers of farmland are taking on considerable debt. In the national economy, recent data suggest economic conditions have improved as temporary factors weighing on growth have dissipated.  The decline in inventory investment in the third quarter suggests businesses will need to ramp up production going forward.  Conditions in the labor market have been improving over the past three months as the pace of growth in total hours has increased, and corporate profits are near record levels as a share of GDP, which should support investment spending. Over the medium term, my views are largely unchanged from November.  I expect the economy will continue to build momentum with growth gradually increasing to a pace that should produce further reductions in the unemployment rate.  Factors supporting growth include pent-up consumer demand, business investment to expand production, and highly accommodative monetary policy.  Several factors, however, pose headwinds and downside risk for economic activity over the next few years.  The European debt crisis, reduced federal spending, and an impaired housing market will limit growth, with further worsening of the European crisis posing significant downside risk. Inflation has been affected by a number of temporary factors that boosted inflation in the first half of this year and which are now pushing it lower.  After these pressures unwind, I expect inflation will be somewhat below 2 percent in the near term, before rising toward 2 percent as the recovery strengthens.  In summary, I expect the recovery to continue, with growth rebounding from the soft patch in the first half of this year.  Risks to growth remain to the downside, while longer-term risks to inflation remain to the upside.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing a general overview of the economy and expressing their expectations for future growth.


Passage number 126.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of thanks and a formal title for President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 127.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The phrase "Thank you" and the mention of President Lacker do not indicate any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 128.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Over the past couple of months, incoming data have been consistent with the gradual improvement in U.S. growth that we had expected for the second half of the year.  At the same time, deteriorating conditions in Europe have damped the outlook for future growth in the U.S. Recent reports from our Fifth District contacts are certainly consistent with gradually improving activity now.  We have heard of several positive developments in manufacturing, for example.  Two new tire plants have been announced for South Carolina, and the resolution of the NLRB complaint against Boeing has removed a cloud over a project that is expected to add significantly to employment in the Charleston region.  Machine tool orders for the Southeast are said to be up substantially over the past year.  A director from central Maryland reports gains in activities there.  And the West Virginia energy sector continues to boom.  Reports from retailers in our District have improved quite noticeably in the past couple of months.  At a gathering a week and a half ago, a number of retailers were quite positive about holiday season sales based on early results they had seen through the Thanksgiving weekend. On the less positive side of the ledger, housing remains depressed pretty much throughout the District.  Uncertainty about the magnitude and distribution of federal spending cuts continues to weigh on business and commercial real estate in the D.C. area.  And we have heard that revenues at K Street lobbying firms are down significantly due to the end of earmarks, although one could argue this actually belongs on the positive side of the ledger. On balance, I would say that our anecdotal reports line up pretty well with the national data that show a pickup in growth since the first half of the year.  Overall, the tone of reports is noticeably less gloomy than in August, and for what it’s worth, we have even heard a couple of references to green shoots.  I have to explain to people, though, that that is likely to jinx the recovery.  [Laughter]  We shouldn’t do that. Inflation indicators from the Fifth District are somewhat mixed.  Measures of current price trends from our surveys have generally ticked back up in the past two months, as have our wage trend measures.  Expected price trends have come down in the past few months, but they are still at or above the levels we generally saw from 2006 to 2008. At the national level, the Tealbook marks down 2012 growth by ¼ percent, essentially due to the deteriorating outlook in European growth.  I have no reason to question the staff’s revision; it seems sensible to me.  Such a forecast certainly gives one pause regarding downside risk.  This would not be the first time a contraction in one major trading area turned into a broader downturn in global growth. Perhaps more noteworthy is the downward revision of ¾ percent to the Tealbook’s projection for growth in 2013.  I am not sure I fully understand the reasons behind the staff’s revision, but 2½ percent for that year would not at all surprise me.  Indeed, it seemed reasonably plausible back in the late spring, before the recent weakening in Europe.  Growth at that rate would be consistent with the shift in our assessment that has taken place over the course of this year, toward the notion that there are more-persistent impediments to growth. Another feature of the Tealbook projection is the imminent convergence of inflation to around 1½ percent.  Granted, we have seen very low inflation readings for the past couple of months, and commodity and energy price trends appear to be quite favorable.  But on a 12-month basis, we are still much closer to 3 percent than to 2 percent. When we see several months of inflation above average, we are usually very careful to give balanced consideration to the hypothesis that it is a transitory bulge in inflation versus the hypothesis that it is a harbinger of a permanent acceleration.  When we see below-average inflation we need to be equally balanced.  The current slowdown in inflation could just be transitory, as was the acceleration we saw a year earlier.  Thank you very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and analysis based on the data they have observed.


Passage number 129.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there does not appear to be contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 130.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage consists of a simple thank you statement from someone named Governor Yellen.


Passage number 131.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think it is worth recalling that this FOMC meeting marks the third anniversary of the Committee’s historic decision to lower the federal funds rate to zero.  In announcing that decision, our December 2008 meeting statement indicated that weak economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate “for some time.”  That phrase, and its successor—“an extended period”—were generally interpreted as suggesting a likely duration of around three to six meetings.  But here we are in December 2011, and not only is the funds rate still pinned at zero, but modal market expectations are that monetary policy will remain constrained by the zero lower bound for several more years.  Moreover, professional forecasters, like most of us around the table, anticipate that the economy will not be back on its balanced growth path for quite a long time to come.  Can there be much doubt that historians will look back on this period as the lost decade. As we engage in our usual festivities this month, we might also keep in mind the devastating economic circumstances that continue to confront so many people around the country.  For example, a record 46 million Americans can give thanks to the supplemental nutritional assistance program for the meals on their holiday tables this season.  Indeed, the numbers of individuals receiving food stamps has risen month after month and is now more than 30 percent higher than in June 2009 when the NBER officially declared that the recession was over. In sifting through the latest data, I was struck by the complex combination of recent developments.  In particular, unexpectedly strong readings on consumer spending and vehicles sales were accompanied by a disappointingly large shortfall in income, and the surprisingly large decline in unemployment was coupled with only modest growth in output and payroll employment.  In the end, I reached the same conclusion as the Tealbook—namely, that the incoming data confirm the fundamental picture of an economy that is recovering only gradually at best.  In effect, under current policy settings, the U.S. economy continues to face an exceptionally prolonged period of unacceptably high unemployment and a duration of unemployment spells that is simply unprecedented.  The longer this situation persists, the more likely it is that individuals who are unable to obtain work will be permanently scarred—a development that is not only tragic for them and their families, but will also lower the potential of our economy. While there are certainly some upside risks to the Tealbook’s outlook for a very slow recovery, it is evidently quite hard to identify any scenario under current monetary policy in which growth would be sufficiently robust to bring unemployment down to normal levels within the next several years.  In fact, no such alternative simulation appeared in the Tealbook.  Even in the scenarios labeled “Faster European Recovery” and “Faster Snapback,” unemployment falls only to the vicinity of 7 percent at the end of 2014.  Unfortunately, the drags afflicting aggregate demand from fiscal policy, housing, and a weakening global economy and stronger dollar are just too large to support robust growth.   In my view, the risks to growth continue to be weighted to the downside.  Most notably, while the Europeans may have made some progress in cementing stronger long-run fiscal discipline, they have done little to address the deterioration in the European economic outlook or to resolve the uncertainties that have caused market participants to shed sovereign debt and lose confidence in European banking institutions.  Barring further major policy initiatives, those uncertainties are likely to afflict the forecast for many months, if not years, to come.  We can by no means rule out an intensification of spillovers to our own financial markets and a further appreciation of the dollar that could undermine the prospects of U.S. export growth.  At the same time unemployment is forecast to fall far short of its maximum sustainable level and inflation now appears likely to drift substantially below the 2 percent level most of us consider consistent with the Fed’s dual mandate.  Incoming data clearly confirm that inflation has subsided.  Moreover, in light of the considerable slack in the labor market, subdued trends in compensation and unit labor costs, and downward pressure on import prices, the Tealbook forecasts that inflation is likely to run at around 1¼ to 1½ percent over the next several years.  Fortunately, long-term inflation expectations remain stable.  However, as with the balance of risks to the growth outlook, I also see the risk to inflation as weighted to the downside. With inflation expected to remain below mandate-consistent rates, and unemployment expected to deviate very substantially from my estimate of its longer-run normal level, I consider the case for providing additional accommodation to be very strong, as I will discuss in the policy round.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Yellen, is discussing the current economic conditions and expressing her views on the need for additional monetary policy accommodation.


Passage number 132.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any information or context to suggest contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude directed towards Governor Duke.


Passage number 133.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Now I think I finally understand what it must have been like to be a European central banker in 2008.  No wonder they kept calling you and urging you to act.  I would imagine that in those dark days, they were the ones having to consider the possible spillover from our financial crisis to their financial markets, the threat to their financial institutions, the reduction in global demand from the loss of our consumer spending.   And now I see how frustrating it must have been not to be able to forecast how and when it might be resolved, much less to have a hand in resolving it, but to know that what we did would impact their economy more than what they did. I confess to being somewhat surprised and disappointed to see the downgrade in the Tealbook baseline forecast, driven in large part by increasing pessimism over the situation in Europe, even while domestic data came in a bit stronger than expected.  Given that my comments at the last meeting were the most optimistic, and maybe even the only optimistic view at the table, I went back to those observations to see if I wanted to back up on them a bit.  But I don’t.  I do think that the balance sheets of households, businesses, and financial institutions continue to strengthen, and all of my conversations with bankers confirmed a continuation of the same banking conditions. With the exception of residential mortgage lending, I don’t think spending is being held back by debt burdens or credit availability.  In fact, banks are actually seeing some increases in commercial lending, including commercial real estate.  And even though European lenders are pulling back in business and commercial real estate lending, those holes are apparently being filled seamlessly by other banks, mostly from the U.S. but some from Japan and Canada.  Even in the mortgage banks, I believe there are things that can be done.  New policies that are being introduced are gaining acceptance that can improve the last area of severe credit problems.   Indeed, stronger retail sales, a pickup in auto lending and auto sales, indicators of robust early holiday spending—including significant growth in credit and debit card transaction volumes—signs of improvement in employment data, and better readings on consumer confidence all lead me to believe that it is possible that some pent-up demand from consumers might finally be showing up just as catch-up business capital expenditures start to fade. My outlook for 2012 and 2013 is for slightly better performance than the baseline in the Tealbook, closer to the “Faster Snapback” or “Faster European Recovery” scenarios.  I do recognize the risk to this outlook from the situation in Europe.  If that goes badly, my forecast doesn’t matter.  I understand that lower readings on personal disposable income and the saving rate do not support continued improvement in consumer spending. The Congress could certainly fail to extend the payroll tax cuts, extended unemployment, the Medicare doc fix, spending bills, or gridlock again on something else critical that I can’t even think of right now.  I’ve assumed achingly slow but still measurable progress in the resolution of housing and mortgage foreclosure issues that may not materialize.  The most daunting risk for me is that my assessment is noticeably brighter than that of all the trained economists and complex models we use.  [Laughter]  However, even in the most optimistic scenario, inflation barely touches 2 percent.  So none of my optimism about the outlook makes me reluctant to take action that could firm the momentum that I see developing.  In fact, I think it is important to support strengthening where we can find it, so that it can finally break through if we ever catch a break.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 134.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Tarullo.


Passage number 135.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First, with President Bullard’s permission and based on a conversation we had during the break, I want to clarify one comment that Jim made earlier about the divergence of the staff forecast from private forecasts.  I heard Jim mistakenly—and maybe others did too—to be referring to forecasts for U.S. growth, but I think actually Jim was referring to forecasts for European growth where the staff is somewhat more pessimistic than private forecasters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply clarifying a comment made by Jim and provides their own interpretation of what Jim was referring to in terms of the staff forecast.


Passage number 136.
 MR. BULLARD.  Yes, and I apologize for not being clear enough on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker acknowledges their lack of clarity but there is no mention of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 137.
 MR. TARULLO.  That is the case—I think Steve and others and I have taken a somewhat gloomier view than private forecasters, but what’s important to note is that everybody has moved toward the gloomier side.  I notice the Blue Chip forecast for each of the past couple of months has gone down, and their consensus is now in slightly negative territory as well.  This just indicates that, as several of you have already pointed out, euro zone problems have gone from being a dark threatening cloud on the horizon to still being a dark threatening cloud on the horizon, but now almost certain to be a drag on U.S. growth in any reasonable baseline projection.   An interesting question, of course, is whether in the absence of this impact from Europe, the U.S. recovery would continue to pick up pace.  My own sense is that, just as has been the case a couple of times already in the post-crisis period, the marginally better-than-expected data over the intermeeting period would likely have proven to be just another short stretch of dry pavement before we hit the mud again, rather than the beginning of an open road. I think the aggregate demand shortfall is still the story, with no particularly good reason to think that there’s going to be much progress in creating the additional demand required to move the economy more quickly toward filling the output gap.  I want to say a couple of things, some of which I can dispense with because John summarized very well some of the reasons to expect that this is a short stretch of dry pavement rather than the beginning of a nice, wide, open road.   But more generally, it’s useful to recall again the origins of the circumstances in which we find ourselves.  It is a financially induced recession based on the bursting of asset bubbles with an enormous amount of wealth lost.  Board staff has been doing a lot of work on housing policies and the housing market.  One of the striking numbers that jumps out of the work they’ve been doing is that there’s been $7 trillion in home equity lost since the peak of the housing market about five years ago.  Seven trillion dollars is obviously disproportionately in the hands of consumers since most home equity is in the hands of the homeowners themselves.  That has clearly affected their own calculus of their wealth and their ability to take on further debt, and indeed, their thinking about saving rates and spending in the future.  That loss really has not in any way, shape, or form begun to get worked off yet.  Even if we’re dealing with retail debt, even if we’re beginning to deal with the dysfunction of the housing market itself, there is that enormous loss of home equity, which is not going to be replaced under the most optimistic of scenarios for years to come. Similarly, there’s a lot of sunk capital, if I can put it that way, sitting basically fallow throughout the United States, whether it’s in factories that are not being fully utilized or in shopping malls that are sitting half or fully vacant at this point.  This is the nature of a recession following a period of overleverage and burst asset bubbles.  There’s not a propensity to invest, to increase supply, or to invest in more productive capacity until people are convinced, investors are convinced, producers are convinced that there’s going to be more demand, and I really do think that continues to be the story. In terms of the labor market and what it can tell us about whether there’s an output gap or whether we’re on a more recovery-oriented path, it’s hard to use any past postwar recession as a model for comparison with what’s going on now because none of those was a financially induced recession.  Jim referred to the two more recent recessions, which were not only not financially induced, but also shallow.  The two more severe recessions obviously were further ago, in the early ’80s and the mid-’70s. It’s difficult to conclude very much from the comparative performance of the labor market post this recession compared with the earlier two shallow recessions for a couple of reasons.  One, precisely because those recessions were shallow, there were not large numbers of layoffs.  We saw a striking, almost frightening hemorrhage of jobs in late 2008 and early 2009, whereas in those earlier recessions, because they were shallower, the employment adjustment occurred more through attrition, which took time, and indeed continued into the recovery period.  That is related to a second distinguishing factor, which was that those earlier recessions followed long periods of expansion during which it’s reasonable to think that a fair number of productive inefficiencies got baked into the labor market, and thus it was easier for companies to increase production in the post-recession period without increasing employment.   Here, like in the earlier severe recessions, we had a cascade of layoffs, and thus one would expect some rebound and some reduction of the unemployment rate—because the layoffs had been so dramatic—in order to increase production at all, and I think that’s what we’ve seen.  The jury is still out on exactly where we are with labor markets, but I don’t think that comparison of this experience with any past recessions suggests that somehow we’re performing better here. This leads to my final observation, which is that the critical issue is whether, after five years in which we’ve averaged less than 1 percent growth per year and with many reasons to believe we will at best slog along for some time to come, we’re approaching the point at which future potential growth may be adversely affected by this continuing period of lower economic growth and outright recession. In the labor market, which I’ve looked at more closely than any other part of the economy, I don’t think we’re there yet, but we’re certainly much closer than we’ve probably ever come before in the United States, at least in the postwar period.  I’ll close with a slight gloss on Narayana’s very interesting observations earlier about the better use of unemployment as a way of doing monetary policy.  Narayana makes very good points, which would probably hold up when the data were generalized, though maybe not in quite the same magnitudes.  The one thing I would say, Narayana, which I don’t think you’d disagree with, is that particularly because there are some underlying structural problems in the economy, an extended period of high unemployment and subpar economic performance could increase those structural problems and thereby make the unemployment rate look somewhat better than it might actually look otherwise just because of people dropping out of the labor market.  With that qualification, I agree with what Narayana said earlier.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Tarullo, is expressing his own views and observations about the state of the economy. He acknowledges that some others may have a more positive outlook, but overall, he believes that the U.S. recovery is still facing challenges and that there is a lack of demand to drive economic growth.


Passage number 138.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude to Governor Raskin.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 139.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Some of the news we’ve received over the past several weeks has been pretty good.  Consumers are buying motor vehicles and other goods at a faster clip than we had expected, and consumer sentiment moved up off its recent lows.  In addition, the unemployment rate dropped and new claims for unemployment insurance have been edging down.  However, I’m not convinced that we’ve actually seen much sustainable improvement in these two areas, and that’s what I’d like to focus on right now.  I should also say that we’ve seen zero improvement in the housing market, but I won’t discuss that today.  A lot has been said about Europe, and I won’t add anything to that discussion even though the situation is critical to our country’s growth prospects. In the labor market, all indicators other than the unemployment rate are pointing to only modest, if any, improvement.  Job gains have been disappointing.  Unemployment insurance claims are only creeping lower, and hiring plans are pretty stagnant this year.  Even the unemployment rate declines don’t look that great.  Of the ¾ percentage point decline in the unemployment rate over the past year, about ¼ percentage point of it may be due to people dropping out of the labor force when their unemployment benefits run out, and probably some others are dropping out due to discouragement. The rest of the improvement is pretty paltry for a recovery.  Two and a half years into the recovery, there are still 24 million underemployed people.  I think the decline in the unemployment rate exaggerates the improvement in underlying conditions, and I wouldn’t be surprised if the rate moves back up a bit in December.  At the current pace of improvement, it will be years before the labor market can be described in positive terms, and by that time we might well have started to see a loss of skills and networks among the unemployed and underemployed, which could cause a long-run erosion of the economy’s productive potential, an outcome that we should all want to avoid. Turning to consumer spending, while I’d like to believe the surprisingly strong consumption recently is going to continue, it just doesn’t seem sustainable given all the other information.  Real disposable personal income declined in both the second and third quarters—not much recovery there.  The latest data on services from the quarterly services survey were also pretty weak in the third quarter.  Consumer sentiment is still below the levels from last spring.  While it’s encouraging that sentiment has moved up from the panicky levels of the late summer, it still remains at levels we usually see in recessions, and frankly, if the extremely low numbers we saw in September were associated with households’ concerns about policymaker paralysis, the current debate about the payroll tax cut and the failure of the supercommittee is not likely to help. One piece of the sentiment data that seems especially downbeat is households’ expectations of their own income expectations.  These figures have not budged from their lows at the 2008 trough.  If households don’t think incomes are going to improve, it’s hard to see why they would begin to spend in earnest.  Moreover, many households are still adapting to the $7 trillion decline in household wealth, particularly the sharp drop in real estate wealth that occurred over the past several years.  Consumers probably are still trying to rebuild their nest eggs and replenish their retirement accounts, and that will likely continue to curtail their spending in the quarters ahead.  With all of this pessimism weighing on households, I don’t believe that the recent sharp drop in the saving rate, which now stands at 3½ percent, is really sustainable.  Rather, I expect household spending to be pretty unimpressive going forward.  I’ll stop there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The author acknowledges some positive economic news but also expresses skepticism about the sustainability of the improvements in the labor market and consumer spending. They argue that the decline in the unemployment rate may be misleading and that consumer sentiment and household income expectations remain low. They also mention the decline in household wealth and the need for households to rebuild their savings, which they believe will continue to limit spending. Overall, the author's viewpoint contradicts the notion that the recent improvements in the economy are significant or long-lasting.


Passage number 140.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  I note that this is identical to what was circulated in the Tealbook, Book B.  Are there any questions for Bill.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 141.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, I couldn’t hear you, sir.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that they were unable to hear the chairman.


Passage number 142.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I just said that these statements are identical to what was circulated in Tealbook, Book B, so there’s no change.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the statements being referred to are identical to what was circulated in a book called Tealbook, implying that there is no change. The statement made by President Kocherlakota is not provided, so it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement in that statement.


Passage number 143.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I had a couple of questions.  One is for Bill and one is for Brian Sack.  The question for Bill is, I didn’t see in Tealbook, Book B, and maybe I missed it, an explanation for why the staff was recommending a change in the language of paragraph 5 of Alternative B relative to what was in the previous statement of the FOMC.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they have a couple of questions, one for Bill and one for Brian Sack.


Passage number 144.
 MR. ENGLISH.  That’s what we had in the Tealbook.  Our thought was that with the European situation even more uncertain, and a little more emphasis on strains in global financial markets in paragraph 2, it made sense to note financial developments would be monitored as well as incoming information on the economy.  We wanted to add those words in paragraph 1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining the rationale behind wanting to add certain words in paragraph 1.


Passage number 145.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  My second question is for Brian.  If the Committee were to adopt Alternative A3′—the flow of purchases—how long could we run 3′ before we ran out of capacity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 146.
 MR. SACK.  The $40 billion per month was calibrated based on the gross amount of MBS production that we are seeing.  The $40 billion, on top of the $25 to $30 billion a month of reinvestment you are already doing, would be a good chunk of the gross production.  Of course, in terms of net supply, there is basically no increase or very little increase in the mortgage market.  Even though this is calibrated to be not too much of gross production, we still need to be displacing investors over time.  That will introduce a limit on how far you could go with this.  But you could go through 2012, because that’s what was calibrated to be comparable to the $500 billion in A3.  You could go well beyond that since you are spreading it out, but obviously not indefinitely, because you are basically eating up a larger and larger share of the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 147.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 148.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other.  [No response]  All right.  We are going to do our policy go-round.  Let me ask your indulgence.  We would very much like to vote by 1:30, if we can.  I’m sure that Michelle would like it to be earlier, if possible.  If you have broader issues in monetary policy that can be postponed to the afternoon go-round, that would be very much appreciated.  But, of course, everybody should say what they need to say.  We begin with President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a request and a statement about the order in which policy discussions will take place.


Passage number 149.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  According to the Tealbook, by mid-2013 the PCE price index will be growing at 1.2 percent, and the unemployment rate will be 8.4 percent.  I, unfortunately, view this as a plausible baseline forecast with significant downside risk.  Furthermore, the long-term outlook shown on page 32 of the Tealbook, Book A, indicates that in 2016 we will still be missing on both elements of the mandate.  Such a forecast is consistent with taking more action, as reflected in option A. There has been much discussion of credibility over the past few years.  How credible would a central bank be that misses on both elements of its mandate for five years.  I have little doubt that if we had been well above full employment for years, and the inflation rate was forecast to be well above 2 percent for the next five years, that we would be acting decisively.  We should behave symmetrically, displaying equal concern when inflation is forecast to be too low and the unemployment rate to be too high.  Some have argued that we cannot have an impact now that we are at the zero bound.  I do not agree.  If I thought that our alternative policy tools at the zero bound could not stimulate the economy enough to raise the inflation rate to 2 percent in the medium term, I would certainly be advocating aggressively for a higher inflation rate to ensure we never hit the zero bound again. If we are going to go with option B, I question whether the language of mid-2013 is appropriate.  The Tealbook forecast has us far from our target in mid-2013, and that is based on a forecast where liftoff does not occur until the fourth quarter of 2014.  What are we conveying when our forecast for liftoff has lengthened by a year and a half and we do not change our announced liftoff despite the passage of time.  Are we being transparent.  And is that language helping us. For this meeting, I would suggest two possible wording changes—change “2013” to “2014,” or, at a minimum, change “mid-2013” to “the end of 2013,” which is still a year less than we actually expect in the Tealbook.  The problem with the fixed calendar date is quite apparent.  President Kocherlakota actually mentioned this when we first adopted it.  I would prefer the language in paragraph 4 of option A to be adopted today.  It ties monetary policy to economic outcomes.  However, if not, I would hope that such language is in option B in January.   Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

This passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. The speaker is providing their own perspective and suggestions, but there is no opposing viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 150.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude from the author to President Pianalto.


Passage number 151.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support Alternative B.  Based on the incoming data, I continue to expect the economy to recover at a gradual rate and underlying inflation to remain stable.  However, I do believe that there are significant downside risks to the outlook.  In particular, Europe’s continued problems have increased the risk to our recovery. In more normal circumstances, these conditions by themselves might warrant a little further easing of monetary policy.  However, in today’s unusual circumstances, several considerations lead me to favor an unchanged policy.  One consideration is the effectiveness of the tools available to us.  While I would like to see the unemployment rate decline faster, it is not clear that further easing of policy would materially boost employment.  Certainly, I wouldn’t claim that the monetary transmission mechanism is broken, but we have reason to think it is impaired. A second consideration is that using the limited policy tools available to us could create future challenges.  I have supported both the use of forward guidance and our balance sheet, and I remain open to further action, if warranted.  But I am mindful of the analysis done by the staff that has shown that there are scenarios in which further use of these tools could create problems down the road.  For example, as Bill mentioned in his comments, further expansion of our balance sheet would significantly increase the chances that our Treasury remittances fall to zero. The final consideration is that more monetary accommodation could cause inflation expectations to become unanchored.  While inflation expectations have been stable, we are just now seeing the headline PCE inflation rate move lower.  With inflation still above 2 percent, more easing of policy could cause an unwelcome backup in inflation expectations. Under these circumstances, I believe that we need to proceed very cautiously and to strike the right balance between costs and benefits of further action.  In today’s challenging environment, with my outlook for a stable pace of recovery, I think that Alternative B is appropriate.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses support for Alternative B and provides reasons for their opinion.


Passage number 152.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists of a simple expression of gratitude from someone named President Fisher.


Passage number 153.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, I support Alternative B.  It has the benefit of accurately stating where I believe the economy is.  I remain concerned, as I hinted in my questions, about the distortions that may stem from our maturity extension program, and perhaps increasingly from our activity in mortgage-backed securities.  I would not support additional monetary accommodation. I do want to make a quick comment on inflation, because, as you know, we are somewhat fundamentalist at the Dallas Fed.  We do follow the trimmed mean rather religiously, and the trimmed mean is running at a six-month rate of 1.9 percent.  We have had two months of softness in terms of the component numbers—falling price components—but two months don’t a trend make.  And I do believe, as I have said before and have pointed out in my corporate conversations, that we are trending back toward that 2 percent level.   With regard to employment, I listened carefully to Governor Yellen.  I am sympathetic:  I grew up in a household that was affected deeply by some of the things you mentioned, and it does tug at my heart strings.  I just don’t believe that we can effect a significant amount of change there, given the present inefficiency of fiscal policy and the disincentives that are provided by our fiscal policymakers. I also have a view that Alternative B does remind people that we are on the balls of our feet, and yet I don’t think it is the time of year for us to change what we agreed to in the last meeting.  It is not propitious to surprise the marketplace at this juncture.  In summary, I support Alternative B.  I would not support and I would vote against—despite my great respect for Eric Rosengren—extending the date past the current language, since I was opposed to it in the first place.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker clearly states their support for Alternative B and expresses their concerns about the economy and monetary policy.


Passage number 154.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 155.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The recent data suggest that the moderate economic recovery remains on track.  While the European situation poses a risk to this outlook, I see no evidence to suggest that the Fed should act preemptively to stave off financial market effects of the European situation beyond what we have done already with the central bank swap lines.  Over the past several years, we have developed many tools that we can use in the event of a financial crisis, and we must be vigilant and be willing to act as needed.  My best guess is that Europe will muddle through somehow and avoid a full-fledged financial crisis, whose probability I think remains low.  Europeans are likely to do what is necessary to avoid a total collapse. We continue to provide a large amount of monetary accommodation to support the U.S. economy as it continues to recover.  I see no evidence that trying to push interest rates even lower will have much effect on what ails this economy or help resolve the European crisis.  Trying to tweak our policy for little or no effect seems to risk our credibility.  I also fear that our continued efforts to tweak monetary policy, or to signal that we might do so, can add to the kind of policy uncertainty that so many of us have heard from our business contacts is inhibiting both investment and hiring. Thus, I can support taking no further action at this time, as in Alternative B.  I am not confident that inflation expectations will remain anchored over the medium term if we keep trying to increase the degree of accommodation.  In my view, we have taken some significant risks with future inflation.  Unless we are extremely mindful of those risks, and are prepared to act—perhaps aggressively and at the appropriate time and in the face of what may prove to be substantial political pressure—inflation may prove to be a serious problem at some point down the road. Regarding language, I am okay with Alternative B language as in the Tealbook.  But my hope is that if we are able to go ahead and publish our policy paths in the SEP in January—as we will discuss later this afternoon—that we will be able to extricate ourselves from this calendar date issue as forward guidance in the statement.  As you know, I dissented in August in part because of the use of the calendar date.  I didn’t favor this type of communication, since it makes it less clear that our policy is conditioned on the outlook for the economy.  Making the policy path projection part of the projection exercise is a good way to emphasize the ties between economic conditions and policy.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker is expressing disagreement with the idea of taking further action to push interest rates lower and is concerned about the risks of increasing the degree of accommodation. The speaker also disagrees with the use of calendar dates as forward guidance in the statement and prefers a policy path projection that emphasizes the ties between economic conditions and policy.


Passage number 156.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude from President Lockhart to an unidentified recipient.


Passage number 157.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support Alternative B.  I believe a stay-the-course approach is appropriate for the time being.  As I said in the economy round, I expect the most likely outcome is that growth will continue to improve modestly, inflation will settle out at acceptable levels, and the labor market will improve gradually.  This outlook is about as good as can be achieved in the face of the current set of headwinds and drags on the economy—factors likely to be unresponsive to aggressive further stimulus.  I think it is appropriate to acknowledge downside risks, but not act on them at this meeting.  There certainly can be circumstances that justify taking out insurance against downside risks, but with the biggest downside risk being associated with contingent developments in Europe, it’s not clear to me that this is such a circumstance. As regards the statement language, I favor minimal changes beyond the updating of the description of current economic conditions.  I think that materially changing language beyond updating the description of conditions could be disruptive.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses their support for Alternative B and their belief that a stay-the-course approach is appropriate. They also state their outlook for the economy and their preference for minimal changes in the statement language. There is no indication of disagreement or contention with anyone else in the passage.


Passage number 158.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a polite expression of gratitude.


Passage number 159.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I recommend adopting a wait-and-see posture for this meeting, and, accordingly, I advocate adoption of Alternative B.  The data on the U.S. economy have generally been stronger than had been expected during the August–September time frame.  While a recession in the U.S. seemed possible at that juncture, subsequent events have not confirmed that possibility.  As a result, U.S. economic prospects appear to be on firmer footing for now. The European situation remains worrisome.  But given the Committee’s past easing actions, it seems prudent to gather more information on the likely path of events there and the possible effects on the U.S.  I am also a bit concerned that we do not inadvertently send a signal that there is some kind of dramatic Fed–ECB action pending as part of some kind of quid pro quo for governments in Europe trying to get their fiscal house in order.  The markets are very sensitive to any kind of indication in that direction, and I would be concerned that we not send a signal, because I think there is no such plan. Because of the time-consistency problems I discussed at the last meeting, I do not think further easing of monetary conditions can be achieved through mere announcements of policy intentions far in the future.  For this reason, I think that any additional policy moves have to come through the balance sheet, and I do not recommend changing anything on that dimension at this meeting.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Bullard, is expressing his recommendation to adopt a wait-and-see posture and advocate for the adoption of Alternative B. He also discusses the current state of the U.S. economy and expresses concerns about the European situation and the need for more information before taking further action. There is no conflicting viewpoint presented in the passage.


Passage number 160.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 161.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I continue to not support Alternative B, as in the November meeting.  I support some version of Alternative A.  The particular version is not very important today, and I will just repeat my comments from last time that my preference would be to clarify our forward guidance through conditional economic thresholds with an inflation safeguard, and then perhaps, if that did not improve matters enough, do additional MBS as in Alternative A.  I come to this, again, because of our dual mandate responsibilities, which are what the Congress charges us with.  In fact, I think that is extremely good for the U.S. economy, American consumers, businesses, and everyone involved. What helps me think about this best is John Taylor’s seminal work in 1979, his Econometrica piece on optimal monetary policy in a rational expectations model.  In that analysis, he takes a quadratic loss function for monetary policy with an output gap and inflation, and he maps out different weights on the output gap, and he is able to map out the policy frontier, which is associated with the optimal responses there.  That is totally consistent with meeting the objectives of policy—hitting your inflation goal as well as keeping output gaps approximately zero on average.  That delivers a good range of low variability for inflation and low variability for output gaps.  As I look at the type of analysis that he does, I am led to favor a more conservative weight on the output gap—that is, a lower weight than 1 on the output gap, relative to Taylor’s model, but a weight that would be consistent with a unit weight on unemployment deviations—equal weight on unemployment and inflation. Having said this, if you apply this level of economic rigor and discipline to describing the policy strategy, our current outlook is very far from our objectives.  With current monetary policy accommodation in place, inflation in 2013 will be under our 2 percent objective and unemployment will be, as I see it, 2 percentage points above the sustainable unemployment rate, which I take to be a very conservative 6 percent.  It could actually be lower than that, but it is 2 percentage points above.  That is another conservative choice.  We have to be forward-looking.  Until our inflation forecast is pressing the upper tolerance of our inflation objective, I don’t think this is even a conflicted choice for policymakers, given the unemployment situation and resource slack.  I favor more accommodation.  I cannot support Alternative B.   I want to close by taking note that I saw in today’s Wall Street Journal that Allan Meltzer was quoted, and he said that more inflation is coming.  I, frankly, don’t know where this type of prediction comes from.  There is no theory attached to it, other than perhaps that the Fed’s balance sheet is very large.  But there is no mechanism laid out for inflation determination, and it would help me sort through some of the problems that we have if there was more of a discussion about those theories.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, is expressing his personal preference for Alternative A and explaining his reasoning behind it. He also references the work of John Taylor in support of his position. While he mentions that he cannot support Alternative B and disagrees with Allan Meltzer's prediction of more inflation, there is no direct disagreement or argument being presented.


Passage number 162.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  He is very consistent.  He has been predicting that since 2008.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement implied in the passage. The statement emphasizes the consistency of the person in predicting something since 2008.


Passage number 163.
  [Laughter] MR. EVANS.  He has been predicting it since longer than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The inclusion of laughter in brackets suggests a lighthearted or humorous tone, rather than a serious argument or disagreement.


Passage number 164.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It consists of the speaker acknowledging laughter and then continuing with a statement by President George, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 165.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I prefer Alternative B.  Data since the last meeting suggest a continuation of the moderate recovery.  Consumers and businesses are spending.  Auto sales have bounced back from supply chain disruptions and are at their highest level of the year.  Businesses are expected to increase production to replenish inventories that declined in the third quarter. Of course, some sectors are not performing as well as I would like.  Activity in the housing market remains at very low levels, due in part to ongoing household deleveraging.  The unemployment rate remains higher than I would like, but declining jobless claims and increasing employment suggest that the labor market is slowly improving.  Unfortunately, neither of these problems appears to be readily amenable to monetary policy solutions without potential tradeoffs for inflation in the future.  I expect that the current softness in inflation will be short-lived and by the end of next year, I expect readings to move closer to 2 percent. While Europe continues to pose a significant ongoing risk to the outlook, it seems reasonable at this juncture to wait in order to allow our past monetary policy actions to take effect and for policymakers in Europe to work toward solutions to their problems.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. MS. GEORGE is expressing her view and explaining the factors that support her preference for Alternative B.


Passage number 166.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Kocherlakota.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 167.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  At our last meeting, President Williams suggested that he found it useful to consider the recommendations of simple policy rules when thinking about the appropriate formulation of policy, and in the past, the Chairman, Governor Yellen, and I have expressed similar views.  Along those lines, if you look at Tealbook, Book B, it looks at the implications of a variety of simple policy rules for the path of accommodation.  This is a line of rule-based analysis, and I continue to appreciate these kinds of analyses. But I thought that the treatment of the LSAPs in the analysis in the Tealbook was a little incomplete.  In this regard, I would say two things.  First, I think the current level of accommodation should include the best estimates of the accommodation that the FOMC is providing from its large-scale asset holdings.  Second, the prescribed evolution of accommodation should include the use of asset purchases, especially since asset purchases are explicitly being considered in Alternative A. I believe that the best current Board staff estimate of the impact of our current asset holdings is that they are providing accommodation equivalent to a reduction of 2½ percentage points in the fed funds rate.  With that estimate in mind, when I look at the graphs on page 7 of Tealbook, Book B, it seems that if I use these simple rules, policy is currently overly accommodative and, hence, Alternatives A and B would both be inconsistent with the recommendations of these rules.  This is all based on the Tealbook’s estimate of potential.  Like President Bullard, I would be inclined to use a slightly lower estimate of potential.  Actually, President Bullard used a much lower estimate of potential. With that said, I do see two reasons for caution.  First, the recommendations of these rules seem highly inconsistent with the optimal control simulations on page 3 of Tealbook, Book B.  The unconstrained optimal policy simulation implies that the Committee should be buying something like $3 trillion of long-term assets over the coming year.  Second, several members of the Committee have suggested the impact of monetary policy is not being destroyed but being blunted by current household credit conditions.  This impairment of monetary policy, as long as it’s not being reduced to zero, would lead one to use more accommodation. At this stage, these reasons for caution strike me as somewhat imprecise, and I would find it useful at future meetings to have staff work that fleshed them out in some way.  Is there a way to put some kind of fudge factor in the policy rules that make them accord better with the unconstrained optimal control solution.  In particular, we often talk about the Taylor 1999 rule as being a very accommodative rule.  Is there a way to make it line up better with the optimal control solution so that we can use it for guidance in thinking about how policy should evolve, but also have the level match up at least a little bit closer to what we have in the unconstrained optimal control solution.  Second, what is the staff’s best estimate of the current real impact of monetary accommodation on the economy.  How is our level of monetary accommodation translating through to the real economy.  These are tough questions, but I think it would be helpful for us to move them from the realm of the qualitative into the realm of the quantitative as best we can. Despite this current imprecision of these counterbalancing considerations, I am willing to go along with Alternative B at this meeting.  However, I would strongly prefer that we use the version of paragraph 5 that was in the last statement for a couple of related reasons.  One is related to what President Lockhart said in his statement.  We should avoid using any language beyond the updating of economic conditions.  We don’t want to be indicating anything that would disrupt markets in any fashion.  That’s the practical consideration. More philosophically, the new version of paragraph 5 implies that we see financial market conditions as being an important factor in the making of monetary policy over and above the information that those conditions provide about the economic outlook, and I think this is problematic.  Our mandate is not to make sure financial markets function well.  Our mandate is to promote price stability and maximum employment, and obviously financial market developments matter, but only insofar as they affect the outlook for prices and employment.  For both of those reasons—not rocking the boat and for this more philosophical consideration—I would favor Alternative B but with the old paragraph 5.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

There is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kocherlakota expresses his disagreement with the treatment of LSAPs (large-scale asset purchases) in the analysis in the Tealbook. He also disagrees with the recommendations of the simple policy rules, stating that they are inconsistent with the optimal control simulations. Additionally, he disagrees with the new version of paragraph 5 in the statement, as he believes it implies that financial market conditions are an important factor in monetary policy, which he disagrees with philosophically.


Passage number 168.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude from the speaker, President Lacker.


Passage number 169.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support Alternative B.  I don’t see a case for changing our policy stance at this meeting, and if the data come in reasonably close to what the Tealbook is forecasting, it’s hard for me to see a case for changing policy at the next meeting either. In the interest of time I won’t elaborate on this, but I have one comment about communications.  I think you did a service over the summer, Mr. Chairman, by discouraging the notion that monetary policy should be held solely responsible for the economic recovery.  You were wise to point to other nonmonetary factors restraining growth, and you succeeded in reducing public expectations for us to act whenever growth disappoints.  Going forward, we need to reiterate that message because the downward revision in the medium-term growth trend suggests a higher likelihood that growth will disappoint from time to time.  One sign of the need for continuing to discourage overinflated estimates of the potency of monetary policy appeared on page 1 of the Wall Street Journal this morning.  In an unfortunate and unfair article, it focused on your legacy as Chairman, paid virtually no attention to inflation—apart from the brief passage that President Evans just cited—and instead took the stance that unemployment and growth were the sole relevant criteria for evaluating a central banker’s performance.  Again, I think we need to continue to explain that monetary policy has only limited capacity to stimulate real economic growth in these circumstances. I agree with President Kocherlakota that the old B5 would be better than the new B5.  I’m reminded of questions I’ve heard many times about language change in this Committee.  Why are you changing it.  Why now do you change this language.  Have we not been following financial developments.  The answer is we have been, and it will draw, as President Kocherlakota suggests, unwarranted attention to financial market developments and their influence on our policy.  I’d be with President Kocherlakota in favoring the old version of B5.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement of support for Alternative B and agreement with some of the Chairman's perspectives.


Passage number 170.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply expressing gratitude.


Passage number 171.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 172.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support Alternative B.  Recent economic data show that at best a moderate recovery is in train.  Inflation is trending downward, heading below 2 percent.  We are currently falling short on both parts of our dual mandate, and I expect, as many others, that this will remain true for many years to come.  In these circumstances, the current highly accommodative stance of monetary policy is appropriate. Nonetheless, as others have mentioned, the expected outcomes are highly unsatisfactory.  By my own calculations of a super long-run outlook that extends the Tealbook’s long-run outlook [laughter], we will not achieve either of our mandated goals until early 2018, which is a decade from the beginning of the recession.  One way to improve on this dismal prospect is to upgrade our communication of our long-run goals and principles and of our policy projections.  This should help further anchor expectations and enhance the effectiveness of our policy actions.  I will return to this topic in our discussion later today. As a final note, I want to return to a topic that President Fisher mentioned earlier today, and he and I have mentioned in previous meetings, and that is that I am particularly concerned about the possibility that the ongoing crisis in Europe could blow up with little advance notice.  In that case, the market reaction, including massive safe-haven flows to the U.S., could drive the entire Treasury yield curve down to very low levels, potentially making our current unconventional tools of forward guidance and Treasury purchases largely irrelevant.  As I have said before, we need to plan now about the options we have if such a scenario materializes and not wait until we are in the teeth of a full-blown crisis.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. Williams supports Alternative B and argues that the current highly accommodative stance of monetary policy is appropriate. However, they acknowledge that the expected outcomes are highly unsatisfactory and propose that communication of long-run goals and principles should be improved. They also express concern about the possibility of a crisis in Europe and advocate for planning for this scenario in advance.


Passage number 173.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Yellen.


Passage number 174.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I can support Alternative B today, although I see a compelling case for further policy accommodation, given that my forecast envisions an extended period of unemployment far above normal levels, coupled with inflation below 2 percent.  In this regard, I found the discussion of rule-based recommendations in the Tealbook very helpful.  It reveals that every rule we monitor, with the exception of Taylor 1993, calls for stimulus over and above that currently in place. There is also a strong case to do more from a risk-management perspective, given that the zero bound is expected to constrain policy for the foreseeable future, and there are exceptionally large downside risks.  I’m attracted to both of the policy options in Alternative A and believe these steps deserve serious consideration by the Committee in January. With respect to our forward guidance, I’d be inclined to shift mid-2013 guidance out to late 2014.  Such a shift would be consistent with current market expectations and the outcome-based rule incorporated in the Tealbook baseline.  The constrained optimal policy in the Tealbook calls for an even later onset of tightening in mid-2016.  Of course, forward guidance indicating that we expect to hold the funds rate at zero through any particular date, even if appropriate in the modal outlook, should not be unconditional.  I, therefore, hope we can also provide the public with greater insight into the economic conditions that the Committee believes would continue to warrant such a policy stance.  We have considered a number of different approaches to elucidating conditionality, and I still see considerable merit in the threshold approach that we have discussed in previous meetings and that President Evans has publicly endorsed.  But I’m open to alternatives, and the approach embodied in paragraph 4 of Alternative A, while a little bit less informative about the Committee’s reaction function, also has considerable merit.  It would serve as a valuable complement to the policy projections that I think we will begin including in the SEP in January. I’d also be supportive in January of a program of further asset purchases along the lines proposed in Alternative A.  MBS purchases make considerable sense because, in addition to easing financial conditions generally, they could have a disproportionate effect on mortgage rates and the housing sector.  Mortgage rates have declined this year, but the spread between the fixed mortgage rate and 10-year Treasuries has widened considerably. While I’d be open to either of the approaches suggested in Alternative A, I see some significant merit embarking on an open-ended program of purchases as in paragraph 3′.  The program proposed there begins at a modest pace, and it could be scaled up or down over time as conditions evolve.  If we move in this direction, I believe it would be helpful for the public to have a very clear idea of the policy objectives that would motivate the program.  I hope we will also agree to articulate a consensus statement of our goals and objectives.  The publication of policy projections, coupled with a consensus statement on our goals and policy framework, would enable the public to place any further easing policies in appropriate perspective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's support for Alternative B and willingness to consider further policy accommodation.


Passage number 175.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contentious or disagreeable statements. It simply expresses gratitude to Governor Duke.


Passage number 176.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I prefer Alternative B.  The assessment of current economic conditions and the outlook for the future in Alternative B is closer to my own, but I also think that the darker tone and the unexpected actions contained in Alternative A—coming on the heels of recent stronger spending and employment readings—could actually create alarm in markets and spook what little confidence is emerging in households and businesses.  I do believe that additional MBS purchases could be positive for the housing sector and the economy in a number of ways.  However, any action we take will be more effective if we first resolve our communication strategy. With the exception of a potential blowup in Europe that would require its own unique reaction and perhaps swamp our available tools, I don’t think there’s a large risk in waiting to act, and by waiting we pick up the additional benefit of perhaps a bit more clarity on the direction of spending, income, and employment, and there is always the outside chance that something will resolve more positively in Europe.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

In this passage, there is no clear contention or disagreement expressed. The speaker expresses a preference for Alternative B and provides reasons for their preference. They also mention the potential positive effects of additional MBS purchases and the importance of resolving communication strategy. They then mention the potential benefits of waiting to act and the possibility of positive resolutions in Europe. While there are different possibilities mentioned, there is no explicit indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 177.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage consists of a thanking gesture and a mention of the individual's name. There is no indication of any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 178.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor more accommodation substantially for the reasons stated by President Evans, and more specifically, I’d be inclined toward paragraph 3 of Alternative A.  But, I’m not going to advocate for paragraph 3 of Alternative A for two reasons.  One, obviously, we haven’t laid the foundation for additional MBS purchases right now either internally or externally.  Two, maybe less obviously, I do have some sympathy for those who have observed that the efficacy of various monetary policy instruments in the absence of good fiscal policy is more constrained and more limited than we’d like it to be.  It would be useful to maximize the effects of MBS purchases and consequent reductions in mortgage rates, and that can best be done through further pursuit of a variety of initiatives, which now, for the first time in a while, seem to be under consideration more seriously both by the Administration and by the Congress.  If we followed Bill’s advice and proselytized for the adoption of some of these additional measures by the political branches of government, action we took to lower mortgage rates would be augmented or amplified in the economy itself. Having said that, I do look forward to a vigorous debate in January on some of the issues that have been latent in what many of you have said.  I do think the question of efficacy is a serious one.  I honestly don’t understand the inflation concern.  So I’d be interested in hearing more about that in January. With respect to specific language, for the same reasons stated by Betsy, I wouldn’t favor a change in paragraph 4 right now.  Get our communications a little bit straighter.  On paragraph 5, I’m sympathetic to the point Narayana made and for an additional reason, Mr. Chairman.  When we do change the language, I think people ask themselves, “What do we think has changed in the world.”  I don’t assess the risks from Europe any greater now than I did at the last meeting.  I assessed them quite high at the last meeting, but no greater right now, and so if someone were to infer from this that somehow there’s some greater concern we have, that wouldn’t be quite reflective at least of my own view.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Tarullo expresses his favor for more accommodation and his inclination toward paragraph 3 of Alternative A. However, he states that he will not advocate for that paragraph for two reasons. This indicates that there is disagreement or contention within his own views.


Passage number 179.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of a polite expression of gratitude and a mention of Governor Raskin, which does not imply any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 180.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Before I turn to my preference for policy options, I note some discomfort in the way the labor market is characterized in each of the three policy alternatives.  Even in Alternatives A and B, the wording is that indicators point to some improvement in overall labor market conditions, and that is too strong.  As I said in my earlier statement, although I am encouraged by the decline in the unemployment rate, I think it may be temporary, and I am not particularly impressed with the direction of other labor market indicators.  I share some of President Kocherlakota’s concerns about an undue focus on the unemployment rate to the detriment of other labor market indicators and look forward to further discussions in this area. I will turn now to my policy preferences.  Over the past year, observing the sluggish pace of recovery and the disappointing progress we are making toward fulfilling our statutory mandate, I have wondered whether the problem is that monetary policy is currently powerless to address the weaknesses in the labor market or whether we have just been setting monetary policy too tight, either because we underestimated how much monetary stimulus was needed this year or because we are being overly cautious with our nontraditional tools. Regarding the first point, it seems to me that monetary policy surely is not as powerful as it has been in the past.  While I have confidence in our ability to affect longer-term interest rates, the inability of already very low rates to stimulate housing demand suggests this usually important transmission channel depends on factors that monetary policy is not equipped to address.  Monetary policy cannot, for example, address the various obstacles and frictions that are limiting access to mortgage credit among creditworthy borrowers to refinancing, facilitate deeds in lieu and short sales when remaining in the property is not viable, or improve the incentives of mortgage servicers.  Around this table, we have not been able to directly address the ongoing problems in the U.S. housing market, which continues to impede our economic recovery.  But this doesn’t mean that monetary policy is completely powerless.  For me, this has been one of the fundamental challenges I have struggled with during my time on this Committee. It occurred to me last night that monetary policy transmission might be analogous to the problem of the plumbing of the kitchen sink.  When you look into your sink in the morning and see that the remnants of last night’s dinner have adhered to the drain, do you roll up your sleeves and pull out the spaghetti and pieces of garlic bread, or do you blast the water from the faucet harder to force it all down.  [Laughter]  The critics of more monetary policy accommodation are probably people who don’t advocate the water-blast-from-above approach, but believe the clogging culprits need to be removed first, one at a time, and, they might add, not by them.  [Laughter]  The advocates of more monetary policy accommodation believe one big blast from the water faucet might just do the trick, and if that blast is powerful enough, it will sweep away all of the stubborn debris clinging to the sides. What we have learned since the crisis began is that it is pretty challenging to pull out all of the flotsam and jetsam from the drain.  You think you’ve got it all, and, lo and behold, it is not just spaghetti and scraps of garlic bread, but also lettuce and coffee grinds.  You may think it is just last night’s feast, but when you are pulling it all out, you realize it is also the debris of dinners past.  Maybe the blast of water or several repeated blasts in succession could do the trick instead.  This is a homespun way of saying that there is a considerable amount of evidence that we may be setting monetary policy too tight as we rely on others to clear the impediments to growth. For instance, the simple policy rule prescriptions in the Tealbook are concluding that, unconstrained, we should lower the fed funds rate a couple of percentage points, and the optimal policy prescriptions are showing something similar.  Moreover, these simple prescriptions are for interest rates that have their usual stimulative effects on the economy.  In the current environment, when some transmission channels are clogged, you could argue that we should be doing even more than these exercises imply. I am becoming persuaded that we need to be moving monetary policy in a more accommodative direction in order to make more rapid progress in meeting our statutory mandate.  In other words, we need to turn up the water stream.  Even if we can’t get all conceivable benefits of the traditional transmission channels, further expansionary monetary policy could still have a positive effect on equity prices and household wealth.  Lower interest rates might stimulate business investment, and dollar depreciation would tend to increase the competitiveness of domestically produced goods and services. For this meeting, I support Alternative B.  It remains uncertain how much progress fiscal policy makers and housing policy makers are making in clearing the drain.  But the pace of these efforts may be increasing.  We need additional information to get a better sense of if and when we should turn up the water again.  I am also concerned that a move from us that we haven’t clearly telegraphed and explained might be interpreted by markets as a sign that we think the situation in Europe is, well, going down the drain—a signal we should not send right now.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Ms. Raskin expresses discomfort with the characterization of the labor market in the policy alternatives and disagrees with the focus on the unemployment rate. She also discusses the disagreement between advocates of more monetary policy accommodation and those who believe the clogging culprits need to be removed first.


Passage number 181.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "Thank you" is a display of gratitude and does not express contention or disagreement.


Passage number 182.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.  I am willing to support Alternative B at this meeting.  I see the logic of taking a pause at this meeting.  One, we see an improvement in the recent data.  Two, we see a high level of uncertainty about U.S. fiscal policy and Europe.  And, three, we are contemplating some pretty significant steps in January where a policy action tied to those communication steps might make it more powerful. Barring a significant change in the outlook, however, I would be inclined to pursuing something along the lines of Alternative A at the January meeting.  In particular, a focus on purchasing agency mortgage-backed securities would be a good thing to do because it would provide greater support to the economy relative to the alternative of additional Treasury purchases.  Alternative A, paragraph 4, talks about extending the date to the end of 2014—that makes sense to me given where we are in terms of our own outlook.  It would be useful if we could get to the point where we could actually provide some guidance about what that date means.  Why did we decide on that date.  Because there were some unemployment–inflation parameters associated with that, and it would be good for us to communicate that. In terms of thinking about further policy steps, the fact that the upside risks to inflation appear to have subsided is very important.  Future policy steps are about benefits and costs, and, to the extent that inflation pressures really have come down significantly, the costs of future policy actions are very definitely diminished.  One of the earlier risks of large-scale asset purchases was that these purchases were going to lead somehow to a significant increase in inflation.  There is very little evidence of that, and that reduces the cost of future action. In terms of paragraph 5, President Kocherlakota has convinced me; don’t make the change.  When you are making a change, people really scrutinize it.  I don’t think that there is a compelling case that things are so different at this meeting that we really would need to change paragraph 5.  I would be inclined to keep it the way it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their willingness to support Alternative B at the meeting, but also discusses the logic of taking a pause and potentially pursuing Alternative A at the January meeting. They also agree with the rationale behind extending the date to the end of 2014 and discuss the diminished risks of inflation. Finally, they express agreement with keeping paragraph 5 unchanged. Overall, there is no indication of disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 183.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, everyone.  It’s 1:00.  What an incredibly efficient exercise, and very useful.  Thank you. Before talking about the statement, I want to follow up on comments by President Kocherlakota and Governor Raskin about the optimal control exercises.  If staff could take a look at two questions.  One is:  To what extent does the optimal control exercise take into account the nonstandard components of our policy.  The second is:  If we assume, for the sake of argument, that our channels through the housing sector, for example, are impeded, to what extent does that affect the calculation.  I think it would be useful to take a look at that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 184.
 MR. ENGLISH.  With regard to the first question you asked, those optimal control exercises take account of whatever is in the baseline, so they would take account of the effects of whatever LSAPs and MEP we have in the baseline.  They clearly don’t take account of anything in Alternative A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is merely explaining the limitations of the optimal control exercises and stating that they do not consider anything in Alternative A.


Passage number 185.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It would be useful to write that up, though, so that people understand exactly how that works.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests that writing about a particular subject would be helpful for people's understanding.


Passage number 186.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 187.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Because in some sense, the rate is also in the baseline—the past efforts of monetary policy, for example.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply presents a statement about the rate being included in the baseline and references the past efforts of monetary policy as an example. President Kocherlakota's viewpoint or opinion is not expressed in this particular sentence.


Passage number 188.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me try to clarify, as best I can, what I was trying to get at with my first point.  I certainly agreed with the way you summarized the second issue.  If you look at the LSAP-adjusted policy rule, as David Reifschneider did in the memo from the previous meeting, the implication would be that our level of accommodation is pretty close to being appropriate.  Whereas, if you look at the unconstrained optimal control exercise, we are far too tight right now—we should be buying an additional $3 trillion of assets over the next year.  I would like to have a better understanding of the gap between those two.  That was my question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 189.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We can discuss that further.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting to continue discussing a certain topic further.


Passage number 190.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Sure.  The short answer is that in the staff outlook the shocks that have hit the economy are more persistent than average.  To take account of that greater persistence of the headwinds that are hitting the economy, policy is easier than you might otherwise expect it to be.  But we can spell that out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents a clear explanation of the staff outlook and the reasoning behind policy decisions.


Passage number 191.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  One way to look at it would be to look at the optimal control results for a past period—for example, the Taylor rule based on 1987 to 1993 or something like that—to see if there is a systematic difference between the two approaches. Turning to the item at hand, there is a pretty broad consensus today for Alternative B, although, obviously, people have different nuances for sure.  I agree with that.  We have not seen much change in the outlook since the last meeting.  The economy does look a little better, clearly still not satisfactory, and we are still looking to see how some of the policies we put in place will play out.  More important, I am looking forward to this afternoon’s discussion to see if we can make improvements in our framework and in our communication.  If we can, that would make any given action that we would choose to take more effective and involve less uncertainty on the part of the public. We are better off pausing for today and waiting to see if we can develop a clearer communication framework for January.  My proposal would be to maintain Alternative B, not to change the mid-2013 language for today.  I think it would be more effective to make that change in the context of a more well-developed communications framework. On the suggestion of changing paragraph 5, three people have proposed that we retain the old language, that we go back to the November language.  Is there anybody who would prefer to make the change.  Is there anyone who opposes that change.  Who wants to speak.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation:
There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different approaches and seeking input from others, but there is no evident disagreement or argument.


Passage number 192.
 MR. FISHER.  Go back to the language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple instruction or request.


Passage number 193.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Going back.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The provided passage does not include any contention or disagreement. It only mentions President Rosengren without expressing any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 194.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Let me make the argument.  When I look at Brian’s charts, and I look at the FX swap rate even after what we did, it is higher than the last FOMC meeting.  If I look at spot LIBOR, it is higher than the last FOMC meeting.  If I look at European bank CDS, it is higher than the last meeting.  And if I look at the U.S. dollar–euro, it is higher than the last meeting. To President Kocherlakota’s point, the policy rules don’t give the distribution around inflation and unemployment.  If you had a very leptokurtic distribution around unemployment, if it’s a very fat tail so that there is a very high probability of a very severe outcome that you worry about, I don’t think you ignore that.  Therefore, I am not sure that taking finance out of paragraph 5 actually does make sense.  We can have this discussion later this afternoon, but financial stability does deserve to get attention, and it is separate from just looking at the mean path of inflation and unemployment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Rosengren expressing his views and concerns regarding various financial indicators.


Passage number 195.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions President Fisher without providing any context or details. Without any information or clues about any sort of disagreement or contention, it is not possible to determine whether there is any contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 196.
 MR. FISHER.  That is a good point, Mr. Chairman, but we do refer in paragraph 2 to strains in global financial markets.  And I would add my name as the fourth to leave paragraph 5 unchanged.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher agrees with the point made by the Chairman and suggests adding his name to support leaving paragraph 5 unchanged.


Passage number 197.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Anybody else.  [No response]  My vibes are that we are okay for making the change back to November, barring anybody else commenting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their own opinion and sensing that there is no opposition to their suggestion of changing back to November.


Passage number 198.
   VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I support that change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement expresses agreement and support for a change without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 199.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Why don’t we do that—let’s change paragraph 5, taking note of President Rosengren’s comments.  Let’s take paragraph 5 back to the original language.  Any other issues.  [No response]  If not, can we take a vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests making changes to paragraph 5 and asks for any other issues or objections before taking a vote. Since there is no response, it implies agreement or lack of disagreement among the participants.


Passage number 200.
 MS. DANKER.  Yes.  This vote is on Alternative B, the statement and the directive that were in the handout from Bill, with paragraph 5 language reverting to what was used in the November FOMC statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the subject of the vote, which is Alternative B.


Passage number 201.
 Chairman Bernanke Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes Governor Duke  Yes President Evans  No President Fisher  Yes President Kocherlakota Yes President Plosser  Yes Governor Raskin  Yes Governor Tarullo  Yes Governor Yellen  Yes   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  It’s about five after 1:00.  I believe lunch is ready.  Why don’t we reconvene at 1:35, in half an hour.  If people are still eating, we can begin the discussion over lunch.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is simply stating the agreement or support of each individual mentioned.


Passage number 202.
  [Lunch recess] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any statements or discussions that suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 203.
 MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman, you deserve a better birthday than you’ve had so far.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 204.
  [Laughter]  And in an attempt to contribute— MR. TARULLO.  We’re going to have cake.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The mention of "laughter" indicates a light and friendly atmosphere, while the statement "we're going to have cake" suggests that the speakers are in agreement and expressing a sense of celebration.


Passage number 205.
 MR. LACKER.  —to that end, I would like to suggest that the Federal Open Market Committee, both members and participants [laughter], not to mention the accompanying staff, sing you “Happy Birthday.”  With your pleasure.  Shall be begin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 206.
  [Singing and applause] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any statements or ideas that would indicate contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 207.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Little split between the hawks and doves there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Little split between the hawks and doves there" suggests that there is a disagreement between two groups or factions, the hawks and the doves. The use of the phrase "little split" implies that there is some disagreement or division between these groups, albeit not a significant one.


Passage number 208.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We recorded there were only four dissents.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The presence of laughter does not indicate disagreement, and the statement about there only being four dissents is a simple recording of facts.


Passage number 209.
  [Laughter] MR. FISHER.  It would become a YouTube sensation if it’s released.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply expressing a hypothetical scenario.


Passage number 210.
 MR. LACKER.  Now, isn’t that better, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is addressing someone as "Mr. Chairman," which suggests a respectful and collaborative tone.


Passage number 211.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I do actually feel much better now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing a personal opinion or feeling, indicating that the speaker is currently feeling better than before.


Passage number 212.
  [Laughter] VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Then it’s all worthwhile.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It includes laughter and expresses a sense of positive fulfillment, suggesting that the act or situation being referred to is valuable or fulfilling.


Passage number 213.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, President Lacker, I appreciate that.  I also want to thank Debbie Danker for the gluten-free carrot cake cupcake, which was very nice as well.  For the people recording this, we will just begin the meeting now.  [Laughter]  I’m informed by the faithful secretary that we did not take the vote to ratify open market operations, and since we want to keep Brian out of jail, all in favor.  [Chorus of ayes]  Without exception.  Thank you. We turn now to the last principal item on our agenda, our communications.  As you know, this is a very important topic.  During normal times, which we can all remember, market participants can draw on their long experience with the Fed to infer our policy actions and how we might respond to certain developments.  But currently, with rates close to zero and nonconventional policies in operation, and with unusual and diverse circumstances in the economy, communication is absolutely essential for effective policy, and so this is a very important session. Governor Yellen and her subcommittee worked hard to present a couple of proposals to you today.  First of all, I want to thank them for a lot of good work and for their consultation.  I’ll turn it over to Governor Yellen to introduce the topic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing gratitude and thanking various individuals before discussing an important topic.


Passage number 214.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Are there any questions for Spencer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude and then asking if there are any questions for Spencer.


Passage number 215.
 MR. FISHER.  Can I ask a governance question, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

The given passage does not include any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question inquiring about a governance matter.


Passage number 216.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Certainly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 217.
 MR. FISHER.  Assuming we get along the path here, and we decide to finalize this in January or at a subsequent meeting, is it done by a vote of the members or of the entire Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a question about the process of finalizing a decision, not expressing opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 218.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’m going to address that in just a second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is acknowledging the listener's question or concern and expressing their intention to address it shortly.


Passage number 219.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only includes a brief statement expressing gratitude, which does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 220.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions for Spencer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 221.
  [No response]  Well, let me talk a little bit about— MR. ROSENGREN.  Can I ask one other governance question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 222.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 223.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  If somebody didn’t agree with the statement and chose to dissent, are they then obligated to communicate what the Committee thought was right.  I want to understand what a dissent would potentially mean.  We’re going to do this every year.  Let’s say that somebody decides that they want a 0 percent inflation rate, and everybody else thinks 2 percent is the right inflation rate, but the person for the 0 percent doesn’t agree at the January meeting.  Is that person obligated to talk about what the Committee’s consensus viewpoint is.  It’s another governance question of how exactly this works at the beginning of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking a question to understand the process of dissent within a committee.


Passage number 224.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think the framework would be the context in which decisions and discussions would take place, but it would not prevent anyone from expressing his or her own view, and we could record dissenting views or dissenting arguments as appropriate. Let me address those governance issues that were just raised and add a little bit of substance while I’m at it.  There are two issues on the table.  The first one is this policy framework.  I apologize to Governor Duke for bringing this issue up once again.  She once said that she had heard it enough times already, but in fact, the FOMC has been discussing inflation objectives since the mid-1990s, and we’ve never come to a conclusion.  Some of the issues that troubled us considerably in the 1990s and early part of the 2000s are no longer big issues.  For example, a question that was often raised was:  Isn’t it better to have constructive ambiguity.  That is no longer quite as big an issue as it was 15 years ago.  The real issue that has always prevented consensus has been the very thorny question of how you reconcile a numerical objective for inflation with the dual mandate.  My sense is that everybody around the table understands, in principle, how that would work and how, in fact, it’s quite consistent with modern macroeconomics, but there are problems with communication as well as problems with wording and details.  What we’re trying to do today is see if we can come to a broad statement that will summarize our objectives and our policy approach for the public’s benefit and give some context to our discussions. By the very nature of this, it’s going to have to be a broad tent.  It’s going to have to be a statement that everybody can accept with at least a little discomfort probably, but I hope enough support that they can support the statement.  This will be very valuable.  I have supported this kind of approach for a long time.  It would help us in our communications in a lot of ways.  That being said, I view this as a quasi-constitutional type of discussion.  I don’t think it’s something we should do on a bare majority; I’m looking for a very broad consensus. What I propose to do on this issue is to hear everybody, just like Governor Yellen said, to try to get a sense of whether a consensus is possible or if there’s a modification of the statement for which a consensus is possible.  I do not anticipate making any decision today.  Instead, the subcommittee will take the commentary, then go back and see whether they can find something that everyone or virtually everyone can agree with.  If the answer is yes, we can consult over the intermeeting period and formally approve the statement in January. With respect to the interest rate projections, I have a somewhat different time frame.  As Governor Yellen suggested, it would be really useful for us if we’re going to do this to incorporate it into the January SEP.  The next quarterly projections are April 26−27, which is a long time from now.  It seems to me that agreeing on interest rate projections could be a very useful tool for us, particularly as we’re wrestling with the issue of these conditional dates and things of that sort.  I’m hopeful that we can come to a decision on that today.  I would propose at the end of the discussion to take a straw vote of all participants around the table and, if there are people who disagree, depending on the number and virulence of their opposition, we can take various measures—including recording their views in the minutes or, if necessary, making modifications. I have a couple of final words on the interest rate projections.  First, I remind everyone that we have been making these quarterly projections since 2007.  They have become an increasingly important part of our communication.  They are now the basis, for example, for my press conference opening statement after the projections are released, and I think the public is becoming much more comfortable with what they are and what they aren’t.  These projections are conditional on so-called appropriate monetary policy, and one of the main gaps that now remains is that the public is not informed as to what that means, and that’s an important problem.  As Governor Yellen said, transparency would be served by providing information on what we think the appropriate policy is, conditional on information we have today.  No one is arguing this should be a nonconditional commitment. The other observation I’d like to make is, consistent with what Governor Yellen said, that this is not the last thing we’re ever going to do in communications.  First of all, we could probably take additional steps in the context of the quarterly projections that would be useful, and a few ideas have surfaced; we should continue to talk about that.  But it’s also possible that we may want to take a much different approach, and that’s fine, but that’s something that’s certainly going to take some time.  In the interim, I hope that we can adopt this approach and then continue to work as a Committee and through our subcommittees toward alternative approaches if that, in fact, becomes desirable.  President Fisher, does that answer your question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 225.
 MR. FISHER.  Yes, sir.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude.


Passage number 226.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  With that, let’s have a go-round, and we’ll get people’s views on these two questions.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "let's have a go-round" suggests a discussion or exchange of views, but it does not indicate any disagreement or contention. The mention of President Kocherlakota does not provide enough information to determine if there is disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 227.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, Mr. Chairman.  You made reference to the first item being, in your view, a quasi-constitutional item.  Was that to distinguish it from the second item.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is questioning or challenging the chairman's view by asking for clarification and distinction between the first and second item.


Passage number 228.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I don’t think we need unanimity on the second item.  It’s an element of our communication, and in the same way that our statements involve communication decisions, it will be something that a majority could support.  The distinction I would make is that, unlike a policy statement where the Committee votes, this is something that appropriately concerns all participants, and I’d like to have a comfortable majority of participants supporting the approach.  We begin with President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses the author's opinion on the need for unanimity on the second item and their preference for a majority support.


Passage number 229.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply appears to be a polite expression of gratitude towards President Fisher.


Passage number 230.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude and acknowledges President Lacker.


Passage number 231.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple expression of gratitude from someone named President Williams.


Passage number 232.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage given.


Passage number 233.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am strongly in favor of both communications initiatives.  I was struck by the fact that I agreed with everything Governor Yellen and President Plosser said in their remarks about this.  I think I am going to repeat a little bit of that, but I’ll try not to repeat too much of it. Let me first add that I am extremely impressed with the magnificent—someone said masterful—job the subcommittee did in fashioning these proposals and finding what was an effective middle ground on difficult and contentious issues.  Based on this heroic effort and accomplishment, this “supersubcommittee” could make short work of solving our federal budget problems as well.  [Laughter]  Mr. Chairman, this is just an idea you might pass on to congressional leaders during one of your meetings. Over the past several years, we have taken many important steps to improve our communications and transparency.  At each step, we have had a healthy debate about the associated risks and benefits, and President Fisher’s comments reflect that healthy debate.  I come out on the other side of that.  Ex post, each of these steps has proved successful, and the hypothesized risks have not materialized.  The initiatives before us today are a natural continuation along this path.  Taken together, these two initiatives will be a major step forward in terms of transparency and accountability, and, importantly, should help our policy succeed in these challenging times. Providing interest rate projections will help align the public’s expectations with our own, and thereby improve the effectiveness of our policy actions.  Furthermore, as our forecasts for economic activity, inflation, and the funds rate evolve, the public will get a better picture of the state contingent nature of our policy reaction function.  As Spence mentioned, several other central banks have successfully implemented this approach, and their experience gives me comfort that the benefits far exceed the costs.  And I, too, am a big fan of the dots chart, and I am all for dot charts everywhere. Releasing a statement of our principles will also be highly valuable for the reasons that others have already said.  A consensus statement about our policy goals and strategy will help anchor inflation expectations while underscoring our firm commitment to both parts of the dual mandate.  It also promises to be a valuable tool for explaining the principles that guide our policy decisions.  I have long supported publishing an explicit numerical inflation objective, and this document achieves that. I have also written a number of research papers about the real world challenges policymakers face when natural rates—say the natural rate of unemployment—are unknown and vary over time.  So I have long been concerned about placing too much confidence in our ability to estimate natural rates with any precision.  The language in the statement addresses these concerns very effectively.  It acknowledges the uncertainty and describes the range of nonmonetary factors that help determine the maximum sustainable level of employment. Importantly, it also allows a separation between participants’ shorter-run assessments of maximum sustainable employment and their views of the longer-run level—a point that President Lacker just made.  This language provides ample room for Committee members to express their higher or lower views about the currently prevailing natural rate of unemployment.  For example, I, like the CBO and the Board staff, currently estimate that the natural rate of unemployment is somewhat higher than its longer-run value.  I have a minor suggestion that would further strengthen that distinction between our assessments of the prevailing level of natural rates and the longer-run values.  I would break into two the sentence that says, “The Committee considers a wide range of indicators in making these assessments, and information about Committee participants’ estimates of the longer-run,” et cetera, with the second sentence starting, “With information about Committee participants’ estimates.”  Basically, break that into two so that we are not linking the Committee’s shorter-term assessments with their longer-run estimates. I have a second minor wording suggestion to offer.  Paragraph 1 starts with, “The FOMC is strongly committed to fulfilling its statutory mandate.”  To me, the word “strongly” actually weakens this declaration.  It is like we are saying we are really, really, really committed.  [Laughter]  I would drop the word “strongly” from here.  Saying, “The FOMC is committed to fulfilling” is good, or you could say “firmly committed.” Finally, I do think that the principles statement should be reaffirmed each year in January.  The composition of the Committee changes.  Document details could change over time as more evidence and experience is accumulated on these issues.  In summary, I strongly support moving forward with both initiatives in January.  I do have one technical question, not that important right now, but would the idea be that the exhibit would be released prior to the Chairman’s press conference, like table 1.  Or would it come out when the minutes are released.  I assumed it would come out prior to the press conference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 234.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We haven’t finalized, but I assume that we would want to release this with the other projections that we’ll talk about in the press conference.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their assumption about the release of a project along with other projections discussed in a press conference.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 235.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, appreciate the work of the communications subcommittee on this issue.  I generally favor increased transparency, but I continue to harbor considerable doubts about whether this is the best way, or even a good way, to provide increased transparency with respect to the likely future path of policy.  I am referring to the SEP enhancements here. I tend to agree with many of the points raised by President Fisher on this matter in his memo to the Committee, and let me outline just a couple of my thoughts.  While the SEP is fine as far as it goes, when it comes to policy projections, it may be advisable for the Committee to provide a more detailed assessment of the state of the economy.  This could be done through a U.S. version of a quarterly inflation report as is done, for instance, in the United Kingdom.  Such a report would give a view of the many elements in the economy and the many factors that come into making a forecast of future economic conditions.  Such a forecast should be based upon the market perception of future policy at that juncture.  This is what other major central banks do.  It seems sensible to me.  I see this as an appropriate way to give a complete, technical assessment of the economy for public use at regular intervals.  I say technical assessment in the sense that you have a lot of data there, a lot of numbers on charts, as opposed to speeches and interviews that we do, which are more qualitative. One advantage of such an approach is that the Committee could describe the future path of policy on many dimensions, as opposed to only the funds rate path.  In particular, balance sheet policy could be described in full.  This seems particularly important during the next few years as the policy rate seems likely to remain near zero.  This is an important element of what we’re doing here, putting more emphasis back onto the funds rate just at the time when we can’t really do very much with the funds rate and we are looking for other policy levers to move.  That aspect of it is a bit counterproductive. One element of President Fisher’s memo is that the policy rate forecast, as envisioned, may not provide a reliable guide as to what the Committee will actually end up doing.  For the countries that have tried this type of policy projection approach, my understanding from the available literature is that the path of future short-term interest rates has been no more forecastable under the regime of releasing policy projections than it was under the regime of not releasing policy projections. This causes me to wonder about the efficacy of this effort.  We have a chart that we sometimes pass around in St. Louis.  It is a chart of the Riksbank policy path.  I should have brought it with me, but I didn’t, but I’ll tell you what it is.  It shows the actual policy path as it has moved, and it shows all of the projections at each date, which look like branches on a vine, because they are all going off at orthogonal directions from where the actual policy path went.  When you use data like that and then try to figure out whether this is really enhanced transparency about short-term interest rates in Sweden, the answer comes back from the econometrics that it hasn’t really enhanced or changed anything, because the policy path keeps changing in response to economic events, which is exactly what you would like it to do.  Given these considerations, my preference would be to consider this matter further before going ahead.  Again, I am not against transparency, I am just not sure that this is a good way to go about providing more transparency. On the statement of longer-run goals, I support this statement as written, and we should go ahead and adopt it at the January meeting.  This statement seems very much like the type of statement that might appear in Chairman Bernanke’s textbook, which I regard as very much reflective of the conventional wisdom or the mainstream view on these matters.  In this regard, I do not expect the statement to be particularly controversial.  I know that the Chairman has been working on adopting an appropriately flexible inflation targeting framework for some time, and I think the adoption of this statement of longer-run goals would be an important step toward establishing flexible inflation targeting in the U.S.  The U.S. is a laggard on this issue within the central banking community internationally. One of the questions is:  Should this be a living, breathing document.  I would take the constitutional view on this, which is that you would want to make changes only with the broadest possible support of the Committee.  I would do that only once a year and with very strong support, and change it only at that type of juncture and not be tinkering with it continually.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. Mr. Bullard expresses doubt about whether the proposed SEP enhancements are the best way to provide increased transparency. He disagrees with President Fisher's memo and argues that a more detailed assessment of the state of the economy, similar to the quarterly inflation report in the UK, would be a better approach. He also questions the efficacy of releasing policy projections, citing examples of other countries where the path of future short-term interest rates was not more forecastable under this regime. Overall, while Mr. Bullard is not against transparency, he expresses skepticism about the effectiveness of the proposed enhancements.


Passage number 236.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude by someone referred to as Governor Tarullo.


Passage number 237.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 238.
 MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement or introduction from Mr. Lacker.


Passage number 239.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot answer the question as there is no passage provided.


Passage number 240.
 MR. LACKER.  I want to clarify, in light of Governor Tarullo’s very thoughtful comments, my intentions.  I described the consistency of my interpretation with the draft.  I view it as intellectually dishonest for me to publicly claim that mine is the only interpretation.  I have talked in public about differences of views, and for me this provides a great framework for describing those differences of views.  I don’t want anyone to be left with the impression that my intention was to publicly claim interpretive hegemony.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show contention or disagreement. Mr. Lacker acknowledges that there can be different interpretations and he does not want to be seen as claiming interpretive hegemony.


Passage number 241.
 MR. TARULLO.  Never thought it was, Jeff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Never thought it was, Jeff" indicates agreement or support.


Passage number 242.
 MR. LACKER.  Great.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any statements or views that could result in contention or disagreement. It only expresses gratitude towards someone named Mr. Lacker.


Passage number 243.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information in the passage to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 244.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I would similarly like to thank my subcommittee colleagues for their great comments and the great work, and Spence, Loretta, and Andy for working so hard on this.  We probably have some more work ahead of us at some point on other issues. Let me start with the communication of the longer-run goals and the policy strategy.  I agree with so many things that President Plosser laid out.  It strikes me that this document describing our long-run goals and strategies offers me, certainly, but I think all of us, an opportunity to describe the policy loss function that we are thinking about, with the weights on it and how it works—what I was describing this morning.  This allows me that ability to do that.  We are going to have some disagreements, and it is not really the remit of this Committee to come down with exactly what the loss function is and what the weights are and all of that.  We will have to work through that. This document did have many compromises.  There was some language that I saw in the earlier document that I liked, but others didn’t.  There were some things that appeared at other times that others liked and I didn’t, and I compromised, and this is very useful.  It will serve us well, and we can all explain our views well with this. I was quite taken with President Lacker’s description of how he is thinking about this, and I agreed with virtually everything that you said.  The maximum employment concept is a difficult one.  If I understood it correctly, I do agree that we will use a model framework.  We will use different models perhaps, and Charlie was saying the same thing when he was talking about New Keynesian models.  I believe that we will bring the discipline of different economic frameworks to bear on what we mean by this concept, and if there are ambiguities at the outset, further research will help us narrow our differences or sharpen the way that we talk with each other.  We will bring the research community into this, too.  I can imagine some conferences that will spring out of this:  Did this really help the FOMC.  The Romers, undoubtedly, will want to have a part in that.  They read the minutes before we do.  Well, I mean—[laughter]—quite quickly. I am optimistic.  I have heard a number of good things here, and the annual adoption process of this will be something that will sharpen our focus after we do this one or two years.  As we run into certain issues, that will naturally lead to a further assessment of how it works and what can be clarified, and will provide scrutiny.  I fully support the way it is crafted now. On the policy projections, these will be very helpful.  As President Plosser said, appropriate policy, we have known, is highly artful.  If you worked in the Federal Reserve System before you came to this table, you somehow grew accustomed to the wisdom of what Mike Prell or Don Kohn or people before that dreamed up:  We can all have different policy assumptions, and they are appropriate.  But the public doesn’t understand it, and when we talk about it, it is very difficult.  Publishing the funds rate projections would be highly transparent and helpful.  It could help us with troublesome language like our mid-2013 language in the FOMC statement.  The choice has been made here, and it’s a very effective presentation of the data. The last thing, other than to simply say I support all of this, would be on this issue about the funds rate projections and the reliability of those.  This is a very broad point and is what is missing from this discussion:  Any time you put out a forecast, things happen between now and when the forecast period occurs.  And there are forecast errors—the history of forecasting is that inflation is very difficult to forecast.  The Minneapolis Fed has highly cited work on that.  It is hard to beat a random walk.  Think about it this way:  Let’s say we adopted a simple rule and it had a Taylor-form structure to it, but we did not actually have our funds rate projections.  If we gave enough information in the SEPs, then we could run those output gaps and inflation deviations through the simple Taylor rule and come up with everybody’s implied policy projections.  It would be an automatic algorithm.  This is inevitable if you go a number of different ways.  For me the issue is:  How do we sharpen it to get the best type of projections out there in front of people.  The issue is not:  Don’t do it.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses agreement with multiple points made by other individuals and expresses support for the ideas and proposals being discussed.


Passage number 245.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Unless people are eager to get to the airport, we could take 15 minutes for coffee.  Is that okay.  No objections.  All right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement present in the passage. The statement "No objections. All right" indicates that everyone is in agreement with taking 15 minutes for coffee.


Passage number 246.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let’s recommence, and we will turn to President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply implies a break and a resumption of a discussion.


Passage number 247.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, want to thank the subcommittee for this very thoughtful work.  I support a set of principles that describe our longer-run goals and policy strategy.  I would like to see the statement, however, acknowledge the interactions among financial stability, monetary policy, and our objectives, and note that the current draft makes no reference to financial stability.  Given our discussions, including today during the policy go-round, where we make explicit references to financial markets and financial developments, it would seem appropriate to me for any statement to include our consideration of financial stability.  I agree that this statement should be affirmed at the annual organizational meeting each January, and while I believe it should be a living and breathing document, it seems to me the benefits of providing the statement would diminish rapidly if we were to change it every year to any significant extent. Regarding the enhancements to the SEP, I remain open to making greater use of these projections to provide additional information about our thinking.  However, like some others, I have some reservations about providing policy projections to the extent that they unintentionally hinder our communication, both within the Committee and with the public.  In our public communication, I assume FOMC participants will discuss their preferred policy path in the same way they now discuss their outlook for growth and inflation, which makes me ask, would doing so lead participants to become more locked into a particular policy stance prior to each meeting.  Moreover, it seems likely that the public could focus more on the policy projections and not on how the projections changed in response to changes in conditions and forecasts, thereby reducing the value of providing these projections in the SEP. Looking at communications within the Committee, likewise, I am concerned that participants may become more locked into a particular policy stance prior to each meeting, thereby limiting the value of our discussions and making it even harder to reach consensus on our policy decision.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no significant contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. George is expressing her support for a set of principles and suggesting some additions to the statement. She also expresses openness to using policy projections but raises concerns about how they could impact communication and consensus within the committee.


Passage number 248.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward expression of gratitude.


Passage number 249.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Before providing my thoughts on the proposal, I also want to add my thanks to the subcommittee and the supporting staff for all of their work on enhancing our communications.  They had a tough job, and they carried it out very well. In broad terms, I support both of the subcommittee’s proposals for improving the communications of the Committee.  I believe that each proposal represents a logical next step in our longer-term efforts to enhance transparency, accountability, and the effectiveness of monetary policy.  By combining the statement of our longer-run goals and policy strategies with the extension of the SEP, we would be providing the public with much more information about our flexible inflation targeting framework.  And over time, the implementation of the proposals would give the public a better sense of the Committee’s policy reaction function. With that broad overview, I will answer the specific questions posed to us, starting with incorporating our policy projections into the SEP.  In general terms, the approach the subcommittee has recommended seems reasonable.  Providing our funds rate projection will give the public important information on the Committee’s reaction function.  Describing the reaction function in simple words would be very difficult, especially given the diversity of views on the Committee.  Publishing our policy projections is an easier way of conveying much of the same essential information. Certainly, I recognize that there are risks to publishing interest rate forecasts.  For example, we will have to be sure to explain that the projections are conditional on the state of the economy, and, therefore, subject to change.  But other central banks, as has been noted, have been able to address these kinds of challenges and use interest rate projections to improve their communications, and we should be able to achieve the same. Once we start to publish our policy projections, though, there is no turning back.  While the Committee’s approach seems reasonable, I didn’t see a reason to rush.  I would have preferred to take a little more time to be sure that our communications approach in the SEP is effective and doesn’t yield some unintended consequences.  More specifically, to be sure that the fed funds rate projections are helpful, I would have liked to have seen how they evolve as we update our economic forecasts in coming months.  We have only had one trial run. I was going to suggest that we take a little time to consider also some of the different approaches that we might use to present the forecast in charts.  While the proposed figure 2 is useful in some important ways, it is very specific to the circumstances we face today.  Once we have moved closer to a normal policy stance, we will have to decide what figure we will replace it with.  I had preferred to see us think through some of these things before moving ahead, but I can support moving ahead in January with the provision that we continue to smooth out any of the rough spots that develop along the way. Regarding other potential enhancements, between now and January, I would suggest that we spend some time looking at whether we want to refer directly to the SEP information in our forward guidance and our statement.  Policy Alternative A in the Tealbook provided the specific example of the use of our forecast and forward guidance.  In principle, the use of the SEP information is going to be helpful in forward guidance, and it could improve our communications.  But in practice, if we use the SEP information in forward guidance, we might want to adjust the schedule that we present our SEP, because right now three of the SEP meetings occur in the first half of the year, and we only have one SEP meeting in the second half of the year.  It would be useful to take a look at this practical issue and the potential merits of using the SEP information in our forward guidance. Turning to the statement regarding the Committee’s longer-run goals and policy strategy, I strongly support the draft statement.  As you know, I have for some time favored the adoption of an explicit numerical goal for inflation.  To me, that is the most important achievement of the statement.  But I also see the value in clearly indicating that we place equal weight on our dual long-run goals of price stability and maximum employment, and in explaining why one goal has a more precise numerical objective than the other.  The statement does a good job of describing our broad strategy for achieving the goals over time. Finally, I view the statement as a broad set of principles that guide the conduct of monetary policy.  Because it focuses on principles the bar for changes should be high and the statement shouldn’t need frequent adjustments.  That said, it is certainly possible that the need for adjustments could arise occasionally over time, so I do support a plan to reaffirm the statement at our annual organizational meeting in January.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Ms. Pianalto, expresses support for the proposals and suggestions for improvement, but does not argue or disagree with any specific points.


Passage number 250.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Thank you. President Lockhart" does not include any contradictory or conflicting ideas. It is a simple expression of gratitude towards President Lockhart.


Passage number 251.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, want to thank the subcommittee.  I know this was hard work, I could tell that in Charlie Plosser’s voice on the phone.  [Laughter] I will respond to the questions as presented.  First, regarding the enhancement to the SEP, I support the subcommittee’s recommendation and favor implementing it with the January SEP.  I also support considering the inclusion of a question about balance sheet assumptions in the SEP questionnaire and summarizing responses as part of the narrative.  The staff assumptions about the balance sheet path seem like a reasonable benchmark on which to build that narrative.  Down the road, however, this could be somewhat challenging.  I see a difference between publishing the very familiar and relatively simple federal funds rate information, and trying to explain participants’ various views on the balance sheet with all of the different exit scenarios and preferences that we will be considering at some stage, as well as other influences on the balance sheet—for example, use of the swap line.  I see that as conceivably a bit more challenging. But in general, I support considering further enhancements noted by the subcommittee.  It could be especially useful to provide information about the linkages between participants’ policy projections and their economic forecasts.  I am less convinced, however, that information or commentary about the participants’ sense of the balance of risks around policy projections would be all that useful. President Fisher has offered some useful cautionary points.  I would like to make a couple of counterarguments.  I am not so concerned about a succession of quarterly forecasts that include policy forecasts putting pressure on the Committee to stick to prior forecasts or risk disappointing markets.  I don’t believe market participants will fixate on past statements unless there is a stark difference from one to the next.  I think market participants understand that we are constantly reappraising the path of the economy and reoptimizing appropriate policy.  Also, markets understand that response to shocks and unexpected developments is part of policymaking.  The markets will see the policy forecasts as useful information but understand them for what they are.  Most market participants understand that the composition of the Committee will change and can factor that into their processing of the information. Turning to the statement of longer-run goals and policy strategy, I support the adoption of the statement drafted by the subcommittee.  Like many, I had some small nits to pick.  I conveyed those in a detailed memo a week ago Monday, so I am not going to repeat them here.  I am in favor of treating the statement as a living, breathing document, to be reaffirmed at the annual organizational meeting in January, although I agree with President George and others that in all likelihood, as a statement of guiding principles, we should not be adjusting it frequently.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any signs of contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses support for various recommendations and suggestions made by the subcommittee.


Passage number 252.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It includes a statement of gratitude towards someone, President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 253.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. President Rosengren is simply expressing gratitude.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 254.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just have one comment.  This morning some argued that financial problems should make us less willing to ease, because they didn’t think it would have much of an impact.  Others argued that financial problems should make us more willing to ease, because we should offset the problems.  Either way, if financial market conditions impact the degree of accommodation that we are going to choose, then we should acknowledge it.  This is to be transparent publicly.  I would prefer financial stability be included, like it was in the earlier draft.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The author mentions that some argued that financial problems should make us less willing to ease, while others argued that financial problems should make us more willing to ease. This shows a difference in opinion and a disagreement on the appropriate approach to dealing with financial problems.


Passage number 255.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Otherwise, you are okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is assertive and straightforward.


Passage number 256.
   MR. ROSENGREN.  Otherwise, I am okay with everything else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 257.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The phrase "Vice Chairman" is simply stating a title or position.


Passage number 258.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I want to thank the subcommittee.  This is very difficult, and you made a tremendous amount of progress.  I support the principles of providing the policy projections in the SEP.  However, the information provided by these projections would be even more valuable if it were possible to associate each FOMC participants’ projected policy rate with the projected policy paths for output growth, unemployment, and inflation. While the problem of unconnected information about the participants’ path of inflation and real activity is already an issue in the current format of the SEP, when you include the policy projections on top of that, it is just going to exacerbate the problem.  In particular, under the current format, it would be unclear why people are outliers in terms of their policy projections.  Is it because they have different views on inflation or real activity.  Or do they have different views in terms of the Fed’s appropriate reaction function. Now, you could address this in a number of ways; let me just outline two alternatives.  One alternative, which is the more difficult one, is to change what we mean by central tendency projections, so that the central tendency is described across all of the variables of the forecast jointly rather than each variable individually.  That is going to be very difficult, because you are going to have to figure out how that methodology works, and how you weight this year’s forecast, next year’s forecast, and the following year’s forecast. If that’s not acceptable or possible, another alternative, which is much more straightforward, is to publish each participant’s forecast without attribution.  There would be 17 different forecasts identified anonymously for real GDP, the unemployment rate, inflation, and the federal funds rate, or 16 if the Chairman chose to be excluded.  I would suggest that we should actually take a straw vote on this to see if there is support for this.  I would probably group the 17 into two groups—voters versus nonvoters—because it is relevant to market participants where the outliers lie.  That would even provide more information, but that is not essential to this proposal. In terms of the balance sheet, I certainly support inclusion of the question:  Do respondents differ materially from the Tealbook.  With respect to publication starting in January, I support that.  But my view is that the ultimate objective should be along the lines of what President Kocherlakota proposed, that we really should be trying to, at the end of the day, work for a Committee view, rather than a collection of individual views.  That is what our longer-term goal should be. In terms of the statement, I can support the draft statement as it currently reads.  There are a few little changes that I would make.  In paragraph 3, I would prefer the inflation objective to be 2 percent “over time,” as opposed to “over the longer run.”  That is actually what you are really trying to achieve—to have inflation average 2 percent over time. Paragraph 5 is a bit vague right now, and that is part of the big-tent problem.  I certainly would be open to exploring if there is a way to make it less vague over time.  Wherever we end up, though, with paragraph 5, I think the Chairman is going to have to take the lead in explaining what he thinks paragraph 5 means.  You have to take paragraph 5, and then explain what flexible inflation targeting means in terms of where you are.  If the unemployment rate is high and the inflation rate is high, you are probably going to think differently about things than if the unemployment rate is high and the inflation rate is low.  It would be very useful to the Chairman to run through a few examples to take this very abstract paragraph 5 and give it a sense of how the Committee is likely to think about it. As far as the living, breathing will, it is fine to reaffirm the document each generation.  But like the consensus view around the table, I view this as constitutional, and so I would be fixing the bar pretty high for making changes.  I don’t think the statement should be up for a vote where we make little language adjustments each year.  There have to be real, substantive reasons to make a change to the statement.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing support for certain ideas and proposals, and suggesting ways to improve the current format of the SEP and the statement.


Passage number 259.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Thank you. Governor Duke" simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Duke, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 260.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would also like to acknowledge the work of the subcommittee.  This is a difficult task, and I recognize that dealing with me was a big part of the difficulty.  [Laughter] I would like to start at the statement of longer-run goals and policy strategy.  With the addition of the paragraph on employment that President Lacker would not have written, I can accept the statement.  And I agree that if it’s adopted, it should be a living, breathing document, subject to revision, but that is with recognition of the effort that it took to wrestle this beast to the ground the first time.  [Laughter]  I will not object to its adoption, not in a straw poll, not in an official vote, and not in a speech.  That doesn’t mean, however, that I think it is a great idea.  I still don’t see that it adds real clarity to the public understanding of our framework.  It will be viewed, for all the intricate language of the compromise, as an inflation target at about the level the public thought it would be. The subcommittee has carefully drafted this statement to eliminate most objections, including mine.  And as heroic as that effort has been, in doing so, I fear they have created a document that is subject to varying interpretations, both in this room and on the outside.  And I agree with Governor Tarullo that agreement on the statement doesn’t necessarily equate to agreement on principles.  So if I don’t think it adds information, I do think that it has the potential to stir up political heat on all sides.  But as I said, I won’t object. As to the inclusion of the fed funds projections in the SEP, I have similar feelings.  I don’t object to their inclusion.  They will confirm, for all to see, that there is definitely a range of views about the appropriate path of the fed funds rate, and they will provide some clarity about the degree of that variation.  But for those who think that publishing these forecasts might signal that rates will be low for a long time, what I see from the sample actually goes in the other direction.  Moreover, I think they will limit the effectiveness of any potential statement, such as the one that was offered in option A.  It is hard to make a credible statement that the Committee now anticipates that economic conditions are likely to warrant this exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate at least through the end of 2014, when in fact only four respondents expected the first increase to come later than 2014.  Similarly, the projections for unemployment and inflation in those time frames may not line up.  As a matter of fact, they did not line up between the language in option A and the sample in the December 2 memo.  I am all for transparency in communication.  But as we add new information, it becomes nearly impossible to take it back, even if it no longer conveys the message that we want to send. The additional attention to the SEP that has been achieved in the press conferences is a positive step.  But I would caution that as we add more communication devices, such as the statements on exit and long-run strategy, and as we add more information to the SEP and to the meeting statement, that we need to pay attention to the consistency of the message across all of these Committee communications, or we will confuse the public or, worse, lose the credibility of those communications.  It is bad enough when we create cacophony as we each speak in our individual capacities about our different viewpoints.  It will be an even bigger problem if our Committee communications themselves send conflicting signals.  Thus, depending on the contour of the SEP projections that we publish, I can envision scenarios where we might be limited in the forward guidance that we can credibly include in the meeting statement. I would urge caution, as President Pianalto and President Kocherlakota have suggested, that before we move forward with publishing everyone’s individual projections, we also look at the potential for crafting a Committee projection.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement with the idea of including the fed funds projections in the statement, stating that it may limit the effectiveness of the statement and may not line up with projections for unemployment and inflation. The speaker also expresses concern about the consistency and credibility of Committee communications if conflicting signals are sent.


Passage number 261.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Raskin.


Passage number 262.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First, let me say that I share many of the concerns expressed on this draft.  I am particularly moved by the expressions of concern about how interpreting the strategies set out in the text of this draft could cause us to perform less well on one mandate than on the other. I will try to address this risk first before turning to the broader rationale for supporting this draft.  To restate Governor Tarullo’s concerns, as well as the concerns of others, as a question:  Does this statement urge us to continue on a path where we state allegiance to the full mandate but underperform on the employment side.  In short, my anticipation is that the interpretation of the statement could have this result, but the existence of the statement alone should not.  Whether there is a statement or not, as a Committee we don’t want to adopt a policy thinking that it permits us to act as though we are much more opposed to inflation being modestly above our target than to inflation being a similar amount below our target, or that it permits us to favor parts of the statutory mandate to the detriment of other parts.  In other words, we should not adopt a statement that provides a fig leaf for us to act contrary to our statutory mandate.  There is some risk embedded in the statement if we use it as an excuse to not act to achieve our statutory mandate.  I am sensitive to this risk.  But this is a risk that exists regardless of whether or not we adopt the statement.  These are the debates around this table, and statement or no statement, they are going to continue to exist.  As long as we have a statutory mandate, we are going to be interpreting it and reinterpreting it. The reason to adopt this draft is to provide more transparency to the American public on the Committee’s monetary policy goals.  The value of transparency, as I see it, is to improve accountability by spelling out how monetary policy is set to achieve our statutory goals.  In a democratic society, public institutions must be accountable for their decisions.  We say we need to be independent.  But if we want to ensure that monetary policy is well insulated from short-term political pressures, then we need to do everything we can to help the public understand the rationale for our policy decisions.  In effect, we can’t make arbitrary choices about whether to provide or withhold such information.  Rather, in order to sustain the public’s confidence, we should strive to be as transparent as possible in our policy communications. Of course, we should aim for clarity as well.  It would be terrific if we could gain consensus about a loss function, but it seems clear that such initiatives will require substantial time for development and consultation with the Committee.  Thus, as Governor Yellen noted in her opening remarks, rather than letting the best become the enemy of the good, it seems very sensible to move ahead with publishing policy projections starting in January, with the understanding that the subcommittee will be exploring other possible SEP enhancements in coming months. To sum up, the first principle in the statement is not just boilerplate.  In particular, while the Chairman has frequently expressed a commitment to transparency in his public communications, I am not aware that the Committee has ever done so in any formal statement.   Moreover, it seems inadvisable for the strength of that commitment to depend solely on the Chairman, as though we would be open to the possibility of reverting to a culture of opacity and secrecy sometime down the road.  Instead, the entire Committee has before it a historic opportunity to express a commitment to strive for the highest degree of clarity and transparency in the monetary policy communications that are relevant to our country.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of the speaker expressing their concerns and opinions about a draft statement and emphasizing the importance of transparency in monetary policy communications.


Passage number 263.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Very good conversation and discussion.   On the policy statement, we do appear to be pretty close.  We have quite broad agreement, but, as I said, the subcommittee ought to take the comments that were made today and see if there are any improvements or changes that need to be made and to consult with the Committee. Some practical issues were raised.  In particular, Governor Tarullo raised the question of how best to bring this out into the public.  If anyone has any thoughts on that, either now or later, I would be very happy to hear them.  I suppose it is a possibility that if we could agree on something in the intermeeting period, I could make some kind of presentation or something before the January meeting, but I don’t want to promise or count on that.  Let’s move forward and see what kind of progress we can make.  Suggestions about how to introduce this most effectively would be welcome. On the issue of the rates, I will take a straw poll in a moment.  I do want to emphasize that, as Governor Yellen said, this is a work in progress.  This is not the last thing we will ever do.  I’m sure there is a lot that needs to be done within the context of the SEP, but also in moving forward toward even better communication devices. President Kocherlakota, I disagree with you in your characterization of this as individuals making policy.  By the same token, we are all setting our own inflation targets, because we all give our long-run inflation value in the SEP.  This is, as everyone understands, a survey of current views, and given that appropriate policy is assumed for the projections, it seems complementary to the survey to have that information.  But while I share some of the concerns about the practicality of bringing 17 people together in a collective forecast, in principle it is the right way to go, and I agree with you and President Bullard that we should investigate that very seriously and move in that direction over time.  Based on experience, it is not going to happen in the next six weeks.  It’s something we need to work toward over time. I do think we can preserve the distinction between commitments made by the Committee and those made by individuals.  For example, it would be possible for the Committee collectively to decide to make an interest rate commitment that would differ from the sum of all of the individual projections and to state that officially in the statements, and so on.  I recognize that is not completely straightforward, but I think that with some explanation it would be workable.  Let me, again, assure you that we will continue to look for ways to improve our communication. While it would be nice to do more work and more experimentation, there is considerable value to putting this out soon.  I would like to propose, as the subcommittee has suggested, that we put the rate projections out in the January round.  I am going to take a straw vote of the Committee participants.  I will ask for yes, no, and abstentions.  All those in favor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and seeking input and suggestions on how to proceed.


Passage number 264.
 MR. FISHER.  Of both.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit statements or indications of contention or disagreement between two or more parties. It simply states that the topic being discussed (or potentially asked about) pertains to both Mr. Fisher and something else. Without further context or information, it is not possible to determine any disagreement or contention within the passage.


Passage number 265.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  In favor.  One, two, three, four, five, six.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the given passage as there is no specific information or context provided. The passage only consists of a list of numbers without any accompanying statements or arguments.


Passage number 266.
   MR. TARULLO.  What are we voting on here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question.


Passage number 267.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We are voting on the rate projections.  Seven, 8, 9, 10, 11.  Against.  No.  Three, four.  Abstentions.  Are you abstaining, Betsy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply describing a voting process and asking a specific person if they are abstaining.


Passage number 268.
 MS. DUKE.  Yes.  My preference would be not to, but I don’t object to doing them, as I said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker states their preference to not do something but also acknowledges that they are not opposed to doing it. There is no evident disagreement or contention in this statement.


Passage number 269.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s an abstention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The phrase "That's an abstention" does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states that someone is abstaining from a decision or action.


Passage number 270.
 MS. DUKE.  That’s an abstention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "That's an abstention" does not indicate any disagreement or argument. It simply acknowledges and confirms the act of abstaining from a vote or decision.


Passage number 271.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The debate will be reflected in the minutes and the transcripts, and we should continue this conversation as we go forward and try to find better ways.  Let me end on the one thing that everybody around the table agreed on, which was that the subcommittee has done excellent work.  We appreciate it.  The penalty for good work is they may be asked to do more work.  [Laughter]  Again, thank you for that.  Any other issues.  [No response]  Two minor things.  First, we did ratify everything.  Second, I need to officially announce that the next meeting is January 24 and 25.  Thank you all very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 272.
 MS. DUKE.  Could I go back to the straw vote and vote present.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Ms. Duke is simply asking if she can change her vote to "present" during a straw vote.


