Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMay 18, 1981A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in theoffices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington,D. C., on Monday, May 18, 1981 at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker 1/, ChairmanMr. Solomon, Vice ChairmanMr. BoehneMr. BoykinMr. CorriganMr. GramleyMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. SchultzMrs. TeetersMr. WallichMessrs. Balles, Black, Ford and Winn, Alternate Members ofthe Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roos, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff DirectorMr. Altmann, SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Oltman, Deputy General CounselMr. Mannion, Assistant General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMessrs. Burns, Danforth, Ettin, Keir, Prell, Scheld,Truman, and Zeisel, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, SystemOpen Market AccountMr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations, SystemOpen Market Account1/ Left the meeting following the action to approve the minutes and returnedprior to the action to ratify System open market transactions in Govern-ment securities, agency obligations,and bankers acceptances.5/18/81Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Associate Director, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMr. Lindsey, Assistant Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat,Board of GovernorsMr. Doyle, First Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of ChicagoMessrs. Balbach, J. Davis, Fousek, Koch, and ParthemosSenior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banksof St. Louis, Cleveland, New York, Atlanta,and Richmond, respectivelyMessrs. Bisignano, Cacy, Fieleke, Sandberg, and Syron,Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of SanFrancisco, Kansas City, Boston, New York, andBoston, respectivelyMr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply lists the attendees of a meeting.


Passage number 2.
 Lang, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank ofPhiladelphia-2 -Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofMay 18, 1981CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The meeting can come to order and we canapprove the minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a neutral statement indicating the beginning of a meeting and the approval of minutes.


Passage number 3.
MR. SCHULTZ. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The phrase "So moved" is a phrase commonly used in meetings or discussions to indicate agreement or support for a particular motion. It does not signify any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 4.
MS. TEETERS. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 5.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, the minutes areapproved. I want to propose a change in the order [of the agenda]this morning. I'm going to have to leave at about 10:00 a.m. forabout 45 minutes to an hour, unfortunately, so I want to start offwith the business discussion. I've had appointments with thePresident on and off and he came up with one this morning and Idecided I'd better grab it while I can get it. You can go back to dothe reports on foreign currency and domestic operations and so forthat that point. And then I can be back for Mr. Axilrod's presentation,hopefully. So, why don't we start off with you, Mr. Kichline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply proposing a change in the order of the agenda due to a personal appointment they must attend.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 6.
MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the use of the phrase "see Appendix," which suggests that the statement being referred to may be in conflict with another viewpoint or argument presented in the appendix.


Passage number 7.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have a situation continuing whereforecasted downturns by a lot of people haven't materialized. I guesswe ought to focus on how strong we think things are at the moment inthe face of historically high interest rates. Who wants to comment.Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that forecasted downturns have not occurred and suggests focusing on the current strength of the situation. There is no indication of disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 8.
MR. BOEHNE. I'll start briefly. I've been spending a fairamount of time out in the Third District, and I find an unusual amountof diversity in terms of what people think about the economy. It'sall the way from the brink of disaster for some manufacturing firms tostrong business for health care, pharmaceuticals, and services. Onaverage I think the "go slow" is probably right, but my hunch is thatthe economy is probably going to be stronger than we think it is,although there is this diversity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any direct contention or disagreement among the individuals mentioned. It highlights the different perspectives and opinions on the economy, but there is no explicit disagreement or argument present.


Passage number 9.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How strong do we think it is. That's justit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple question and statement without any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 10.
MR. BOEHNE. Stronger than we think it is. Also, I find afair amount of support for a balanced budget out there rather than taxcuts. The supply side approach I don't think has reached thecountryside yet. I might just add that there seems to be a lot ofgoodwill toward the Fed as an inflation fighter. But despite someintellectual appreciation for what we're doing, the high and volatileinterest rates are beginning to reach the point where it hurts. And Ithink the gut is overpowering the intellect in this area. That's allI have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and observations, but there is no indication of a disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 11.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the specific text being provided.


Passage number 12.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I could ask JimKichline to indicate those areas where he thinks the first-quarter GNPwill be revised upward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unclear. The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It is a simple request for Jim Kichline's opinion or analysis.


Passage number 13.
5/18/81MR. KICHLINE. Inventories for one. The implied estimate wasvery low for March and the numbers have come in significantly higher.Business fixed investment we think could be revised up at least $5billion, as shipments were much stronger than their assumptions. Andin construction outlays, spending put in place was running higher thantheir assumptions. Personal consumption expenditures may be a littlehigher, given the upward revision in March [retail] sales, as may netexports, which is a major contributor here in terms of a low guessprior to the availability of the March data. So, it's pretty muchacross the board but, surprisingly, both inventories as well as fixedinvestment are very strong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply reporting data and observations.


Passage number 14.
MR. BLACK. What kind of percentage are you thinking it willchange to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply asks a question to gather information.


Passage number 15.
MR. KICHLINE. We think the first digit should be 8. It's aquestion of how much higher. We'd say 8 to 8-1/2 percent or somethinglike that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion or suggestion about what the first digit should be, without contradicting or opposing any other viewpoint.


Passage number 16.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's probably right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "I think that's probably right" does not suggest any disagreement or contention. It signifies agreement or alignment with the previously expressed idea.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 17.
MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, we are hearing much of what EdBoehne reflected. We feel that the economy is continuing fairlystrong. We really don't have any specific disagreement with theGreenbook forecast, but our fear is that the figures on both theeconomy and inflation will probably be revised upward. As for thecomments that we're receiving from our directors, bankers, andbusinessmen in the District, they are expressing concern over theplight of the small businessman with these continued high interestrates. They are expressing possibly some sense of frustration in thatthey really don't see any end in sight and they don't seem to have thefeeling that we're making very much progress.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Boykin, acknowledges that they don't have any specific disagreement with the Greenbook forecast, but they express their fear that the figures on the economy and inflation will probably be revised upward. This suggests a disagreement or differing opinion on the potential future revisions of the figures. Additionally, Mr. Boykin mentions receiving comments from directors, bankers, and businessmen in the district who express concern and frustration over the high interest rates and lack of progress. This further indicates a disagreement or difference in perspective between those expressing concern and frustration and those who may not feel the same way.


Passage number 18.
MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, if one looks at the current datacoming in, one can't see any sign of weakness in the economy. Andwith inventories as low as they are, the prospect of any major sharpdecline seems fairly remote. But at the same time, I'd simply cautionthat there hasn't been time yet for the data to reflect the impact ofwhat we've done in the last couple of weeks. We've had a major changein interest rates and that, I think, is going to show up in the monthsahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply cautioning that the current data may not yet reflect the impact of recent changes in interest rates.


Passage number 19.
 I'm not concerned about the economy running away from us atthe present level of rates, but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a little troublesome because we hadhigher levels of rates than this in the fourth quarter and we had an 8to 8-1/2 percent increase in the GNP immediately following.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses a lack of concern about the economy running away at the present level of rates, but mentions that higher rates were experienced in the previous quarter along with a significant increase in the GNP. However, there is no indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 20.
MR. MORRIS. Yes, but most of that [strength] was early inthe period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that most of the strength mentioned was early in the period. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 21.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Last month the bond market had over$5 billion of [new] corporate issues. At the time not only were bondrates high but it was a very disturbed market. Except for a couple oftrouble spots, there just seems to be enormous pressure for everybodyto go ahead and engage in high levels of economic activity and justcontent themselves with Henry Wallich's point that after taxesinterest rates are not that high. That seems to be everything I hearup here in the financial markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The mention of high bond rates and a disturbed market suggests that there may be disagreement or concern about engaging in high levels of economic activity. The phrase "except for a couple of trouble spots" further indicates that there may be differing opinions or conflicts about the current state of the market.


Passage number 22.
5/18/81MR. BOEHNE. Well, I didn't hear that in Pennsylvania, NewJersey, and Delaware. They may not be that sophisticated, but theythink these higher rates are hurting and hurting badly, especially thesmall and medium sized business firms.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Boehne mentions that he did not hear a certain statement in Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and Delaware, but it does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 23.
MR. SCHULTZ. That's where it is hurting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any suggestions of contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Schultz.


Passage number 24.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I'm unable to provide an answer without the passage. Can you please provide the text?


Passage number 25.
MR. BALLES. It's obvious that there are very strongcrosscurrents around the country. We see this in the West as well.The lumber industry, because of the housing industry, is flat on itsback. On the other hand, we see the opposite extreme in officebuilding construction, for example, which is [experiencing] real boomconditions in San Francisco, Los Angeles, etc. Agriculture, ourleading source of income in the State of California--I guess it's nowthe biggest agricultural state in the country--is doing very well. Idon't hear of any signs of collapse there despite the high cost ofcredit to farmers. Aerospace, electronics, and so forth are stillgoing along very strong. In short, what continues to amaze us is theresilience of the economy despite high interest rates. I share yourfeelings that, looking back over the past couple of years, the oftenadvertised coming of a recession or slowdown more often than not hasnot materialized. And I suspect, if anything, we're underestimatingthe strength of the economy. I would look for a better 1982, forreasons I won't take time to go into at the moment, than forecast bythe Board's staff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 26.
MR. PARTEE. How is housing out there, John.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It is a neutral question asking about the state of housing in a certain area.


Passage number 27.
MR. BALLES. It's about the same as around the country--poor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the situation is similar to the rest of the country, suggesting no strong disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 28.
MR. PARTEE. I know, but you don't get any feeling of uplift.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states a fact or personal opinion without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 29.
MR. BALLES.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 30.
 Not as yet, because all these variable rateproposals haven't really had a chance--MR. PARTEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement indicated by Mr. Partee's response of "Yes."


Passage number 31.
MR. BALLES. --to take effect in terms of restimulating theindustry. But I think when those do get underway, that will have abeneficial effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 32.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions a person's name, Mr. Corrigan, without any context or information to suggest any disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 33.
MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, I continue to believe that theeconomy is stronger than the so-called consensus forecast, which Ithink would encompass Jim's forecast. In terms of the underlyingdemands, the suppressed demands, given that in the short run thecapacity to snap back very quickly in housing and other areas is sogreat, I can't see much of a significant downside risk. The majorimponderable in all of this is how much financial stress is reallythere that we don't see. We focus a lot on the thrift industrybecause we know a lot about it. But I suspect that there probably isa good deal more stress around on balance sheets and other things thanwe perhaps really perceive.-3-5/18/81The other point I would make is that, at least in the NinthFederal Reserve District, I have a hard time finding anybody whothinks that a three-year tax cut is a good idea. There's a certainhesitance for people to talk about that publicly. I'm not sure why.I guess so much hope is pinned on getting some spending cuts here thatthey don't want to compromise that. But certainly in privatediscussions I can't find anybody who thinks that a three-year tax cutis a good idea right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is sharing their own beliefs and observations, but there is no conflicting perspective presented.


Passage number 34.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 35.
MR. WINN. One of the interesting areas is the steelindustry, which is running currently almost at capacity. How much ofthat is inventory building is not quite clear, but think about whatwould happen if automobile sales should pick up or--this is hard todetermine--if defense orders start to flow to a greater extent thanthey have previously. We'd have a really tight bind with respect tosteel. The second thing is that if you look at retail sales acrossthe board, and they have been very strong, [our sources] all reportthat it is for top-of-the-line merchandise. The bargain stuff isn'tmoving very well. This is not a feeling of weakness in my judgment interms of what is happening there. One has to watch this comparisonwith last year--which is how retailers report sales--because of thecredit crunch and the difference in when Easter falls and otherthings. But retailers thought sales would tail off after Easter andthey are continuing quite strong even through last week, which is arather strange phenomenon. The third point I'll make is that onJohn's point about office building and other kinds of activities wemay have a bit of a booby-trap in this area in that most of those havebeen financed on construction loans without take-outs in someinstances. And the question is: With the change in interest rates,what kind of take-out set-up are we going to have for some of thesethings. They went ahead with the buildings thinking that if theycouldn't find financing, they would sell them. We may have more forsale here suddenly than some people have expected. And this is afinancial booby-trap out there that may or may not snap at us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 36.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is incomplete, so it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 37.
MR. ROOS. We sense a fairly strong base of economic activityin our area. There are two dramatically weak segments, home buildingand automobile manufacturing, and the latter is a big factor in partof our District. However, commercial building, as John said, is verystrong, as are chemicals, military equipment, and oil and gasequipment. Basically, we don't see many signs of weakness except inthose two specific areas I noted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is describing different sectors of economic activity in their area and mentioning two segments that are weak. However, they state that overall they do not see many signs of weakness except in those specific areas. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 38.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: cannot claim credit for the success of his company without acknowledging the hard work and dedication of his employees.


Passage number 39.
MR. FORD. In the South we have a mixed picture that reflectssome of the things you've heard from other areas. The touristbusiness is great. As for the steel industry in our area,surprisingly, after years of disaster around Alabama, U.S. Steel isplanning to put up a new plant of all things and employment is risingin that industry. In our high-tech belt that is developing aroundAtlanta and Florida, the high-technology industries are doing great.The defense-related industries are doing great. In housing and5/18/81construction, surprisingly, while activity is not great, on a month-over-month basis it is up and on a year-over-year basis it is up.Mortgage loan closings are up; we don't understand why, but apparentlythey are. The agricultural sector would be all right were it not forthe fact that everybody else in the country has gotten rain except usapparently, and there is still some concern about the lingeringeffects of the drought we've had.The big area of worry is in the financial sector where, onthe banking side, our banks are doing not just well, they're doingfantastically well. Big banks in Atlanta and Florida are up 25, 30,35 percent year-over-year, quarter-over-quarter, anyway you want tomeasure it. But there are areas of stress. I've been going out, asEd has, trying to get closer to the individual industries and some ofthe particular players to hear how it sounds to them. The thriftexecutives are counting [reserves]; they are all down. I've nowtalked to about 8 or 10 of them individually because I made themistake of making a public speech about their problems a month beforeeverybody else did, so I've been going around trying to heal thewounds and listen to them. What I hear is that they're all measuringtheir survival literally in terms of how many months of reserves theyhave left at the current rate. They all have it counted out that wayand they are in a near panic state, as [the Board] will hear when itmeets with its Advisory Committee later today or whenever.Consumer finances are starting to worry me in that we seemore and more isolated signs of stress on the consumer balance sheettipping upward. One of the biggest industries in our area is Equifaxcredit reportings, for example, and they say business is great. Thereis more concern than ever about the credit condition of the consumer.The collection companies are doing great, which is bad news in termsof financial stress. Another thing that worries me is that we'restarting to get some evidence of creative financing; as a concept, Ithink it is very worrisome and something we're going to have to focuson. A lot of financial balloons have been put up in the air wherepeople are disintermediating [from] the normal lending agencies andtaking back paper on homes. That is done on the basis of veryquestionable credit standards or none at all. And I'm starting tohear more and more people, as I talk to people about housing finance,talk about possible problems in the area of creative financing.Finally, all over the District I'm hearing from smallbusinessmen, especially dealers of U.S. built autos and various othersmall businesses, that they are actually paying 1 or 2 points over theprime rate. They support us tremendously philosophically, but theywish we would lower interest rates today because their survival is inquestion now. I haven't been able to verify how much of that is true,but every time I go out to a meeting or sit down at a rotary club talkor wherever people get me in a corner and I ask them: "Do you believein what the Fed is doing." They say: "Terrific, you're on the righttrack; hooray for you and Ronald Reagan." Then if I ask how businessis, they say it's terrible. They say, for example: "It costs me moreto finance a car on the floor of my showroom for one month than I canever hope to make in profit, and I'm not selling it within a month."So, my big worry would be the overall stresses and strains in thevulnerable areas on the financial side. Overall, I would say theeconomy in the South is moving sideways. We have strong areas thatare booming balanced off by these areas of weakness. We don't see a-5-5/18/81big surge coming, but we don't think we're in a depression or arecession now at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 40.
MR. SCHULTZ. I told you about going to a cocktail party acouple of months ago. A fellow who happened to have had a few drinkscame up to me and clapped me on the back and said "I want you to knowthat I'm with you all the way, you S.O.B."SPEAKER(.). That's the exact [sentiment].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker's response with "That's the exact [sentiment]" suggests disagreement or disapproval towards the statement made by the fellow at the cocktail party.


Passage number 41.
MR. FORD. That very much summarizes what I'm hearing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply summarizing what they have heard.


Passage number 42.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Doyle, let's get the depressing sideof this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Doyle is simply being asked to focus on the negative aspects or "depressing side" of something.


Passage number 43.
MR. DOYLE. Sorry to add to that, Mr. Chairman. Theautomobile industry is still in a very depressed state in our Districtand its influence is quite pervasive. Even though production has beenup quite a bit lately, largely associated with the introduction ofsome new models, no one I talked with really expects much of aturnaround in that area at all. There now seem to be increasedconcerns spreading somewhat to the rural areas. The banks are highlyliquid, but high interest rates are discouraging borrowers and we tendto hear more and more from this particular sector recently. Thedrought has ended in the Middle West and it has brought with it somerather interesting revisions in estimates of food price [increases]for this year, which are expected to be somewhat less than the USDAprojections--say, somewhere around 10 or 11 percent rather than up inthe 11 to 12 percent range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information about the current state of the automobile industry, concerns in rural areas, and revisions in food price estimates.


Passage number 44.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did you get rid of your dry weather, Mr.Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question asking if Mr. Guffey got rid of his dry weather.


Passage number 45.
MR. GUFFEY. It largely has abated, yes. Just over the lastweek to ten days we've gotten very good rains and very general rains.There is some good and some bad news to that. Along with the rainswas some very severe weather; and much of the winter wheat, whichwould be harvested commencing in early June in the southern part ofthe District, was laid flat by the hail and high winds. So, thequestion is whether what wheat survived will result in a good crop,beyond earlier expectations; that which was flattened is a total loss.The USDA doesn't know what is out there and I don't think the farmerscan tell. Not until the harvest is completed will we know. The factof the matter is that the outlook for the agricultural sector probablyis better at the moment than it has been over the past sixty days,with the exception of the red meat industry, particularly the cattleindustry. There has been a continued liquidation of breeder stock,keeping meat prices down. As a result of that there is a loss in thecattle in the feedlot area. That has to end one of these days; andwhen it does, we will quite likely see an escalation of meat prices,which will roll into [consumer] food prices.On the other hand, the District is heavily engaged in theenergy business and that is going gangbusters. The unemployment rateranges someplace from 3-1/2 percent to 8 percent, depending uponwhether you're in Oklahoma, Colorado, or New Mexico. It's a verymixed picture.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It provides a description and analysis of different factors affecting the agricultural and energy sectors.


Passage number 46.
5/18/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'd better run in a second. We haveheard from all the presidents; the governors have all been silent.We'll leave that to you. And you can go over these other [agendaitems].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that the governors have been silent and that the reader can go over the other agenda items.


Passage number 47.
MR. GUFFEY. Before you leave, Mr. Chairman, I should saythat the green bug problem has been whipped with a red lady bug.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker states that the green bug problem has been resolved with the use of red ladybugs. There is no mention of any disagreement or contention regarding this statement.


Passage number 48.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Good. By what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: is "good" determined?


Passage number 49.
MR. GUFFEY. Lady bugs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions "Lady bugs," there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 50.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Count on the lady bugs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 51.
MR. SCHULTZ. Let me ask a question, Roger. Are the cattlebeing slaughtered or are they being put back in the pasture. With therains you've had, I would imagine some are going back to pasture.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Schultz is simply asking a question and making an assumption based on the rains.


Passage number 52.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, I can't answer the question of what mayhappen in the future. The rains have only occurred within the lastten days, so those judgments might be made in the future. But theycertainly haven't been up to now. Conditions have been very dry andas a result the cattle have been taken off of the range for tworeasons. One was that the prospect for keeping them through theupcoming summer was not very good. Secondly, those in the feedingbusiness were losing from $75 to $200 a head on fat cattle. So, theyare just liquidating their breeder stock. Whether or not businessjudgments will be made to maintain some of that breeder stock now thatsome green grass has come forth, I don't know. It doesn't bode well,however, for food prices for the period ahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and stating their uncertainty about future business decisions.


Passage number 53.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We haven't heard from any governors,I don't think. Emmett.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. The speaker is simply expressing their own belief or opinion about not having heard from any governors.


Passage number 54.
MR. RICE. I'll start off. Much of what I've heard from thepresidents confirms the feeling I've had about our current situation.If I had to characterize the current economic situation, I would saythat the economy is slowing from a very high rate of expansion but itis not by any means weak yet. I say this because it's hard to see anyunqualified indications of weakness. Even in retail sales we see,adjusting for autos, an increase. And the slowing in industrialproduction, while negligible, would actually be an increase if itweren't for the coal strike. So, most of the indications of weakness--for example in the payroll employment area--are not unqualified. Onthe other hand, there are some fairly good indications of enoughstrength still left in the economy. Business fixed investment isstill strong. And, of course, capacity utilization has increased.So, I would say on balance that there may be some slowing but it's aslowing from a very rapid rate [of expansion] and the economy is notat all weak at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement evident in this passage. The speaker is providing their own analysis and perspective on the current economic situation.


Passage number 55.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Governor Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 56.
MR. GRAMLEY. I deliberately stayed out of the talking stageand in the listening mode because it seems to me that it's moredifficult than I can ever remember to know what is happening bylooking at the statistics from here in Washington and by using thetypical technology of forecasting, either models or judgmental-7-5/18/81forecasts. The economy just isn't behaving the way it used to. Ithink the staff is basically right, however, that we're looking at aneconomy that is quite strong. The areas of weakness that we do see--and we are seeing some weakness in the housing industry and the autoindustry, which is being reflected in the employment statistics and tosome degree in industrial production--are in credit-sensitive sectors.To the extent the economy is being restrained at all, it's beingrestrained by monetary restraint, by very high interest rates. Whatthe staff is saying, in effect, is that interest rates will simplyrise however far they have to rise to get nominal growth of GNP downto the 8 to 9 to 10 percent range or somewhere around there. And Ithink the only issue is whether or not the staff's forecast ofinterest rates is right. The staff's forecast of interest rates, incomparison with the major outside forecasters, leaves no doubt thatoutside forecasters aren't anywhere close to being correct if thestaff has the basics [right] on where the economy is going. The staffhas interest rates on Treasury bills continuing to move up through thelast three quarters of 1982, hitting a peak of around 17 percent; theyare moving up gently but continue to move up. The mean of otherforecasters has the peak of interest rates in the first quarter of1981 and coming down to about 11-1/2 percent by the end of 1982.That's why I think we're seeing a major difference in what forecasterssee for the outlook from now until the end of next year. The economyis very strong, and I don't think we are likely to make a mistake atthis point of overrestraining it unless we take very drastic action ontop of what has already been done.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, acknowledges that the staff's forecast of the economy being strong is correct and agrees with their assessment. The only point of discussion is whether the staff's forecast of interest rates is accurate compared to other forecasters.


Passage number 57.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Henry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 58.
MR. WALLICH. Well, I find the economy very hard to read, asdo others. Some things don't quite seem to fit together. Forinstance, we've had this strong surge in the first quarter, which maybe revised up. But it doesn't seem to have led to a great increase incapacity utilization; it may have in materials but not in other areas.And it hasn't led to a reduction in unemployment, as one would figure.Now, if we are looking at this first quarter, it really means that GNPfrom here on out will be about 1 percentage point higher than it wouldhave been had GNP grown at something like 3 percent or so--spreadingthe difference roughly over the rest of the year, or dividing it by 4.So, the whole picture is somehow tighter. And that I don't quite seereflected in the capacity utilization or the unemployment figures; butit must be there. I also am asking myself: Why, in an economy inwhich no single thing seems to be outstandingly strong, is there solittle room. Why, when we've got some distinctly weak sectors likehousing and automobiles, has the economy been expanding so rapidly.Is it because the saving rate is so low that we're now at a muchhigher level of consumption than we normally would be so that leavesless room in the economy for other things and is squeezing things out.I find all these things difficult to reconcile, but there seems to beno doubt that the economy is not going down even moderately as much asthought; it may not go down at all and is overall very strong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, is expressing confusion and uncertainty about the current state of the economy. He mentions that certain aspects of the economy, such as capacity utilization, unemployment, and weak sectors like housing and automobiles, do not align with the strong surge in the first quarter. He questions why there is so little room in the economy and wonders if the low saving rate and high consumption are squeezing out other sectors. While he acknowledges that the economy is strong overall, he highlights the discrepancies and difficulties in reconciling these observations.


Passage number 59.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Chuck.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Please provide more context or specific information.


Passage number 60.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't think there's much downside riskeither, except if there should be some unexpected financial difficultythat would lead to it. And that's always hard, indeed impossible, topredict or to time. I would agree with Lyle that the governor on the5/18/81economy is monetary policy. And with emphasis on the aggregates, whatwe're really talking about is how high interest rates will go. But,of course, as they go higher, if they should go higher, the smallbusiness problem and the problem with housing and with automobiles andso forth will get greater and greater. Indeed, that's the disturbingfactor about the economy. There doesn't seem to be too much effect inthe soft goods sectors and certainly no effect in the defense area.There is a strength that could end up in a bad crash, I think, innonresidential construction. I agree with Willis that there are a lotof problems that could develop there because there's an expectationthat prices will go higher and that the properties will appreciate.If they don't, then there is no basis for the financing being done onthem. So, the concern that I'm beginning to have is that to achievethe 9 percent nominal GNP that Lyle speaks of, we will have noactivity to speak of in some sectors and hardly reduced activity inother sectors. The differential impacts are going to be verydifficult to deal with. Henry made a good point a month or so ago, ina speech that I guess he didn't deliver, which is that there are twotiers in terms of interest rate effects. Those who don't pay 46percent tax rates are hurt a lot more than those who do pay 46percent. That's very consistent with the notion that small businessis complaining, because they [don't] pay 46 percent tax rates. And itwould be very consistent for any firm that is in a loss position to bebadly hurt. It reminds me of the [adage] that the worst thing a bankcan have is money--that the bank should get so that it doesn't havetaxable income. The same thing is getting to be true of debt burden.The worst thing you could have, if you have any taxable income, is notto have a debt burden because then you don't have any tax write-off.So, I agree that we're in a fairly narrow range with very littlechance of a sizable decline in the immediate picture and a goodcontrol over the expansion because monetary policy is well along theroad toward being restraining. But as to the effect that this willhave in the longer run, I'm certainly not prepared to say at thispoint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing their own concerns and opinions about the economy, but there is no opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 61.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But isn't it likely from whateverybody is saying around the table that we're going to see monetarypolicy not being very effective as a general restrainer until some ofthe troubled areas have some dramatic failures. And then we would geta reaction in the rest of the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a possible scenario based on what everyone is saying, without presenting any opposing viewpoints or disagreements.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 62.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, we could get a sharp change inexpectations. The people who are expecting prices such as real estatevalues to rise will stop expecting them to rise. And then suddenlywhat didn't seem to be such a high interest rate before will seemextraordinarily high, and that could happen very quickly. But onejust can't predict when it will happen. By the way, though, Tony, Ido think that [our policy] is having a restraining effect on theeconomy. It's clear that housing starts are not going to stay at 1.2million; they're going to drop below it. And that's very restraining.That's one of the biggest industries in the economy, and it's largelydue to interest rates that housing activity is as low as it is. Oninventories, I agree with Frank. He said inventories are very, verylean. Why are they lean. It's because interest rates are so highthat everybody pays great attention to keeping inventories down. Theautomobile business, which in the last two or three 10-day periods hasbeen below 6 million in domestic sales, is 4 million off what theindustry has been accustomed to. That's a big cut in output in GNP.5/18/81So, interest rates are restraining the economy; and the higher theygo, the more they will restrain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. One person is stating that higher interest rates will restrain the economy, while another person is arguing that interest rates are already having a restraining effect on the economy.


Passage number 63.
MR. CORRIGAN. But even in terms of the residentialconstruction that is still going on, I don't know for sure, but Iwould venture a guess that a substantial fraction of the housingstarts we're seeing right now is being creatively financed. Everyplace you go you see condominiums, and the sign out front says 10-1/4percent mortgage money.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their thoughts and observations about the residential construction and financing of housing starts.


Passage number 64.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's for 2 to 3 years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement simply gives a timeframe of 2 to 3 years without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 65.
MR. CORRIGAN. No, these are term loans. The way they'rebeing financed is that the builders go to the bank or the S&L and worka deal for a construction loan. They take out all the first mortgageson a term basis at 10 percent or something in exchange for $300 or$400 or $500 thousand in fee income, which the institution takes rightin, charges it as current income, and passes it right down to thebottom line.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining how builders finance construction loans and how the institutions involved benefit from it.


Passage number 66.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But they don't give 10 or 11 percenton a fixed rate mortgage for 25 years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that a certain percentage is not given for a fixed rate mortgage for 25 years. There is no contention or disagreement within this statement.


Passage number 67.
MR. CORRIGAN. Absolutely, yes they do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It appears to be a statement of agreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 68.
MR. PARTEE. It's the other way around.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is stating that the situation is the opposite of what has been previously mentioned or understood.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 69.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The story that I've been hearing frompeople in the Midwest whom I know in the real estate insurancebusiness is that they have this "teaser" rate. I don't know what theycall it. You come in and get 10 or 11 percent financing for the first2 to 3 years, during which time the builder compensates the thriftinstitution. But thereafter the loan has to be renegotiated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that they have been hearing a specific story from people in the real estate insurance business. However, they are not certain about the exact name or terms of the financing arrangement. This lack of clarity suggests some disagreement or uncertainty about the details of the "teaser" rate and the subsequent renegotiation of the loan.


Passage number 70.
MR. CORRIGAN. There are some of those, but there is an amplenumber of these deals that I've just described where people still canget a 20-year mortgage at 10 to 11 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the availability of 20-year mortgages at certain interest rates.


Passage number 71.
MR. WINN(.). They add it onto the price, Tony. They justjack the price up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the price is increased.


Passage number 72.
[VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON]. Nancy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The given text only states the statement made by Vice Chairman Solomon without any indication of disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 73.
MS. TEETERS. Well, I'm surprised at the first quarter, and Idon't really understand it. However, I am also getting very worriedabout the cumulative effect of this [monetary policy restraint]. Ifreal GNP revises up even to 8 or 8-1/2 percent, there literally hasbeen no real growth in the economy for two years. That to me saysthat monetary policy has been working quite well in restraining theeconomy from any growth. We've never had a period like this in whichwe had literally no growth on average for that [length of] time. Ithink we have to continue to restrain [the economy]. However, I amvery worried that we will restrain it to the point that we will getinterest rates that are going to be really damaging to all segments ofthe economy. Interest rates may be [low] after tax, or in real terms,but they are still contributing to cost and are creating, I think,some of the upward pressure on prices. You may be in a 46 percent taxbracket, but you still have to recoup that 18 or 20 percent interest-10-5/18/81rate in order to pay your taxes on it. This forecast has eightquarters of 18 percent interest rates. I just don't think the economycan survive that way. Either it's going [to blow] up on us in thesense that inflation is going to take off or we're going to have majorfailures and we are going to get a major recession from this someplacedown the line. And I urge caution when we come to deciding what we'regoing to make the interest rate because I think [the high rates] aredamaging. They can do a lot of damage if we are not careful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses surprise, worry, and concern about the cumulative effect of monetary policy restraint and the potential negative impacts of high interest rates. However, there is no mention of conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 74.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. John Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 75.
MR. BALLES. Well, I will just piggyback on Fred's S.O.B.story with one I find extremely instructive. Twolumber companies.One is a great big one and one is a small one. And if there's anyindustry in the country, along with autos, that should be screamingfor relief from high interest rates, it seems to me it would certainlybe the lumber industry. Yet both of these guys are foursquare forsolid monetary restraint, enough to get the job done in bringinginflation down. When their quiz them on how they cansupport this kind of restraint in terms of what its doing to theirbusiness, the explanation is along the following lines: They have twochoices, both of which are bad, but one is worse than the other. Onechoice is to price people out of housing temporarily through highinterest rates; the other, as they put it, is to price them out ofhousing indefinitely and permanently through ongoing double-digitinflation. So, even looking at their own long-run self interest, theyfavor monetary restraint and are not ready to throw me out the windowor out of my job--if they could--because of what we are doing to theirbusinesses. I find that rather instructive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Balles is simply sharing an anecdote about two lumber companies and their support for monetary restraint. There is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 76.
MR. PARTEE. They're not facing bankruptcy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement made by MR. PARTEE indicates that the subject in question is not facing bankruptcy, but this does not create any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 77.
MR. BALLES. No, but the small lumber company is surelymaking no money.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is making a statement about the financial situation of a small lumber company without expressing any opposing views or engaging in a debate.


Passage number 78.
MR. PARTEE. That's what I was wondering.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement made by Mr. Partee expressing curiosity or pondering about a certain topic.


Passage number 79.
MR. BALLES. It will be a while, but they're not facingbankruptcy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that it will take some time, but bankruptcy is not a concern.


Passage number 80.
MR. BOEHNE. They probably have some independent wealth,though. I've run into some people like that, too, and they alwayshave some private means if the [business] goes under.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply acknowledges that some people may have independent wealth as a backup if their business fails.


Passage number 81.
MR. ROOS. I think it's important to recognize that there isabsolutely no way of reducing these interest rates, even short-terminterest rates, through the old traditional way of pumping money intothe economy. We did an analysis in St. Louis. [It shows that] evenwhen the weekly figures show an increase in the money supply, it ismeaningless; within a week interest rates rise. So, I don't know howwe can bring these rates down through monetary policy other than bycreating a credible track record where people will really believe thatwe are going to bring the rate of money growth down and stick with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their belief that traditional methods of reducing interest rates through monetary policy are ineffective, and is suggesting the need for a different approach.


Passage number 82.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Either that way, Larry, or with anold fashioned crunch. My guess is that it's more likely to be an oldfashioned crunch. If there aren't any additional comments, we'll move-11-5/18/81on to Scott Pardee's and Peter Sternlight's reports. Does someonewant to make a further comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting two possible options, with a preference for the second option. The phrase "If there aren't any additional comments" indicates that they are open to other opinions or suggestions.


Passage number 83.
MR. FORD. I'd just like to ask you a question on the pointyou just made with regard to an old fashioned crunch. I'd beinterested in knowing, Tony, how serious you think this business iswith the mutual savings banks up there [in your area]. I hear thatone of them already has a negative net worth and that a number ofothers are very close to that. What do you see as the scene over thenext three to six months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a question and does not contain any clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 84.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What I hear, and what my people'sanalysis suggests is likely, is that between two and four of them, ofwhich a couple are very important, are calculating that they will havea crisis early next year. They are also calculating the number ofmonths they can take this; and, of course, if interest rates were togo significantly higher, that [crisis] might be moved up a couple ofmonths.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents speculation or analysis of a situation.


Passage number 85.
MR. FORD. That would mean early winter or late fall of thisyear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information about a specific time period.


Passage number 86.
MR. PARTEE. I don't think the savings banks are reallyquite that close. It's 1982 and 1983 for the savings banks. It's1981 and 1982 for the savings and loans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply stating different time periods for savings banks and savings and loans.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 87.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But I'm talking about two to fourcoming in early '82.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "two to four coming in early '82" suggests the presence of multiple viewpoints or alternatives that could be debated or disputed.


Passage number 88.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, that's about what the FDIC feels.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply confirming the statement or opinion of the FDIC.


Passage number 89.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 90.
 But there are a few others thatwould--MR. PARTEE. By '83, if rates stay up as our forecast hasthem, there are going to be quite a few. And they go beyond New Yorkand Boston.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that there are a few places beyond New York and Boston where rates are expected to stay up in 1983.


Passage number 91.
MR. BOEHNE. Add Philadelphia by 1982-83. We have at leastone and maybe two in Philadelphia. On the timetable for the S&Ls, Ithink Chuck's right. Beginning in the fall of this year, stretchingout into '82, you can just string them along a line, a long line.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing their agreement with "Chuck" and discussing their plans for adding locations in Philadelphia.


Passage number 92.
MR. WINN. But that's with no change in the rate of flows inand out. If we have any kind of increased disintermediation, thatwould precipitate it in a heck of a hurry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Winn about the potential consequences of increased disintermediation.


Passage number 93.
MR. PARTEE. Well, we would, of course, finance them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement by Mr. Partee about a possible action they would take.


Passage number 94.
MR. BOEHNE. How.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 95.
MR. PARTEE. At the window.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states that Mr. Partee is at the window without any additional context or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 96.
MR. WALLICH. And how about the large CDs that might run off.If this calculation is that easy to make that you can string them on aline, as Ed says, then others would be doing that, too, and would becutting off their support.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 97.
-12-5/18/81MS. TEETERS. Has there been any indication that theirdeposits are being withdrawn in anticipation of failure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 98.
MR. FORD. That's the biggest single worry I have heard frompeople in the thrift industry: That they have something on the orderof $50 billion in jumbo CDs that are subject to market confidence.They are being tiered on the rates right now, similar to what happenedto First Pennsylvania and other banks, as general recognition of aproblem approaches. I would recommend that we track that carefully onthe early warning indicator. I haven't personally verified thatfigure, but I'm sure Chuck's staff has good information--I hope you do--on how much jumbo CD money is subject to quick market judgments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their concern about the potential risk and volatility associated with jumbo CDs in the thrift industry. They also acknowledge that they haven't personally verified the figures but assume that the staff has accurate information.


Passage number 99.
MR. PARTEE. I don't think we have very good informationbecause the category is $100,000 and over. And the $100,000 notes arepretty secure. We don't know how much is in jumbo CDs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion on the available information and expressing their uncertainty about the amount of money in jumbo CDs.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 100.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Some of the big investment banks whoare financing some of the mutual savings banks with RP financing areforcing, quietly, a reduction in volume. First they tried to do it bysimply raising the price on charges. They weren't getting enoughresponse; the mutual savings banks were paying these higher and higherspreads. Now they have begun to exercise some "window guidance," youmight call it, cutting back on the line. But they are trying to do itslowly so as not to trigger [a crisis]--so they wouldn't get the blamefor any kind of financial problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The investment banks are quietly forcing a reduction in volume and using tactics like raising prices and cutting back on the line of credit. The mutual savings banks, on the other hand, are paying the higher spreads and it's mentioned that the investment banks are trying to avoid being blamed for any financial problem that may arise.


Passage number 101.
MR. SCHULTZ. Most of the commercial paper that thrifts hadout was in the California area, is that right. What has happened toit. Is there any indication. Does anybody know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for information and clarification about the commercial paper held by thrifts in the California area.


Passage number 102.
MR. FORD. I know that a number of them have had theirratings lowered. I don't know about the volume, which is what youasked about. I remember seeing that a number of them had theirratings lowered on paper, which should lead to the answer being thatthere has been a reduction in the availability, but I don't know that.I hope somebody on the staff does.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their lack of knowledge regarding the volume of something, indicating that they hope someone else has the information.


Passage number 103.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Maybe we'd better get moving along.There is one point I should mention. I'm told that if anybody has anyquestions regarding the Board's examination of the System Open MarketAccount, Clyde Farnsworth and Dave Robinson are prepared to answerquestions. Otherwise, we won't bother with that and we'll just acceptthe report. Does anybody have any questions on that. If not, we'llgo to Scott.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply informing the audience that two people are available to answer questions about a specific topic, and if there are no questions, they will proceed with accepting a report and moving on to another topic.


Passage number 104.
MR. PARDEE. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to provide an accurate answer without the complete passage. Please provide the full passage for further analysis.


Passage number 105.
]VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Any comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage, as no specific passage is mentioned.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 106.
MR. RICE. Scott, does the Federal Reserve have anyindependent authority to operate in foreign exchange markets apartfrom the Treasury--or possibly, in parentheses, in violation ofTreasury policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The use of the word "violation" suggests that there may be a disagreement between Mr. Rice and Scott regarding the authority and actions of the Federal Reserve in foreign exchange markets.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 107.
MR. PARDEE. We've reviewed this and reviewed this andreviewed this, and ultimately when it comes down to policy the primaryresponsibility rests with the Treasury. We can work on a consultation-13-5/18/81basis and all of that, but if the Treasury objects, then the FederalReserve, since I've been in it, has acceded to the Treasury's wishes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. This is evident when Mr. Pardee states that the Federal Reserve has acceded to the Treasury's wishes, suggesting that there has been a disagreement or contention between the two entities.


Passage number 108.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The comment is simply that Congresshas been fairly consistent in its attitude and that there is statutorylanguage which says that the principal responsibility forinternational monetary policy is with the President, operating throughthe Secretary of the Treasury. There are no legal constraints on ouroperating with our resources but it would create a political problem,I think, if we were clearly doing it against the wishes of theTreasury.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a comment and explains that there may be a political problem if certain actions are taken against the wishes of the Treasury.


Passage number 109.
MR. RICE. I understand the political problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve contention or disagreement as it is simply stating that Mr. Rice understands a political problem.


Passage number 110.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There are no legal constraints.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a fact without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 111.
MR. RICE. Legal constraints were what I was asking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Rice is simply requesting information about legal constraints.


Passage number 112.
MS. TEETERS. But you'd be prepared to move as you did theday Reagan was shot if there's severe disorder in the market, wouldn'tyou.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement of fact and does not involve any conflicting opinions or perspectives.


Passage number 113.
MR. PARDEE. I'm not prepared to move at all until I get anauthorization from Washington.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Pardee simply states that he is not willing to take action until he receives authorization from Washington.


Passage number 114.
MR. RICE. Do you mean from the Treasury.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 115.
MR. PARTEE. You would let disorderly conditions develop. Asyou see it, you just wouldn't move until Washington said yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement by Mr. Party is a hypothetical situation or assumption about the actions or mindset of the person he is speaking to. It does not express disagreement or opposition towards any previous statement.


Passage number 116.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Those are the instructions. Volcker,Sprinkel and I had a conversation. Scott was there, and [theTreasury] made it very clear that they want prior consultation beforea dollar is spent. They wouldn't give us any flexibility even on, Imust say, relatively minor routine countering of a disorderly market.Even though Sprinkel put in his testimony "countering disorderlymarkets," which is our responsibility under the amended articles ofthe IMF as well as internal policy, in practice I don't think thepolicy has changed any from one of no intervention except in anemergency. We'll just have to wait. Henry was at that meeting alsoand he said: "We'll see. [We'll wait] until such time as a foreigncentral bank requests the kind of cooperation that requires using ourown resources to some degree or until the dollar itself turns aroundso there's a change of view." It's hard to resolve this as anabstract policy issue. I don't think there will be any change until aconcrete incident or situation comes along that seems to indicate theother way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 117.
MR. BOEHNE. What about this talk of selling off reserves andreducing swap lines. Is that serious talk in private and could thatbe done if the Treasury so ordered it. Or is that a joint decision tobe made with the Federal Reserve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The question is simply asking about the possibility and process of selling off reserves and reducing swap lines.


Passage number 118.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. My own view is that they won't insiston that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any opposing viewpoints or disagreements. It simply states the author's personal opinion.


Passage number 119.
-14-5/18/81MR. WALLICH. It seems to me that they can block, in effect,the use of the swaps for intervention, but I don't think they cancompel us to eliminate them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich is expressing his perspective on the situation, but there is no opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 120.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think they will try. My ownfeeling is, even thoughthat this is being looked at--and it hasan impact on the exchange markets--that they are unlikely to go tothat extreme. The only way to get rid of the balances withoutupsetting markets would be to do an off-market deal with a few centralbanks. This would still alarm them and I think there would bepolitical reactions. The State Department does not think along theselines at all. I think the State Department would go to the mat withthe Treasury as it became more of a political issue. I don't thinkthe Treasury is likely to go as far as actually insisting on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their own thoughts and belief, without directly mentioning any opposing views or contradicting statements.


Passage number 121.
MR. SCHULTZ. Does the State Department have its economicteam in place yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 122.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes. Myer Rashish.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I would need a specific passage or statement to determine whether there is contention or disagreement. Please provide more context or the actual passage.


Passage number 123.
MR. SCHULTZ. I know, but he hasn't been confirmed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact that the person in question has not been confirmed.


Passage number 124.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes he was.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement based solely on the statement "Yes he was." The phrase does not provide enough context or information to determine the presence of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 125.
MR. SCHULTZ. When.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply introduces a statement by Mr. Schultz.


Passage number 126.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Tom Andrews hasn't been confirmed,but Myer was confirmed and so was Bob Hormats. That was myunderstanding. It was approved by the Committee. Jesse Helms did notsay anything, but continued to object. I assumed, since it wasapproved by the Committee about three weeks ago, that there was flooracceptance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating information about the confirmation of Tom Andrews, Myer, and Bob Hormats. They also mention Jesse Helms' lack of objection, but it does not indicate a direct disagreement or contention.


Passage number 127.
 It is normally routine that within 24 hours the wholeSenate--MR. SCHULTZ. I thought [unintelligible] told me last weekthat Rashish had not been confirmed. Did I misunderstand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 128.
MR. WALLICH. I think he was confirmed after 260 questions orsomething like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the confirmation process of someone, mentioning the number of questions asked.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 129.
MR. PARTEE. The way we would get rid of the foreigncurrency, I assume, is on a declining dollar market. That is, itwould seem usual, wouldn't it, if the dollar were dropping to sellmarks to support the dollar. And in the process we would get rid ofbalances and just wouldn't rebuild them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. Explanation: Mr. Partee suggests that getting rid of foreign currency through selling marks to support the declining dollar is a usual strategy, whereas the implication is that someone else in the conversation disagrees with this approach.


Passage number 130.
 That would be a practicalstrategy, if we didn't want to--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. After all, that's what the balancesare there for--to cushion if we ever [wanted to]. I'm sure that theCommittee and the Treasury would not want to support the dollar atthese levels; if the dollar started coming down, we probably wouldwant to do something, but not in any significant amounts. And that'squite a ways off yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is merely discussing a practical strategy and speculating on the actions of the Committee and the Treasury in relation to the dollar.


Passage number 131.
MS. TEETERS. But what is there in the outlook that wouldbring the dollar down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply posing a question about the possible factors that could cause the value of the dollar to decrease.


Passage number 132.
-15-5/18/81MR. PARTEE. Well, it's awfully high. I would think exportswill fade.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing a personal opinion about the high level of exports.


Passage number 133.
MR. WALLICH. And the current account deficit. We're alreadypredicting that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints. It simply states a statement about predicting the current account deficit.


Passage number 134.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Roger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without any context or specific passage provided, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Please provide more information for a more accurate assessment.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 135.
MR. GUFFEY. Further along [in his report] Scott mentionedthat the French had inquired about the use of the swap line. Is theTreasury position such as to prohibit us from filling a request forthe French if we otherwise chose to do so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is potential contention in the passage. The mention of the Treasury position possibly prohibiting the fulfillment of the French request suggests a disagreement or differing stance on whether or not the request should be granted.


Passage number 136.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, it's our normal routine totouch base with the Treasury before a swap line is drawn on by aforeign central bank. On the other hand, the Chairman feels, and Ithink he is absolutely right, that we don't want to put ourselves inthe position of not having any judgment in these matters and creatingmore of a situation where the Treasury is giving us day-to-dayinstructions. So, Volcker is planning to tell [unintelligible] thatthese swap lines are available. I don't think that we will run intoany resistance from the Administration as a whole. Whether there willbe some initial demurring by the Treasury I don't know, but I'm surehe also will advise the Secretary of the Treasury. I don't knowwhether Ted wants to comment in this area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the Chairman's stance and does not anticipate any resistance from the Administration.


Passage number 137.
MR. TRUMAN. I think that's right. That's the way theprocedures have worked in the past in the long run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a belief about how the procedures have worked in the past.


Passage number 138.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Where there's no large political orpolicy [reason] that would cause us to oppose a foreign central bankdrawing on a swap line with us, I think we ought to play it in thetraditional way that we've always played it. And that is that yes,it's available if the need is there; if a country explains at the timethat it comes in formally [with a request to draw on the swap] andgives us good convincing reasons, obviously we will go along. Thatbrings up the Swedish situation. Did you comment on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is simply discussing the traditional approach to foreign central banks drawing on a swap line.


Passage number 139.
MR. PARDEE. No, I was holding that for my recommendations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Pardee simply states that he was holding something for his recommendations.


Passage number 140.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What does that mean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not providing any information or making any claims that could potentially generate contention or disagreement. It is simply asking for clarification or further explanation on a topic.


Passage number 141.
MR. SCHULTZ. That comes next.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that "That comes next" without any indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 142.
MR. WALLICH. When we have a swap drawing, we usually want toknow where it is going to lead. With the Swedes we knew that therewas a big European loan coming, which might take us out. With theFrench, one doesn't know where that's going to lead, and I think onehas to look at the situation at the time it develops. The swaps arenot exclusively for the purpose of intervention anyway. They can befor the purpose of a balance of payments financing in a broader sense.I think one can say that with regard to the Swedes, who have a fixedpeg.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 143.
 One can't so easily say that the French have a fixed peg withthe EMS, too. So, again, it becomes more a matter of financing adeficit than arbitrarily intervening in the market. I think thatmakes a pretty good case for the continuance of the swaps.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests some form of contention or disagreement. It acknowledges that it is not easy to say that the French have a fixed peg with the E, implying that there is some disagreement or uncertainty about the situation. Additionally, the phrase "I think that makes a pretty good case for the continuance of the swaps" implies that there might be differing opinions or arguments about whether the swaps should continue or not.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 144.
-16-5/18/81VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The Mitterand group is unlikely topermit a devaluation before the elections, which will probably bearound the end of next month. There's an increasing feeling, ofcourse, among knowledgeable people--and even those who are not tooknowledgeable--that this level of the franc is not sustainable andthat if [a devaluation] doesn't come before the election, it will comeafter. And there are implications that this will put a finish to theEuropean monetary system or that even if it's preserved in its facade,it won't have very much meaning. If there are no other comments, youmay turn now to your recommendations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "There's an increasing feeling, of course, among knowledgeable people--and even those who are not too knowledgeable--" suggests that there are differing opinions about whether a devaluation of the franc will or should occur before or after the elections. Additionally, the mention of implications regarding the European monetary system indicates further disagreement or speculation on the matter.


Passage number 145.
MR. PARDEE. I have no recommendations as far as any actionby the Committee, but I want to inform the Committee that on the 23rdof May the increase from $300 to $500 million in the swap line of theSwedish Reichsbank that we put on last year for one year will mature.The Swedes asked if it could be extended but felt they had nocompelling reasons at this point to justify the extension of thatincrease. They did use the line for $200 million and repaid, asGovernor Wallich just mentioned. But in recent months they have had arather substantial inflow of funds as a result of policy measures theytook early this year, so it's difficult to argue for a continuation ofthis increase in the current environment. It's a hypotheticalsituation rather than an actual situation. Discussions with Mr.Solomon and Mr. Volcker suggested that perhaps we should let theincrease lapse. I informed the Swedish Reichsbank that it wouldlapse, as it was proposed that it would last one year. I told them,should they have further needs down the road, that the availability ofthe swap line is there and that if they want to discuss an increaseagain, we'd be happy to discuss it when they feel they have acompelling case. They accepted that, so I am just informing theCommittee rather than making a recommendation that the increase beextended.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and informing the committee about the upcoming maturity of a swap line with the Swedish Reichsbank and the decision to let the increase lapse.


Passage number 146.
MR. PARTEE. It will drop back to $300 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement by Mr. Party.


Passage number 147.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And they were not unhappy about it.They recognized that in some circles that might be interpreted as asign of strength. When I told them it was unlikely we would [extendit], they didn't seem to mind at all. Bill.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The individuals mentioned in the passage did not express unhappiness or disagreement when the speaker mentioned that it was unlikely they would extend something. Instead, they recognized that this could be interpreted as a sign of strength in certain circles and showed no objection or dissatisfaction.


Passage number 148.
MR. FORD. I just wanted to ask Scott if he could explainsomething. I'm interested in this list of a total of $30 billion inswap lines. I'm just curious to know how you judge, for instance,that the Swiss should have a $4 billion line, and Italy, which hasmore people and I think bigger [unintelligible] should have $3billion. How do you make a decision as to how big the swap lineshould be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Ford is simply asking for an explanation and clarification regarding the allocation of swap lines.


Passage number 149.
MR. PARDEE. Back in 1967 we had an elegant paper that waspublished in the Federal Reserve Bulletin on the criteria for the swaplines based on financial data, reserve position, balance of payments,size of country, and so forth. That was when we were in an activephase of adding countries to the list. We haven't added anybodysince. I think the criteria are more what the problem is that we arefacing at the time and what the financial interest is to the UnitedStates. Our interests are much greater--certainly they were back in1978 when we had the last increases--with the deutschemark, the Swissfranc, and the Japanese yen. Those swap lines were increased at that-17-5/18/81time. So, it's more in response to the situations we face. We dostill review them; and the Board staff remember the criteria and bringthem up from time to time when we are reviewing the size of the swaplines. In the case of the Swedes, it turned out that on these earliercriteria, if we had continued at $500 million, then there might havebeen justification for some of the other Scandinavian countries tocome in and ask for increases. So, we still keep the criteria inmind, but the size reflects more the pressures at the time we aredealing with them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining the criteria and process for adding countries to the swaplines list, as well as the factors that determine the size of the swap lines. The speaker mentions that the criteria are still considered but the size of the swap lines is more influenced by the current financial situations and interests of the United States.


Passage number 150.
MR. TRUMAN. [We look at the pressures] on both sides. Whenthe Italian swap line was raised to $2 billion in '74, if I remembercorrectly, it was largely to help them out under the circumstances.In fact, as I remember, they made some drawings. And the Mexicanshave also been a case where they wanted an increase to show, as theSwedes did last year, solidarity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It mainly discusses actions taken to provide assistance to Italy and Mexico.


Passage number 151.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. For the currencies that we think weare going to use when we're in trouble we took action to raise theswap lines as part of the November 1, 1978 dollar support package. Inthe others I guess we've been more or less passive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply presents two different approaches taken in dealing with different currencies.


Passage number 152.
MR. TRUMAN. The British and the Italians and the Mexicansare cases where the shoe has been on the other foot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that in cases involving the British, Italians, and Mexicans, the situation has been reversed or reversed roles.


Passage number 153.
MR. FORD. Is this $30 billion total here a historic high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This question is asking for a factual answer about the total of $30 billion, without any room for disagreement or contention.


Passage number 154.
MR. PARDEE. Well, it would have to be the high; it will godown from the high by $200 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact or an observation.


Passage number 155.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It went to $30 billion on November 1,[1978]. I gather we have to take action to ratify the transactionssince the meeting on March 31.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply mentions a fact regarding an increase in the value of something ($30 billion) on a specific date (November 1, 1978). The second part of the passage suggests the need for action to ratify transactions since a meeting on March 31 but does not indicate any disagreement either.


Passage number 156.
MR. PARDEE. Collecting interest on our balances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement about collecting interest on balances is presented as a simple fact without any opposing viewpoint or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 157.
MR. PARTEE. Have there been any transactions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple question asked by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 158.
MR. BLACK. It will be interesting to see if we get anydissents, given the nature of the decision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no explicit contention or disagreement mentioned in the passage. The statement merely expresses curiosity about potential dissents without indicating any existing disagreement.


Passage number 159.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Legally we don't need a resolution, Iassume, on any transactions we do for foreign central banks.Therefore, this particular action is going to be inoperative. Ifthere's nothing else, we'll turn to Peter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their understanding of a legal matter and expressing that a specific action will not be effective. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument being presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 160.
MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: This passage does not provide any information regarding contention or disagreement between parties. It simply states the speaker's name, Mr. Sternlight, without any context or indication of a disagreement or contention.


Passage number 161.
]VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual passage provided. Can you please provide the passage so I can assess it?


Passage number 162.
MR. BOEHNE. I have a question. I have the impression,talking to market types and bankers on the funding side, that there isstill a fair amount of confusion about what the Desk is up to. I wantto inquire--it's probably just schizophrenia--in that we make money on[high] interest rates [when] we follow reserves and so on. Do youhave the impression in New York that the confusion over the change inour [operating] procedures is decreasing or increasing. Do you have asense of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking for clarification and expressing their own confusion about the topic.


Passage number 163.
-18-5/18/81MR. STERNLIGHT. I think a better understanding of ourprocedures has been developing. There was some renewed confusion oruncertainty when the February policy record was published in earlyApril because there seemingly was a different significance to themeaning of the federal funds rate constraint. But with the recordlaid down there and some further comments that were made by theChairman around that time there has been a better understanding of thesignificance of the funds rate limits as well, mainly as checkpointsrather than tight constraints.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply discusses the development of a better understanding of procedures and the clarification of the significance of the funds rate limits.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 164.
MR. GUFFEY. There's confusion arising [even] within theCommittee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The phrase "even within the Committee" suggests that there is disagreement or confusion among the members of the committee.


Passage number 165.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I have no comment on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "I have no comment on that" indicates that the speaker does not have any opinion or disagreement on the topic being discussed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 166.
MR. SCHULTZ. Let me ask you a question. You recall the lasttelephone conversation. I expressed some concern about the marketperception along these lines and wondered whether we might not be ableto say things a little better in a way that might help the market.When we get to the directive today, I think some alternative ways oftalking about the federal funds rate are going to surface because I dohave a sense that some confusion still remains out there. On theother hand, I also have some concern that it is probably important notto change the wording very often because just a change of wording hasa tendency to confuse people. So, there are pros and cons on this.Peter, do you have a sense at this point as to whether there might besome better way to explain what we are actually about in order toclear up any confusion they may have. Or is a change of wording goingto add to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Schultz expresses concern about the market perception and suggests finding better ways to communicate about the federal funds rate. However, he also acknowledges the potential confusion that can arise from changing the wording too often. This shows conflicting perspectives and a lack of agreement on how to address the issue.


Passage number 167.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, as I said, I think there is a bettersense of what we are about that is permeating the markets. It's amessage that [could use] further repetition or elaboration asopportunities [arise] in testimony or speeches or interviews to conveyjust how the procedures work and our approach to the funds rate as aset of checkpoints. I've heard the question from market people: Ifit only has the significance of a checkpoint, why do you have it inyour directives at all. I think that's certainly a legitimate pointfor the Committee to want to discuss.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Sternlight, simply suggests the need to further explain or elaborate on the procedures and approach to the funds rate as checkpoints. He acknowledges a legitimate point raised by market people and suggests it as a topic for discussion by the Committee.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 168.
MR. SCHULTZ. Well, that's what I keep hearing: If it's justa checkpoint, why do you put it in or why don't you just say that moreclearly. They get confused about the way we say it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Schultz is expressing confusion and questioning the clarity of the information being communicated.


Passage number 169.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I think the directive does, in effect, saythat [it's a checkpoint] now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 170.
MR. PARTEE. I think we have to have it. Otherwise, how dowe know what the checkpoint is. We could say that that's what it is,although technically that's what the paragraph says.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is expressing their opinion that it is necessary to have something (unspecified in the given passage) in order to know what the checkpoint is. It is a statement of their viewpoint, without any conflicting ideas or arguments from other individuals.


Passage number 171.
MR. SCHULTZ. I know, but it seems to confuse them for somereason.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no apparent contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Schultz is expressing his understanding of a situation without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 172.
MR. BLACK. Peter, you say the [concept of a] checkpoint isthere, but I don't read it quite that strongly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. While Mr. Black mentions that he does not read the concept of a checkpoint as strongly as Peter does, it does not indicate a strong disagreement or contention between the two individuals.


Passage number 173.
MR. PARTEE. Why is that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply consists of a question.


Passage number 174.
-19-5/18/81MR. SCHULTZ. Maybe I started a conversation that best oughtto be done later on. I withdraw the question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that maybe they initiated a conversation that would be better to address at a later time, and they are choosing to withdraw the question.


Passage number 175.
MR. STERNLIGHT. It seems to me that the change in language--I think it was at the December meeting--[clarified it]. Up to then Ithink the wording called for it more as a real constraint, whereas Iread the current wording as more of a checkpoint. That's because weare instructed to maintain reserves along a certain path consistentwith the growth path for the aggregates that the Committee voted forand, if it appears that over a period of time the funds rate is notgoing to be consistent with maintaining reserves on that growth path,then the Manager is to notify the Chairman, and so on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is just an observation and interpretation by Mr. Sternlight regarding a change in language.


Passage number 176.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Whenever we come [to the end of ourcomments] in this area, there's coffee available. These transactionshave to be ratified.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a routine practice of having coffee available when certain transactions are concluded. It does not involve any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 177.
MR. WALLICH. I have a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of disagreement or contention. It simply mentions that Mr. Wallich has a question, without suggesting any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 178.
MR. PARTEE. I have a question, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee simply states that he has a question.


Passage number 179.
MR. WALLICH. Peter, knowing only what we've learned from theincoming data, had we responded very strongly to the upsurge [in thegrowth of the aggregates] in April would it have been possible to makemuch of a difference in the course of the aggregates. What would haveto have been done to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a hypothetical question about the response to the upsurge in the growth of aggregates.


Passage number 180.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think we did respond promptly. Wedidn't get the rate effect until well along in April. Knowing how thewhole month turned out, if we could have been omniscient at thebeginning of the month, I suppose we could have been even morevigorous early in the month. I'm inclined to be skeptical as towhether it would have made a great difference on how the April growthrate itself would have turned out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is reflecting on their actions in response to a situation and expressing skepticism about whether it would have made a significant difference in the outcome.


Passage number 181.
MR. WALLICH. But not being omniscient, just getting thenumbers as they came, I presume we could have acted more immediately.We could have relied not just on the automatic mechanism that movesthe funds rate; we could have dropped the nonborrowed path and raisedthe discount rate and so on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is a statement about what could have been done differently in the past.


Passage number 182.
MS. TEETERS. We did.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting or opposing viewpoints. It seems to be a statement or a response from Ms. Teeters without any conflicting opinions or disagreement.


Passage number 183.
MR. STERNLIGHT. We didn't during that first four-weekperiod, Governor Teeters; we did in the final three weeks. As Iinterpreted it--and Steve may want to comment--I thought perhaps therewas not a need to do that in those first four weeks because there waslighter-than-expected borrowing in the very early part of April. Andbecause of that we were going to be imposing on the banking system ademand for even greater borrowing as we got further into April, whichin itself looked as though it was going to be exerting significantlyincreased reserve pressure without the need to make thesediscretionary, if you will, downward adjustments in the nonborrowedreserve path. We were looking for borrowing to have to rise up to the$1.6 or $1.7 billion area, well above that initial $1150 millionlevel, as we got further along into April.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 184.
-20-5/18/81MR. CORRIGAN. But the fact is that in the first four weeksyou actually moved the nonborrowed path up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a fact.


Passage number 185.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, those were just technical adjustmentsdue to the multipliers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It states that the adjustments were technical and related to the multipliers, which suggests a neutral and factual statement.


Passage number 186.
MR. PARTEE. I'd ask the question more historically thanHenry did. We had a 13.9 percent increase in M-1B shift-adjusted inApril. We had evidence fairly early on that the month would be strongbecause one of those early weeks came in strong. What would it havetaken to have achieved, say, a 10 percent rate of M-1B growth for themonth of April. Is it within the realm of possibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is simply asking a question about the possibility of achieving a certain rate of M-1B growth for the month of April.


Passage number 187.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I think it would have taken [steps] thatwould have had to be done in March.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states the speaker's belief about the steps that should have been taken in March.


Passage number 188.
MR. PARTEE. Before we knew that there was an increase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 189.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes. That would be my view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Sternlight simply expresses his point of view without any opposition or conflicting opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 190.
MS. TEETERS. But we were well below our money growth path,weren't we, for the first three months. And to a certain extent weexpected a rebound in the money supply in April in order to bring theGNP numbers and the money growth into line.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

There is contention or disagreement in the passage because Ms. Teeters suggests that they were well below their money growth path for the first three months, implying that there was a discrepancy between the expected and actual performance.


Passage number 191.
MR. AXILROD. Right. Governor Partee, worrying about how topresent alternatives and so forth, we did look at the elasticities inthe money market model to see if truly we could get an effect within amonth, because in these alternatives we do have effects even in Mayfrom decisions taken in the last light almost--a little beyond themiddle--of May. And if my memory is right--it may be off a little--itlooked as if a one half percentage point increase in the funds rate[would be needed to effect the growth of money in a month]. You could[get the same effect by] working through the borrowing and nonborrowedpath, but it comes down to this: that 1/2 percentage point on thefunds rate seemed to [have an effect of] about 0.3 percent a month ongrowth in the money supply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply discussing different options and their potential effects on the money supply.


Passage number 192.
MR. PARTEE. Right away.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply uses the phrase "right away" to indicate a prompt response or agreement.


Passage number 193.
MR. AXILROD. Within the month. So, if you wanted to get [aneffect of] 3 percentage points, multiply that by 10; it's probably notlinear but it might be on the order of 5 percentage points [on thefunds rate]. [So, if the funds rate were 13 percent at the beginningof a month] and you made it 18 percent pretty promptly during themonth, according to the monthly model it would produce some genuineeffect--on the order of 3 percentage points or so--in the moneysupply. That is all we really have to work on. But then you'd reallyhave to know pretty early in the month what is going to happen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and conjecture about the potential effects of changing the funds rate on the money supply.


Passage number 194.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know where you are [on theagenda]. I understand that you have to ratify the transactions.Maybe you don't want to, after all of this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is uncertain about the other person's stance on ratifying transactions and suggests that they may not want to do so.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 195.
MR. PARTEE. I have one other question Paul, if I might,before we do that. We did have a large increase in rates in themonth. [The increase in] short rates was historically very large andlong rates [went up] quite a bit. One assumes that there must have-21-5/18/81been losers and well as gainers in that market shift. In fact, thearithmetic suggests it, so it must be so. In that last comment inyour statement, Peter, you said the big dealers are in no trouble thatyou can see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests there may be disagreement or contention regarding the impact of the increase in rates on different market participants. While Mr. Partee assumes that there must have been winners and losers in the market shift, Peter's statement implies that the big dealers are not facing any trouble. This contradiction suggests a potential disagreement or contention.


Passage number 196.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I said I'm not aware of disastrouslosses. There were certainly losses taken, mainly in early Aprilbecause they had some big [positions] at the end of March. But ourimpression is that losses were taken by big, well capitalized dealers.They were unhappy, clearly, but they were not put into a state wherethey couldn't function. There were some smaller [problem] situations,not among the major primary dealers but, as I said, among fringeoperators. I can really think of just one smaller dealer operationthat was put out of business.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information about the losses taken by dealers during a certain period.


Passage number 197.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, the one that was in the paper.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Yes, the one that was in the paper" is a straightforward response without any conflicting views being expressed.


Passage number 198.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's almost standard practice for allthe dealers now, unlike a year ago when only half of them did it, tohedge in the futures market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It states a fact about the current practice of dealers and compares it to the past.


Passage number 199.
MR. PARTEE. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only provides a statement, without any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 200.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Now, they [can] hedge purposely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage states that "they [can] hedge purposely," indicating a deliberate action. There is no indication of disagreement or contention in this statement.


Passage number 201.
MR. PARTEE. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage provides no indication of any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 202.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But they can hedge pretty well undergovernment securities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 203.
MR. PARTEE. Well, the question I have in my mind is that thedealers hedge in the futures market and the futures market protectsthe dealers, then, against a very sharp rise in rates. Who is on theother side of those futures transactions and why don't we hear fromthem. They must have lost as much as the dealers were able not tolose.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is posing a question and expressing curiosity about the other side of futures transactions.


Passage number 204.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] dentists.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it is unintelligible.


Passage number 205.
MR. PARTEE. It may be that it's just very widelydistributed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "It may be that it's just very widely distributed" is presented without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 206.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There are a lot of dentists in thearea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement does not present any disagreement or contention. It simply states a fact that there are many dentists in the area.


Passage number 207.
MR. PARTEE. You haven't heard of any problems.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is simply a statement by Mr. Partee asking if the other person has heard of any problems.


Passage number 208.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, no. The dealers did have some lossesin March. In general, it's true that to some extent they were helpedout by hedging in the futures market. Obviously, there were otherparticipants on the other side of the futures market who have lost,but it just seems to be well diversified. We have not heard ofterrible calamitous problems there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement about the dealers' losses and the general help they received from hedging in the futures market.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 209.
MR. BALLES. I wonder if I can just ask one more technicalquestion of Peter. Can you bring me up to date [on your procedures]when you find borrowings departing from assumptions. As I recall, thelast time I heard this discussed you said that in the following period-22-5/18/81you adjust by only half of the undershoot or overshoot, which doesn'tseem to be working out all that well, as far as I can see. Is thatstill the practice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Balles, mentions that the current practice of adjusting by only half of the undershoot or overshoot does not seem to be working well. This implies that he disagrees with the current practice and suggests that it should be changed.


Passage number 210.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, in the current three-week subperiod,we went beyond that kind of adjustment and moved the nonborrowed pathmore in relation to the overshoot. Initially we appeared to berunning about $550 million above on total reserves, and the initialdownward adjustment in the nonborrowed path was $250 million. Then aweek later, it looked as if we were running over by $375 or $400million and a further downward adjustment was made in the nonborrowedpath because of that. There was also another adjustment; in the May6th week we had deliberately accepted some shortfall in nonborrowedreserves because borrowing had been running higher than expected. Itwas kind of the aftermath of that super tight week at the end ofApril. So, another $100 million or so downward adjustment was made inthe nonborrowed path for that reason. In total, the downwardadjustment in the nonborrowed reserve path relative to the totalreserve path was $485 million, which in this case was somewhat morethan the amount by which total reserves were running above their path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining the adjustments made to the nonborrowed reserve path in relation to the total reserve path.


Passage number 211.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We still have to ratify the transactions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the statement. It simply states that there is a remaining task to be carried out, which is ratifying the transactions.


Passage number 212.
MR. PARTEE. So move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply instructing someone to move.


Passage number 213.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, they will be ratified.When I came back, I thought you had finished your coffee break. I seethe coffee is there. Do you want to hear from Mr. Axilrod so you canchew over a doughnut and his comments. Maybe we'll do that, if youdon't take too long.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statements are mostly unrelated and do not involve any conflicting opinions or ideas.


Passage number 214.
MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to provide a response as the provided statement is not available.


Passage number 215.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that all there is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage "Is that all there is?" This statement simply raises a question and does not present any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 216.
MR. SCHULTZ. Yes, he brought us right to the brink and thendropped us, didn't he.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Schultz, implies that the person being referred to brought them to the brink and then dropped them, suggesting some form of failure or betrayal.


Passage number 217.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wasn't quite prepared for you to stop sosoon, but why don't we have the coffee break.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions not being prepared for someone to stop, but suggests having a coffee break, indicating a willingness to continue in a friendly manner.


Passage number 218.
[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have several alternatives laid outbefore us. They take as their low point where we were last time asconverted [for] the remaining part of the period, due to theunexpectedly high [M-1B] growth rate in April. We are, as you know,at the midpoint of the range for M-1B adjusted. The only comfort Ifeel about M-1B adjusted is that we estimate these shifts about threedifferent ways and they all [produce] more or less the same [results].They are probably all wrong, but the different ways of estimating comeout more or less the same. In the last meeting we picked what is theequivalent of "C" this time, which I believe [involves growth that] islow in the range. However, if I recall correctly, the actual M2 camein a little less than we projected the last time, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is presenting different options and discussing their estimations.


Passage number 219.
-23-5/18/81MR. AXILROD. In April it didn't on average, but the data inlate April and thus far in early May suggest that in May M2 will comein quite low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is simply discussing data and making a prediction about M2 in May.


Passage number 220.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And as you see, bank credit has sneakedjust inside the range and M3 remains above its range. While there isa lot of week-to-week change, I suppose that is the trend on theabsolutely most recent money supply figures, if there is such a thingas a trend for about 3 weeks or 4 weeks [of data]. That's where westand. Alternative A would leave us theoretically running in themiddle of the range for M-1B adjusted but would leave us above,although closer to, the ranges in the case of the broader aggregates--only slightly closer, I guess, in the case of M2. That seems to me tobe the range for our discussion. Who would like to start.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information and stating the author's interpretation of that information, but there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 221.
MR. PARTEE. Any of those outcomes is acceptable in terms ofwhat might happen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that "Any of those outcomes is acceptable," suggesting that there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 222.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's fair to say the range ofoutcomes is likely to be somewhat wider than the ranges presented tothe Committee. So, as usual, we are moving in a direction of bias andrisk averseness or whatever. I agree that any of these results wouldnot be disturbing in and of themselves. But it's a question of whichway we should lean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and agreement with the presented options but is discussing the need to decide which direction to lean towards.


Passage number 223.
MS. TEETERS. Steve, you show M2 for May at 6.6 percent. Isit below that now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question about a statistic.


Passage number 224.
MR. AXILROD. We don't have weekly data, except for certaincomponents. But the weakness in the weekly data on money market fundsand what we have seen in small time and savings deposits have led usto project M2 for May generally around that rate. So, it reflects thelatest data for those components for which we have weekly data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply describes the method used in projecting M2 for May based on available data.


Passage number 225.
MS. TEETERS. The 6.6 percent does.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it is a statement of fact. It does not express any conflicting viewpoints or opinions.


Passage number 226.
MR. AXILROD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. The speaker simply affirms the presence of a person named Mr. Axilrod.


Passage number 227.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Schultz.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. This is because the given statement, "Governor Schultz," does not provide any context or information that could lead to contention or disagreement.


Passage number 228.
MR. SCHULTZ. Let me start out with a very quick story aboutthe fellow who went to Dublin and asked directions to a castle outsideof town. He said: "Can you tell me how to get there." And thefellow he asked said: "Of course I can, but you can't start fromhere." I'm afraid I have that same kind of feeling as we go around.The last time I expressed a lot of vague fears, which I guess have allcome true, that we have gotten higher interest rates and a strongereconomy and everything seems to be going in different directions dueto that. Money seems to affect interest rates, and interest ratesaffect money; but neither one seems to have much effect on theeconomy. So, I have some real questions about how we should go aboutdoing this. In addition, I have the same thoughts that were expressedhere a little earlier: That we are putting a lot of pressure onvarious parts of the economy and that it's going to be hard to get outof this without some kind of financial crisis. The one really strongfeeling I have is that monetary policy alone won't do the job for us.But we don't have much choice. Over the weekend I looked at theBluebook and I thought about "B" tending toward "A." But the more I-24-5/18/81listen to the reports that things are pretty strong out there, itseems fairly clear that we don't have any option but to continue torestrain this economy. What we've done so far isn't having too mucheffect. So, I guess I would now come out somewhere between "B" and"C," keeping borrowing around $2 billion and perhaps shading that upif necessary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and concerns about the state of the economy and the need for monetary policy. There is no mention of conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 229.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only provides the name "Mr. Solomon" without any additional context or information.


Passage number 230.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 231.
 Well, unless the President told youthis morning that he's willing to change his fiscal policy and have abalanced budget in fiscal 1982 by forgetting about tax cuts andcutting back on defense increases--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The question answers itself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 232.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Unless you could tell us that, I feelthat we have to go even further this way. I feel we should takealternative C, but not the initial borrowing assumption of $3 billion.I'd start off with a $2-1/4 to $2-1/2 billion borrowing assumption. Ithink that we have to have a fed funds range going up to 22 percent.And even that will be skewed; in other words, we are likely to be nearthe ceiling fairly quickly unless we are very lucky and we see muchlower growth in May. I recognize, if we do get something on the orderof 5-1/2 or 6 percent [M-1B] growth in May, what this would require inJune and that, therefore, pressure is likely to continue mounting overthat period until the end of June. It seems to me that we are betteroff to be very firm and vigorous in our responses early in the game.I'm influenced not only by the strength of the economy--and there is awidespread feeling around the country, and certainly in the market,that with the exception of the troubled sectors the economy is verystrong--but I'm also influenced by the fact that if the President'sprogram goes through, even with a compromise on the tax cut package,the fourth quarter is likely to be much stronger, and the thirdquarter probably somewhat stronger, than the present quarter. And inthose circumstances we might have major problems [achieving] ourfourth-quarter targets. I feel we are better off trying to nip thisnow than trying to be more gentle in our approach; the latter approachis going to store up a lot of problems toward the end of the year.That's all I'll say right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and suggesting a course of action based on their analysis of the economy.


Passage number 233.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I may just interrupt, I have a feelingthat this relative buoyancy in the economy against expectations isimportantly affected by the psychology of the Administration's programitself, the tax reduction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply presents a perspective or opinion about the impact of the administration's program on the economy.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 234.
MR. SCHULTZ. And the way they talk about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of the phrase "And the way they talk about it" suggests that there is a difference in opinion or perspective between different individuals.


Passage number 235.
MR. PARTEE. It's the [tack] of the Administration.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a direct quote with no additional context or information provided. Therefore, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 236.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In the financial markets, privatelypeople will say that they don't see the difference between a Keynesiantax cut and a supply sider tax cut; it's going to be the same. We arecalculating internally within the New York Fed that the budget deficitthis year will be above $65 billion and that for fiscal '82, if thePresident's program is enacted, it will not be $45 billion or less butit will be $75 billion. I would say the majority of the big firms inthe financial markets also are forecasting budgetary deficits very-25-5/18/81much higher than the Administration or even than the CBO estimates.So, that's a factor. I think there would be a remarkable turnaroundin psychology and attitudes if we had a more traditional conservativeapproach to the deficit question by the Administration.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that privately, some people in the financial markets do not see a difference between a Keynesian tax cut and a supply sider tax cut, while the speaker and the majority of big firms in the financial markets believe that the budget deficits will be much higher than what the Administration or the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) estimates. This disagreement reflects differing perspectives and opinions on the effects of different tax cuts and the projected budget deficits.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 237.
MR. SCHULTZ. I think the way they say it is of criticalimportance. The President is essentially an upbeat kind of fellow; Ithink he wants to talk that way. But the talk has been essentiallythat we can get out of this almost without any real pain and withoutany real problems. I just don't think that that's the right way to betalking at this stage of the game because, heaven knows, it's prettyhard to see how that could be possible. If they would talk in alittle more practical way, I think it would help.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Schultz, believes that the way the President talks about the situation is not the right way and does not align with the reality of the situation. He suggests that talking in a more practical way would be more helpful.


Passage number 238.
MR. WALLICH. I think they believe this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their belief without any opposing or conflicting viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 239.
 I have heard thisnow for a week from Beryl Sprinkel: Everything will be easy, if theFed just keeps the money supply--MR. BOEHNE. Yes, I was going to add to that. They say wecan get out of this with no problems unless the Fed screws up. If wehave problems, it's the Fed's fault.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Boehne, agrees with Beryl Sprinkel's statement that everything will be easy if the Fed keeps the money supply. However, they go on to say that if there are problems, it will be the Fed's fault. This suggests a disagreement or disagreement with the role and responsibility of the Fed in managing the situation.


Passage number 240.
MR. WALLICH. That's exactly it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply agrees with the statement or point that was made.


Passage number 241.
MR. ROOS. I don't know. In all fairness, an awful lot of uswho have been advocating monetary restraint over the years have saidrepeatedly that we can't get over a binge such as the one we have beenon without suffering pain. Whether it's Beryl Sprinkel or Joe Jonesor whoever, those who have advocated restraint have also warned thatthere is no easy way out of it. So, I'm not sure that there hasn'tbeen some recognition of the pain that inevitably will be required tobring an economy out of the excesses that this economy has beenexperiencing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any direct disagreement or contention. It is more of an observation and acknowledgment of the potential pain and difficulty associated with bringing an economy out of excesses.


Passage number 242.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I didn't mean to get off on a discussionof pain. Governor Partee, what do you have to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging their unintended shift in topic and redirecting the conversation to Governor Partee.


Passage number 243.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I agree that we have to be restrictive.But I would say in response to Tony that what we should do is to setour money growth course the way we would like to have it. If itdeviates from that, then we'll automatically become more restrictivein terms of interest rates if we need to be tighter, or lessrestrictive if we need to be easier. So, I don't really see movingall the way down to alternative C in terms of the specifications.What would we like to have develop in terms of the aggregates. That'sreally the question we are being asked. And in my view "A" holds usright along the mid-section of the M-1B range. It's a little ample onM2 and M3 and, therefore, there might be a case for alternative B inorder to adjust for having been over on the broader aggregates. Asfor the numbers for the aggregates, expansion of 3 percent in M-1B forApril to June is quite reasonable; it's a very modest expansion andwould be a quite acceptable outcome. Now, we don't know what interestrates might be associated with the 3 percent increase. And if Iunderstand the meaning of the funds rate range now as the points atwhich we're to have a consultation rather than points within which theManager operates, I think we might want to raise that range in "B" to16 to 22 percent. I can certainly imagine the rate going to 22percent with no trouble at all, and I don't know that it would be-26-5/18/81fruitful to have an exchange [of views] until it gets to about 22percent. But that's just a test point, or guidepost, or whatever yousaid earlier, Peter, rather than a specification to the Manager.There is one other point that I want to make now. I think wewill be in as much difficulty politically if there is weakness in theaggregates as if there is strength. We could quickly get quite areaction from very weak growth in the monetary aggregates, and that isnot unprecedented. Starting in the spring of both '75 and '76, therewas a surge in the aggregates that was subsequently reversed. Thefact that the last couple of occasions haven't [produced that result]doesn't mean it won't occur again. April is still an odd month; ithas a lot of tax transactions in it. So it seems to me that we oughtto be in a posture where we can give a little if the numbers come inweak as well as tighten up a little if the numbers come in strong, andwe ought to do it from a neutral position. So, I could accept thespecifications of alternative A, but I lean rather strongly to "B" asa conservative posture.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and preferences, but there is no direct disagreement with anyone else's views.


Passage number 244.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And would you take the associatedborrowing assumption of "B" of $2-1/2 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is providing a statement or a question, but there is no contention or disagreement being expressed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 245.
MR. PARTEE. Well, $2-1/2 billion seems a little strong. Iwanted to ask Steve why he [raised] that. I would say $2 billion isabout where we are now, isn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Partee disagrees with the statement that suggests the amount is $2.5 billion, stating that $2 billion is a more accurate estimate.


Passage number 246.
MR. AXILROD. That's right. We thought with our projectionsthat to stay with unchanged money market conditions we'd expect anoutcome more like "A" than "B." So, with added restraint from "B," itlooked as if we'd have to have a higher funds rate, on the order of apercentage point or so higher. It is hard to relate that exactly tothe level of borrowing, but that tends to push up the level ofborrowing by $450 to $500 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is explaining projections and suggesting that a certain outcome is expected based on those projections. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 247.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are below $2 billion of borrowing rightat the moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact about the current borrowing amount, without any conflicting or opposing views presented.


Passage number 248.
MR. AXILROD. It was $1.8175 billion on Friday exactly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a factual figure.


Passage number 249.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But the average of the last threeweeks was about $2 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement provides a factual average of the last three weeks' amounts without any conflicting information or contradictory opinions.


Passage number 250.
MR. PARTEE. I would say $2 billion, Tony, and then if M-1Bcomes in strong, that would soon develop additional tension andadditional borrowings, as it did in this last episode. I'd favor moreof a neutral start.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and preference regarding the topic at hand.


Passage number 251.
MS. TEETERS. That implies a negative rate of growth in M-1Bduring June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage simply states a fact, without any indication of contention or disagreement. It mentions the implication of a negative rate of growth in M-1B during June.


Passage number 252.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it depends upon what happens late inMay. The staff is assuming an increase late in May.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply describes the staff's assumption about an increase late in May, without presenting any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 253.
MR. AXILROD. It might be helpful to add, Mr. Chairman, thatthe May estimate of a little over 6 percent in M-1B growth does assumean increase from the preliminary data of the 13th to the end of themonth of around $5 billion. If an increase of that magnitude doesn't-27-5/18/81develop, May could turn out to be unchanged or be at a level that haschanged around 1 or 2 percent. It could go almost either way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presenting a range of possibilities or potential outcomes.


Passage number 254.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage is incomplete, and it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement without further information.


Passage number 255.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I feel this May-June period is verycrucial in our efforts to convince the market that we are bound anddetermined to hit these targets that we've set. And given the largebulge we had in the April numbers, I feel we simply can't tolerate anymore than a modest expansion in M-1B. Along with the fiscal stancethat the market perceives, the behavior of the aggregates is going tobe the most important thing determining the business outlook ratherthan all those things we hammered through in our go-around earlierthis morning. So, I think we really ought to try very strongly to hitthese March-June targets that we established at our March meeting,which would incline me to favor alternative C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is expressing his opinion about the importance of hitting the targets and favoring alternative C, but there is no opposition or disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 256.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Since there is no specific passage mentioned, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 257.
MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, this kind of economic environment isone where most people see strength in the economy and where I wouldcharacterize the economy as indicating a pronounced lack of weakness.It seems to me that we may continue to see money growth coming inpretty strong. And in this environment, it seems to me the reallybasic question is how rapidly we want to bring M2 and M3 back towithin their target ranges--whether we want to bring them back by theend of June or whether we are prepared to wait somewhat longer. Myown view is that we should try to get M2 and M3 back within theirtarget ranges as soon as possible--that is, by the end of June. Andalternative C, of course, is the alternative that will do that.Alternative C, if we get the results projected, would result in allthree of the aggregates being within their target ranges: M-1B at thelow end, and M2 and M3 at the top. I think that is important toachieve. If we had an economy that we could be fairly sure wasweakening and if money demand was slackening, we could take a longertime to try to bring these aggregates back to within their targetranges. But in the current circumstances, with recent money growthhaving been so strong and with every possibility that strong moneydemand will continue, I would see less risk in trying to get theaggregates back [on track]. Of course, to pursue alternative C wouldimply, as has been pointed out, substantially higher rates than wehave now and somewhat higher rates than we would anticipate if wepursued alternative B. That is, we would have these higher rates inthe short run, or at least during the month of June and possiblylonger. However, by the fourth quarter, if I read Appendix II [of theBluebook] correctly, alternative C would yield lower short-terminterest rates and alternative B, if pursued, would yield higherinterest rates. So it's a question of whether one wants to takehigher interest rates now or in the fourth quarter. I would opt fortaking them now. And that would lead me to favor alternative C. Afinal reason for favoring alternative C right now is that we reallyare not too sure what we are working with when we rely exclusively onM-1B. In these circumstances I think we ought to attach moreimportance to M2 and to getting M2 back within the target range, so Ifavor alternative C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Rice, is expressing his own view and preference for alternative C, but there is no opposing viewpoint presented or mentioned.


Passage number 258.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 259.
-28-5/18/81MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I line up with Governor Partee onthis one. I think we ought to follow a middle course here. We havehad a major change in policy, as defined by interest rates, in thepast four weeks. We have seen the federal funds rate move up by 300basis points. There hasn't been enough time for us to see what impactthat is going to have on the economy and monetary growth rates. Ithink there's a tendency as we get near the peak of activity always tofeel that we are not accomplishing anything--that the economy somehowis not sensitive to interest rates. I think back to March, 1980 whenthat feeling was clearly dominant in this Committee. We didn't knowat the time that the economy had already been climbing for two monthsas we were sitting at the table and as Fred Schultz was about to leadus into a vigorous credit control program.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their agreement with Governor Partee and advocating for a cautious approach based on recent changes in interest rates. They are reflecting on past experiences and emphasizing the need to wait and see the impact of these changes before making further decisions.


Passage number 260.
MR. SCHULTZ. What a friend.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 261.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In defense of Fred Schultz, that's notwholly apparent to me, [even] with the benefit of hindsight. Had wenot had the credit control program we might not have had the decline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The author is simply stating that they do not fully see the effectiveness of Fred Schultz's defense, even with the advantage of hindsight.


Passage number 262.
MR. MORRIS. Well, I think the evidence is that the declinehad already started.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Morris, simply expresses his opinion that the decline had already started.


Passage number 263.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ex-post people say that. I don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 264.
MR. MORRIS. It seems to me that one could make a case here,at least for the next few weeks, not to set too restrictive a coursein the aggregates until we can assess the effect of what we havealready done. So, "B" looks pretty good to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 265.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without having the complete passage or any specific context.


Passage number 266.
MR. BALLES. There are a couple of things, Mr. Chairman, thathave led me in the same direction as Mr. Solomon and Governor Rice.We're beginning to wonder--and it's obviously speculation rather thanproof yet--whether we aren't witnessing some downward shift in thedemand for money, along the same lines as occurred in the 1975-76episode, because of the institutional changes affecting businessdeposits with this surge in money market mutual funds. Somesimulations we have been doing over the past five months show thatM-1B is now well below the level that would have been indicated byhistorical demand relationships, and I'm really beginning to wonderwhether there hasn't been a downward shift. I don't know what studiesyou have been doing on this, Steve. But if that is going on, and Isuspect it might be, the shift-adjusted range that we have set forourselves could actually give us more expansion than we counted onwhen we picked out the range at the beginning of the year, even thoughwe are now, as of April, in the middle of that shift-adjusted range.And that leads me to lean more toward "C" than "B."One thing that gives me real pause about coming out there iswhat Governor Gramley as well as Steve and the staff remarked onearlier today: Namely, it seems to indicate that we'd have to keepinterest rates at a very high level for a very long time. We needsome real weakening in the economy in order to hit even the midpointof our shift-adjusted M-1B range. But, again, our staff has beendoing some work on the differences between the liquidity preferencemodel of interest rates and the more traditional loanable funds theory-29-5/18/81of interest rate determination. And the net of that is that, exceptfor the very short run, interest rates are going to be determined moreby credit market conditions than pure money demand equations [wouldsuggest]. This leads us to conclude that it's distinctly possiblethat we can get a slowdown in money growth this year from last year,along the lines of the midpoint of our shift-adjusted range, withoutkeeping interest rates that high that long, and to a point where wewould see somewhat more real economic growth in '81 than the Boardstaff [has projected] and almost about the same real economic growth,close to 3 percent, in 1982. Admittedly, a lot of this is conjecturaland one might even say speculative; but taking both of those reasonstogether tilts me toward alternative C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and speculations on the topic, but there is no indication of any opposing views or conflicting opinions within the passage.


Passage number 267.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 268.
MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, when you were out, GovernorGramley spoke of some frustration in terms of trying to figure outwhat the economy is doing. We have more than our share offrustrations in policy here, too. We just got through revising up themoney supply a little in the first quarter, convincing ourselves thatthat made more sense. But now we find that the GNP may be revised upmore, so we're further away than we thought we were.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 269.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Wait 'til next year's revision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Wait 'til next year's revision" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests that a revision will occur in the following year.


Passage number 270.
MR. SCHULTZ. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context that suggests contention or disagreement. It simply states that someone named Mr. Schultz responded with "Yes" to an unidentified question or statement.


Passage number 271.
MR. CORRIGAN. We have a little frustration, too, withrespect to this question of how quickly the banking system responds towhat we do. We saw a classic illustration of that in this periodhere, apropos to your comment earlier, Governor Partee. We seem tohave a situation where, even when we begin to firm up, what happensfor a couple of weeks is that the banks sit there and wait untilWednesday and cover their whole position on Wednesday. And the fundsrate doesn't change except on Wednesday and then everybody discountsthe change. And then for a week or two after the banks run down theirexcess reserves and end up with deficiencies. Somehow or other, inways that are not clear to me, it takes a couple more weeks and werevise away all those deficiencies with "as-of" adjustments. Thenfinally, after all of those processes have run their course, we beginto see some pressure either in terms of borrowing or the funds rate,or both. I will also confess to a little continuing sense offrustration about the construction of and subsequent adjustments tothe reserve paths, which comes up again in this forthcoming period.The Bluebook indicates that, looking out over the April-June period,any of the alternatives contemplates a substantial acceleration inreserve growth while at the same time about the same or less growth inmoney. I don't know what all that means except that maybe we don'tknow as much as we think we know.As I suggested earlier, there are some risks here, and Ithink we have to be prepared to take some risks. In the currentcircumstances I come out somewhere around "C," too, partly because Ithink the economy, if anything, is stronger, and partly because Ithink money growth is likely to be stronger in the short run than weexpect. And finally, like Governor Rice, if we have to take a bit ofa slowdown or a decline in the economy, which we may have to do, I'drather do it now than later, partly because I think it makes more-30-5/18/81sense in the context of hitting the annual targets but partly becauseit forestalls an even more serious problem that would occur if we let[money growth] continue to build up. Given all of that, I come outsomewhere around "C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing frustration and sharing their own perspective on the situation, but they do not directly challenge or disagree with any other speaker.


Passage number 272.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot provide a clear answer without the full passage or context.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 273.
MR. WALLICH. Well, I see the economy lifted to a higherlevel of [activity] and, with a given rate of money growth, we have ahigher level of velocity than one would have expected. Certainly, wehave to [get money growth to] come back [toward our] midpoints. If wedon't do that, I think we will have continuing pressure from highinterest rates for a long time, with the economy being held down byalways bumping [up against] the admittedly very tight-fitting moneysupply ceilings. I find that uncomfortable to contemplate for thefuture. So, if we could create a little breathing space in the realsector, letting out some of that steam that built up during the firstquarter, I think we would operate more comfortably with our existingtargets and in the long run we'd probably have less high interestrates. Conceivably, maintenance of these high interest rates wouldgive us this [result] anyway through some sort of financial crunch.But we don't want to provoke that. So, I would lean toward exerting agood deal of pressure now in order to get [rid of the imbalances in]the economy and [in] the relationship of the aggregates to theeconomy. That suggests that "C" is the appropriate alternative. Tothe extent that one can [anticipate] these things, if "C" will allowthe funds rate to come down later even though it may mean a higherfunds rate immediately, that's what I think we should aim at, i.e.somewhat less pressure in the economy for the longer run.I would say one other thing. Given the way we were surprisedby events in April, we ought to examine whether we couldn't respondmore flexibly to such developments. I realize that means respondingto the weekly data in a way that the data themselves don't reallyjustify. Nevertheless, it has happened again and again that we wereovertaken by events and, in the light of hindsight, probably wouldhave wanted to move faster. I don't recall so many instances in whichwe did move fast and then regretted it or didn't move and then foundthat that would have been the right thing to do. On balance, I thinkour failures have been on the side of actions [that were] too littleand too late.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement with the current approach and suggests exerting more pressure on the economy to address imbalances and potentially decrease high interest rates in the long run. They also recommend being more flexible and responsive to developments, indicating a desire for a different approach.


Passage number 274.
MR. SCHULTZ. But you want to be asymmetrical about that,don't you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking for confirmation or clarification about wanting to be asymmetrical, suggesting a desire for an unbalanced or non-symmetrical approach.


Passage number 275.
MR. WALLICH. On the down side I do have my reservations,yes. In short, I would lean toward "C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, expresses reservations about something, but it is not specified what he is referring to. Therefore, it cannot be determined if there is disagreement or contention.


Passage number 276.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without having access to the specific content of the passage itself.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 277.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm primarilymotivated by a desire to hit the targets that we set earlier, notbecause they're magic but because that would tend to avoid the samekind of thing that happened in June, July, and August of last year.That is, things got away from us after one month [of] fairly large[monetary growth]. We say that isn't terribly bad, but when we startpiling one month after the other, we then have a very small chance ofhitting our targets for the year. Therefore, restraint at the moment-31-5/18/81is attractive to me, but I'm not sure that I would go as far as "C."The staff's estimate of growth in M-1B of 6 percent or a little abovein May under alternative B probably is subject to being off by atleast 100 percent. That is, I think we could get 3 percent or 9percent in May as easily as 6 percent. Thus, my prescription would besomething between "B" and "C," with a borrowing level initially ofabout $2.1 or $2.2 billion and with the rather specific instruction tothe Desk and to the staff that if money growth as it develops in Mayis running above 6 percent, the borrowing level should be adjustedupward promptly to $2-1/2 billion, [the level] I believe the staffwould say at the moment is consistent with "B." So, I am choosingnumbers for growth in the aggregates between "B" and "C," with aninitial borrowing level of $2.1 or $2.2 billion but I would beprepared to move borrowing up rather rapidly if growth in M-1B startscoming in above 6 percent in May. A federal funds range of 17 to 22percent would be acceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Guffey expresses that he is not sure he would go as far as option "C" which suggests a growth in M-1B of 6 percent or above in May. He believes that the estimate could be off by at least 100 percent, meaning that the growth could be as low as 3 percent or as high as 9 percent. He suggests a borrowing level between options "B" and "C" and also mentions adjusting the borrowing level upward if the growth in M-1B goes above 6 percent. This indicates that he disagrees with the specific instructions given by option "B" and has a different approach in mind.


Passage number 278.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: This passage appears to be incomplete as there is no further information provided. Without additional context, it is not possible to determine whether there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 279.
MR. BOEHNE. I think the current economic situation and thegeneral climate that we're in call for restraint. And we really haveto hit our targets. I'd be prepared to err some on the side ofrestraint, but it seems to me that alternative B does that. I findgoing all the way to "C" to be too much in that direction. So, Iwould come out in the neighborhood of "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Boehne simply expresses his opinion that alternative B is more appropriate given the current economic situation and climate.


Passage number 280.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states "Mr. Roos," which does not provide enough context to determine if there is any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 281.
MR. ROOS. I would opt for "C" for most of the reasonsalready stated. There is one further reason, and that is thepossibility that the new seasonal adjustments are a bit unrealistic interms of the degree to which they've adjusted the aggregates downward.I'd like to throw in one other thought, too. If we are interested inachieving the greatest degree of confidence that could reasonably beexpected in the financial markets, I wonder if in the directive--andthis piggybacks somewhat on some of the things that Fred Schultz hassaid--we ought to consider eliminating any reference to our federalfunds rate checkpoints. It seems to me that there could be a lot ofreasons why the Chairman would consult at a critical phase. It isconceivable that growth of the aggregates, for example, could be asource of concern that might lead to adjustments. I do know thatthere is still a degree of uncertainty in the minds of marketparticipants as to why we include a reference to checkpoints on thefed funds rate and not on some of the other [factors] that couldinfluence our [need to] consult. So, I think some considerationshould be given to clarifying that with a statement, perhaps by theChairman, that we consult for a lot of reasons and that under our newprocedures fed funds checkpoints are no more meaningful than othercheckpoints that would lead to consultation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is offering their opinion and suggesting some considerations for discussion, but there is no direct disagreement with any other person or viewpoint.


Passage number 282.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll get to that subject a little later.Mr. Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply mentioning that they will discuss a certain subject later.


Passage number 283.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the mood of theCommittee is becoming very clear. This is a Committee that follows atough policy. It's only a question of how far we go. I share thegeneral view that I believe prevails here that we're dealing with avery strong economy and that our problem this year in terms of the-32-5/18/81monetary aggregates is primarily making sure that we don't overrun theupper ends [of our ranges] rather than the other way around. But Iwant to call the Committee's attention to the fact that we haveessentially one alternative that implies no change in money marketconditions and that's "A." The other two are both tougher. And if mysense of relationships is correct, the borrowing numbers we'reassociating with "B" and "C" are not by any means associated with themidpoints of the federal funds ranges that we're talking about here.The present level of borrowing is less than $2 billion. Under "C"that would go all the way up to $3 billion. And if we go that far, Ithink we're going to end up having a telephone consultation by nextMonday, if not earlier. We have done a lot of tightening recently,and I think we ought to try to keep that degree of tightness andperhaps go somewhat further. But I wouldn't want us to get into asituation in which if some temporary weakness in the aggregates doesdevelop, as Governor Partee suggests it might, we would end up runninginterest rates back down again. That would be quite unproductive, ifthe Committee's diagnosis of the economic problem is a correct one.So, I think the better alternative would be to stick with "B" and thencome back a month from now at the next meeting and go further if weneed to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 284.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about Mr. Ford's stance or opinion on a particular matter, so there is no contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 285.
MR. FORD. I come out pretty much on the consensus of between"B" and "C," leaning toward "C." I share the concern about the greatrisk to credibility and the overriding need to meet the targets and tostart now rather than to wait until later. We've been fortunate thatthe seasonal adjustments, if I read the staff work right, had theeffect of making the more recent aggregate numbers look lower. Theyare below some of the others, which were adjusted upward, is the way Iread that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is indicated by the statement "I come out pretty much on the consensus of between 'B' and 'C,' leaning toward 'C,'" which suggests that the speaker agrees with both options but slightly favors one over the other.


Passage number 286.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It makes April lower, but May and Junehigher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that April is lower, while May and June are higher.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 287.
MR. FORD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is evident from the response "Yes" given by Mr. Ford, suggesting a disagreement or opposing opinion.


Passage number 288.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. February is higher and April and Januaryare [lower].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that February is higher than April and January, without any conflicting information or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 289.
MR. FORD. Depending on how different Fed watchers interpretthat, there may be a little vulnerability about some of the downwardmovement from pretty high numbers to quite low ones, even though inother timeframes they are offset. Overall, I would say we'd have togo with a reasonably tight policy so as not to pay later, hoping it istrue, as I think Governor Rice said, that we'll get slightly higherrates now and receive as our reward lower rates later in the year thanwe would otherwise have under "B" or "A." However, I'm very concernedabout the fragility of the marketplace. Fred Schultz in his commentsmentioned the words "financial crisis" and it almost sounded casual tome, Fred.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their concerns and opinions about the current state of the market and the need for tight policy.


Passage number 290.
 I don't mean to insult you but I don't think that'ssomething that we should--MR. SCHULTZ. This is not my day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and stating that it is not their day.


Passage number 291.
MR. PARTEE. Casual.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 292.
-33-5/18/81MR. FORD. You said there might be a financial crisis and Ithought everyone would blanch. I blanched, but nobody else did.We're obviously not going to put that in the policy record, but Ireally do hope that we redouble our efforts to watch very carefullyfor possible problems arising in the most vulnerable sectors, thehousing-related sectors, and try every device we can think of to helpthe thrifts that is not a bail-out, which would [subvert] monetarypolicy. I'm referring to advocating right now federal preemption ofthe limits on due-on-sale clauses in 17 states, including some of thebiggest ones, and things like that. That would help them to reliquifythemselves better without an outright bail-out, which would simplyexacerbate our monetary control problems. That's the only thing Iwould like to add to this process as we head toward this obviousconsensus of "B" to "C"--that we have to redouble our efforts in thearea of monitoring and doing whatever we can that is not inflationaryto help the [institutions that] bear the brunt of it. I don't knowthat there's an answer, Chuck. I know what you're going to say, butwe had better be searching.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is proposing a course of action and expressing a hope for increased monitoring and assistance in certain sectors, without any conflicting opinions or alternative views being presented.


Passage number 293.
MR. PARTEE. Due-on-sale doesn't help them this month or nextmonth, that's for sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a fact without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 294.
MR. FORD. No, but if you do the calculations on the amountof money they can recycle, that makes a big difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 295.
MR. PARTEE. It might next year or the year after.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a possibility or timeline for an event.


Passage number 296.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Governor Teeters without providing any information or context that could suggest contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 297.
MS. TEETERS. Well, I'm shocked by the consensus that isemerging. I don't think this economic outlook, which is based on "A,"is at all encouraging. It means another year or maybe two years of nogrowth in the economy. I find the unemployment rates projected, withno growth, rather unbelievable also. More importantly, it seems to methat the level of borrowing is now becoming very crucial here. Atjust under $2 billion we have already put a great deal of pressure onthe market. We have shot [short-term interest] rates up 3 to 5 fullpercentage points, depending on which ones you look at. If we moveborrowing up another $1 billion, the [proposed fed funds upper end of]22 percent isn't going to hold. It seems to me that we really shouldbe somewhere between "A" and "B" and perhaps move the borrowing fromthe present $1.7 or $1.8 billion to just over $2 billion and let thatbe the deciding point here. I'd set the [top of the funds rate] rangeat certainly no more than 21 percent, which I find difficult toaccept. We're putting a lot of pressure on the market now. Wehaven't had enough time, as Frank said, to assess what that suddenchange in interest rates is going to do. I think it's foolish to runrates up another 5 percentage points in such a short period of time,which I'm convinced "C" would do at this point. I can live with "B,"but I don't like it. I'd much rather have the borrowing halfwaybetween $2 and $2-1/2 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Ms. Teeters expresses her shock and disbelief at the economic outlook and the projected unemployment rates. She also disagrees with the level of borrowing and the proposed increase in borrowing. She suggests a different borrowing amount and a lower top range for the funds rate. She states that she can live with option "B" but doesn't like it, indicating her disagreement with that option as well.


Passage number 298.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That doesn't sound like such a weakapproach.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The sentence is a statement expressing a perspective or opinion. There is no indication of disagreement or contradiction within the passage.


Passage number 299.
MR. PARTEE. No, no.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 300.
MR. SCHULTZ. That borrowing [level] is pretty good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the statement. The speaker is providing a positive assessment, stating that the borrowing level is good.


Passage number 301.
-34-5/18/81MR. PARTEE. That's a $400 million adjustment right off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply mentions a $400 million adjustment without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 302.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It only mentions a title and a name.


Passage number 303.
 You're above--MS. TEETERS. Yes, but it's better than the [$2-1/2] billionthat everybody else is talking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 304.
MR. SCHULTZ. [I don't think] that's right. I was startingat $2 billion and moving it up from there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. The speaker simply expresses their opinion, without directly contradicting or opposing anyone else's statement.


Passage number 305.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, me too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. "Yes, me too" is an agreement or affirmation of whatever was previously mentioned.


Passage number 306.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage is incomplete, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 307.
MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I come down pretty clearly for"C." The arguments for that position have been stated and I will nottake the time to restate them. But just by way of summary: Thestrength of the economy worries me; I wonder about the recent rapidgrowth in money and that it may not be temporary; also theexpectations issue looms rather large in my thinking. I think it'simportant to have a continuously firm policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their support for option "C" and mentions their concerns about the economy, rapid growth in money, and the importance of a continuously firm policy.


Passage number 308.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
There is no indication of any contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage does not present any conflicting opinions or contrasting viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 309.
MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, there are several things we haven'treally talked about this morning, including the internationalsituation, the Middle East, and a number of other things thatcertainly could alter the outlook very quickly. A second point isthat I'd be very happy if somehow we could get away from the checkwriting privileges on these money funds, because I think we areexposed there with the funds investing in issues that could go sour onthem. We may have more volatility built into this than we arethinking about. The third is that we talk about targets as if theywere fixed and we forget base-drift and a whole lot of history thatgoes into them. I'm not sure that hitting the midpoint of our newrange is what we really ought to be doing. A little miss on the lowside might be more helpful than misses on the high side. I'mdisturbed by the M2 and M3 figures, which tend to go on the high sidein this set-up. On the other hand, I have some sympathy with Lyle'spoint of view in that I'd hate to see us run the rates up and then runthem right back down again. That would not be very helpful in termsof our longer-run objectives. To take a stance at this time, I wouldbe content to be able to hit somewhere between "B" and "C" rather thanto set a target and then be all over the lot in terms of ourperformance. I, too, would be inclined to raise the borrowingobjective to help move in that direction; I'd go to $2.1 billion orsomething in that neighborhood as a first move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains disagreement and different viewpoints. Mr. Winn expresses concern about certain issues and suggests taking a different approach, while also acknowledging sympathy with Lyle's viewpoint. This indicates that there is some contention or disagreement within the passage.


Passage number 310.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Doyle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Based on the given text, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement. The passage only states "Mr. Doyle," which does not provide any indication of disagreement or contention. More context would be needed to determine if there is any disagreement.


Passage number 311.
MR. DOYLE. Mr. Chairman, it's very difficult for me not tobe influenced by the state of the economy in the Seventh FederalReserve District, particularly the credit-sensitive industries, whichare extremely depressed. Every day the feeling seems to be growingthat the risks are greater that some of these industries may notrecover their former strength. Hence, I would favor alternative A butI could reluctantly support alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses a personal preference for alternative A but also indicates a willingness to support alternative B. This suggests a level of flexibility and open-mindedness rather than disagreement.


Passage number 312.
-35-5/18/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess that is everybody, unless somebodyhas not been heard from.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a guess about whether everyone has been heard from. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 313.
MR. PARTEE. We haven't heard from you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply stating that they haven't heard from the person being referred to.


Passage number 314.
MR. SCHULTZ. We're about to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statement or argument that can be considered controversial or contradictory. It seems to be a straightforward statement without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 315.
MR. PARTEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is yes. There is contention or disagreement indicated by the response of Mr. Partee starting with the word "Yes".


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 316.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll reveal my forecast on where theCommittee would come out, which by coincidence or otherwise doesn'tmake me feel uncomfortable. We have had a 5-1/2 percent [M-1B] targetfor the quarter, and the alternative that's consistent with that is"C." But we had a big increase [in M-1B] in April. My forecast wasthat it might not look too good or that people might not want to saythat we should go all the way to "C," which implies about 1 percent[M-1B growth for April to June] by the time we state it in thedirective. Stated flatly, we're certainly around the "B to C" area;both the Committee and the non-Committee members, looked atindividually or collectively, are split someplace between "B" and "C"with a little flavor of between "A" and "B." The question I wouldraise is whether we can reconcile that part of it, and I'll get to theborrowings and the other issues in a minute. If you look at the waythe record has been stated historically, the most consistent way isthat [at this point in the quarter] we'd put in a growth rate forApril to June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that both the Committee and the non-Committee members are split between "B" and "C" with a little flavor of between "A" and "B". This indicates that there is disagreement on where the growth rate should be for April to June.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 317.
MR. WINN. Is it through June or to June, Paul. I'm worriedabout the lack of [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. 
Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Winn, expresses his concern about something (lack of something) but he is not able to clearly communicate the exact thing he is worried about. This lack of understanding creates contention or disagreement between him and Paul, who is most likely trying to understand what Mr. Winn is referring to.


Passage number 318.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it means through June. We next meetat the beginning of July, don't we. I wondered, when I looked at it,whether we could even put in a growth rate through July. I thoughtabout it after the Bluebook was prepared. But generally we go on thetheory--maybe it's not a good theory--that we set something for thequarter and then review it at the middle-of-the-quarter meeting. Wecan get some of that flavor--I don't know whether this captures someof the [concerns] or not--with a slight rewriting. The draftdirective says "In the short run the Committee seeks behavior ofreserve aggregates consistent with a substantial deceleration ofgrowth in M-1B from April to June"--and that's shift-adjusted--"to anannual rate of ___ percent". This language is all the same so far.Consistent with this approach, we presumably could put in somethinglike the "B" number or we could put in [the "B" number and] "or lower,as may be consistent with the objective for M-1B adopted by theCommittee on March 31" and then repeat that number. If we want to gothat way, I think it says that we are between "B" and "C." And thenwe'd put some M2 number in there. We could go that way or we couldjust put in a lower number--we can't put in a much lower number--andsay "or lower." To get absolute consistency with what we did lasttime, we would [have to] say "C" or lower. Last time the directivesimply said "5-1/2 percent or somewhat less," so theoretically wecould do that. I confess to my own bias of rather liking some feelingin the directive that we are not going to hit a precise number,because we are not going to anyway, and giving some flavor of whichway we want the errors to go.-36-5/18/81Well, let me just get a very preliminary reaction tosomething like that. Let me say specifically that we are putting in 3percent but with the period April to June. In any case, we want asubstantial deceleration--I'm just talking about M-1B--to an annualrate of 3 percent or lower, as may be consistent with the objective of5-1/2 percent for the quarter that we adopted last time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing different options and expressing their personal preference.


Passage number 319.
MR. GRAMLEY. What is the purpose of putting the rest of thelanguage in there. If we say 3 percent or lower, what function doesthe rest of this language serve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is asking a question about what purpose the additional language serves, but there is no explicit contention or disagreement evident.


Passage number 320.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It just ties it back to what we saidbefore as to what [M-1B growth for] the quarter should be; it's anelement of continuity and it's not really a lower limit. I don'tthink we can control M-1B that closely, so its purpose is to give someidea of what we mean by a little lower, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an explanation and giving their opinion on the purpose of controlling M-1B growth.


Passage number 321.
MR. ROOS. Is there no reference to NOW accounts. That'sbecause it's shift-adjusted. I get you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Roos, is simply stating a fact and seeking clarification about the absence of reference to NOW accounts.


Passage number 322.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, it's shift-adjusted. We are alltalking about the shift-adjusted number--or I am--at this time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they are referring to the shift-adjusted number at that moment.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 323.
MR. GRAMLEY. To get [a growth rate of] 5-1/2 percent orsomewhat less for March to June, we are going to have less than 1.3percent for April to June. That bothers me; it seems to me that weare putting in figures that are really not consistent with oneanother.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Gramley, is expressing concern that the figures being discussed are not consistent with each other. This implies there is disagreement or contention regarding the accuracy or reliability of the figures mentioned.


Passage number 324.
MR. BLACK. I think that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement evident in the passage. The speaker simply agrees with the other person's statement.


Passage number 325.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess I disagree with that. Butit's a question of approach. My [point] on this is that we are notgoing to hit a precise number anyway, so it's useful to give thedirection in which we would like to go from whatever precise number isput in. Or we could be completely neutral. If if we put in somethingas high as 3 percent as the center of gravity of the Committee, Iwould interpret that as not neutral; we'd rather come in lower thanhigher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not demonstrate any direct contention or disagreement. Instead, the speaker presents an alternative perspective or approach while acknowledging that it is a matter of personal interpretation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 326.
 And that's what I'm--MR. GRAMLEY. But that first "lower"--the phrase "an annualrate of 3 percent or lower"--connotes that. I wouldn't have judgedthat the Committee's view is that [M-1B growth of] 1 percent or lessis what we are really shooting at. And 1.3 percent or less is whatwe'd have to get if we are going to get 5-1/2 percent or less fromApril to June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses doubt about the Committee's view and interprets the phrase differently from what they believe the Committee intended.


Passage number 327.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, this is the question. The questionobviously was not asked this way, but let me ask the question.Suppose we have a happy day and those late May figures come in ratherlow and it looks as if, indeed, we may come in lower than 1 percentfor May and June with interest rates not rising and maybe fallingunder those circumstances. Would the Committee consider that anunhappy result or a happy result. I myself would be rather happy.And, therefore, I would not want to be pushing out money if the growthrate happened to come in, let's say, at zero in May and June, ifinterest rates were already stable or declining.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion and stating that they would be happy if the growth rate of interest rates remained stable or declined.


Passage number 328.
-37-5/18/81MR. GRAMLEY. I don't have any objection to that, but whatthat postulates is that we hope to have another downward shift in thedemand function for money. And if we do, that is fine and the moneynumbers will look better. Unless we get a very marked turnaround inthe behavior of the economy in the near term, what that would imply isthat the money demand function is not behaving as the staff hasassumed. I don't know why we would want to wish for something likethat. That really doesn't do any good; it just makes the numbers lookbetter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 329.
MR. PARTEE. There's some advantage to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Partee is expressing a statement, and there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 330.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure I follow your concern. Iwould argue that without some wording of this sort--not that thewording is all that critical--the Committee would begin gettingworried that money growth was coming in too low and would want toraise it a little. And I'm not sure we want to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker in the passage expresses uncertainty and discusses potential consequences, but there is no clear contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 331.
MR. BOEHNE. Perhaps what Governor Gramley is getting at isthis: Suppose we aren't so lucky and growth in May and June comes in,say, at 3 or 4 percent. Then how would that 3 or 4 percent beinterpreted as being consistent with 5-1/2 percent or less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement posing a hypothetical situation and asking for a potential interpretation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 332.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it wouldn't be. But in that caseit's not consistent with the 3 percent either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "in that case it's not consistent with the 3 percent either" suggests that there is a disagreement or inconsistency between the current situation and the 3 percent mentioned before.


Passage number 333.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, suppose it's just 3 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In the given passage, there is no contention or disagreement. Mr. Boehne simply proposes a hypothetical situation by stating "Well, suppose it's just 3 percent."


Passage number 334.
MR. PARTEE. Maybe the problem is the [wording] "as may beconsistent." Perhaps we should indicate the direction of the move not"as may be consistent" but "in order to be more consistent" orsomething like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is offering a suggestion or alternative wording for a potential problem, but there is no disagreement or conflict present.


Passage number 335.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can look at this language if you want.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that the speaker is willing to examine the language if the listener desires. There is no disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 336.
MR. PARTEE. As I read this construction, Paul, I would havesaid that the Committee would strongly resist growth above 3 percentand that it would be more or less indifferent between, say, 3 percentand zero. That's the way I look at it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply expressing his interpretation of the construction and how he sees the committee's stance on growth above 3 percent.


Passage number 337.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I think that is what it is meant toconvey, if we put the number 3 percent in there. There is nothing tosay we have to put 3 percent in there; we can put in a differentnumber.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that the statement is what is meant to be conveyed when a specific number (3 percent) is included, but also highlights that using a different number is a possibility. However, this does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 338.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The way I read it, though, is that wewould also be resistant to [M-1B growth] below 1-1/4 percent orwhatever the number is, as long as it was consistent [with the targetfor the quarter].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a perspective or interpretation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 339.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but then it says the previous targetwas 5-1/2 percent or less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The statement presents two conflicting pieces of information - one stating that there is disagreement or contention, and the other mentioning a different previous target.


Passage number 340.
MR. PARTEE. And that's why I said that. Well, any positivenumber would be all right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 341.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would read it the way you did and maybeeven add one of the negative numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing agreement with the other person's interpretation and suggesting an additional action.


Passage number 342.
-38-5/18/81MR. SCHULTZ. Suppose we said "3 percent or lower unless itbecomes inconsistent." What happens if we do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There doesn't seem to be any contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating a hypothetical scenario.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 343.
MR. BLACK. But wouldn't 3 percent itself be inconsistent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Black's statement suggests that there is inconsistency with the mention of "3 percent," but the passage does not provide enough context to determine what exactly the inconsistency is.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 344.
MR. PARTEE. That moves us toward consistency, but it doesn'treally make it consistent. That's the point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes


Passage number 345.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what's consistent. We are talkingabout a very small number for two months. That's the problem I alwayshave with these things. One thing I'm sure of is that in one meetingout of about twelve we may be within 1 percent of one of thesenumbers. There shouldn't be a comma after "percent" anyway. It wouldbe " percent or lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their uncertainty about the accuracy of the numbers being discussed, but there is no disagreement or conflicting viewpoints present.


Passage number 346.
"MR. AXILROD. The comma after percent is meant to indicatethat it's only the lower part that is consistent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 347.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If we discuss the central issuefirst, maybe this clause will fall into line more easily. If we say 3percent, we are going squarely for alternative B. It's only if luckcomes along that we are going to accept lower [growth]. The consensusof the Committee was clearly for between "B" and "C." Some people had"C," some people had "B," and no more than one or two were between "A"and "B." I think 3 percent doesn't reflect the Committee consensus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is contention or disagreement among the Committee members regarding the appropriate growth rate (alternative A, B, or C) to be discussed. Some members support alternative B, while others support alternative C. Additionally, there are only one or two members who are considering alternative A. Therefore, the statement that "3 percent doesn't reflect the Committee consensus" further indicates disagreement or contention among the members.


Passage number 348.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How we set this up depends upon where theborrowings go. But I do not read this at all the way you are nowreading it. It says 3 percent or lower and it refers to theconsistency. I read it the way Mr. Partee reads it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 349.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It means, though, that the setting ofour reserve path would be based on 3 percent, wouldn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is seeking confirmation or agreement by stating their conclusion and asking for validation.


Passage number 350.
MS. TEETERS. Is that what sets the reserve path. It'sborrowing, isn't it, that sets our reserve path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The person is seeking confirmation or clarification regarding the reserve path and borrowing.


Passage number 351.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, initially.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting or opposing ideas. It only suggests that something happened initially, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 352.
MR. PARTEE. Yes. If we raise that initial level ofborrowing by anything like what the staff has proposed, thatabsolutely swamps the difference in the reserve path between, say, 2and 3 percent, doesn't it, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply asking for clarification or confirmation from Steve about the impact of raising the initial level of borrowing.


Passage number 353.
MR. AXILROD. Sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 354.
MR. PARTEE. You must be talking about a lot more money overthe two months with a $500 million adjustment of the initial borrowingthan you are with the difference between 2 and 3 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by Mr. Partee simply clarifies that there is a larger sum of money being discussed when considering a $500 million adjustment compared to the difference between 2 and 3 percent.


Passage number 355.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Forget about the language at the moment.My interpretation of this language, as I say, is very much the wayGovernor Partee suggested. There's no point in saying that we are notgoing to permit something above 3 percent. We don't know. Maybe itwill come in above 3 percent. We may set the borrowings at $3 billionand it could come in above 3 percent. Forgetting about the language,is this where we want to be. Will we resist pretty darn hard growthabove 3 percent but be quite relaxed below 3 percent down to zero or I-39-5/18/81would say even below zero, depending upon how things develop in themarket for this 2-month period. Is that what we are trying to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply questioning whether setting a limit at 3 percent for borrowings is the right approach and suggests that they may be open to borrowing above 3 percent if necessary.


Passage number 356.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would hope that we are trying tosay that we'd [strongly] resist growth above, say, 2 percent orsomething like that, if we want to start somewhere between "B" and"C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their hope that the growth should be resisted above a certain percentage, without any conflicting opinions or opposing views being presented.


Passage number 357.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I must confess that I don't know what theoperational meaning of that is for M1-B [growth]. All I have areforecasts that are right within [a range of plus or minus] 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply admits that they do not know the operational meaning of M1-B growth and can only provide forecasts with a range of plus or minus 10 percent.


Passage number 358.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think there's a value in showingthat we are determined and are trying to be very closely consistentwith our previous short-run target. It just adds to our credibility.And, as various speakers have said, I would rather see the ratepressure now than later in the year. It's obviously not a matter oflife and death when we are talking about [a difference of] somethinglike 1 percent, since we don't control it that closely. In terms ofwhat our target is, it seems to me better to be in a fairly tightposition even if we are a little more relaxed on the initial[unintelligible] assumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses their personal opinion and preference but does not engage in any argument or contradict any other viewpoint.


Passage number 359.
MR. CORRIGAN. From my vantage point, if we had 3 percent inthere as you suggest, Mr. Chairman, and in fact ended up there, thatwouldn't bother me too much because I don't see an enormous differenceeven between the 6-1/2 percent [of "B"] and the 5-1/2 percent [of "C"]for March to June. My concern is this: I'm inclined to the view thatwhatever we set we are likely to exceed in this immediate situation;and given the lags in the reaction process both by us and by thebanks, if we start out saying we would live with 3 percent, we couldeasily end up with a quarterly growth rate for March to June of not6-1/2 percent but even more than that. I'm not sure what [directive]construction allows us to deal with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. Mr. Corrigan is expressing his personal view and concerns about the potential outcomes of different growth rates.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 360.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think any constructionallows us to deal with that. What allows us to deal with that iswhere we go on the borrowing assumption right now. I don't see peoplebeing all that gung ho on the borrowing assumption that the staff saysis consistent. I'm not sure it is. The staff estimate may be toohigh. I think we ought to get some understanding of what we aretalking about here, but the only difference it makes in the real worldis what number the outsiders read six weeks from now or when it's allin the past anyway. We can obviously put in 2 percent here. Thatgoes squarely in between.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses doubt and skepticism regarding the borrowing assumption and the staff estimate, suggesting that they do not agree with or trust the numbers presented.


Passage number 361.
MS. TEETERS. What kind of borrowing are we putting in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 362.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we will get to that in a minute.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 363.
MR. FORD. Paul, in your statement a moment ago you asked usif what we are trying to say is that we don't care how far down [M-1Bgrowth] goes. My reaction to that is that we shouldn't have it open-ended at the bottom. I think "somewhat less" is the right tone. Iwouldn't want to see the aggregates collapse again as they did a yearago and be at the floor [of the long-term ranges] once again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is agreement and consensus between Mr. Ford and Paul. Mr. Ford agrees with Paul's suggestion of having the growth somewhat less, instead of allowing it to collapse again as it did a year ago.


Passage number 364.
-40-5/18/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can write this more straightforwardlyperhaps by just using a sentence that has a number in it and then goon to say that a shortfall in growth for the two months from the ratespecified above would be acceptable. That's saying the same thing intwo sentences.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
The passage is not a source of contention or disagreement. It is suggesting a more straightforward way to express an idea, without any conflicting viewpoints or conflicting information being presented.


Passage number 365.
MR. GRAMLEY. If we are going to say "or lower," that secondsentence is already implied, it seems to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, is expressing his viewpoint and suggesting that the second sentence is already implied by the first.


Passage number 366.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, this is partly a question of whetherwe want to tie it back to the objective for the quarter that we setearlier. I don't know whether it's a good idea or not. But if wefollow this idea that we set a target for the quarter and we shouldn'tforget about it six weeks later, it's useful to make a reference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any direct contention or disagreement. It is discussing a question and presenting different perspectives, but there is no explicit disagreement between individuals or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 367.
MR. FORD. Stick to your guns.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "Stick to your guns" implies that Mr. Ford is encouraging someone to remain firm and steadfast in their beliefs or decisions. There is no indication of disagreement or opposing views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 368.
MR. BALLES. I think it would be less confusing if wefollowed what Tony suggested by putting in 2 percent and dropping thewords "or lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Balles, is suggesting a change in the wording of a proposal made by Tony. This indicates a difference in opinion on how to proceed, suggesting contention or disagreement.


Passage number 369.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we can do that here with therest of this. We can't say 2 percent, which is higher than theprevious target, and say it's consistent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion that they do not believe something can be done.


Passage number 370.
MR. PARTEE. We could make it a range. We haven't used arange.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage does not include any statement of disagreement or contention. The speaker suggests a possible option without any opposition being expressed.


Passage number 371.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can put in a range. I have thought ofthat, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that the speaker has also considered putting in a range, indicating agreement or consideration of the previous statement.


Passage number 372.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Or we can say "2 percent or somewhatlower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply providing two options or alternatives. There is no contention or disagreement presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 373.
"MR. CORRIGAN. What's wrong with a range. I guess theproblem is that it doesn't let us deal with the bottom side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker suggests that there is something wrong with using a range, indicating a disagreement or contention regarding its limitations.


Passage number 374.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only fear I have of ranges is that wecan put in a range of 2 to 3 percent and we won't be within it anyway.And people attribute special importance to a range as a whole. That'smy only objection to a range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a personal fear and objection to using a range. There is no indication of conflicting viewpoints or arguments being presented.


Passage number 375.
MR. CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 376.
 For the sake of discussion: If we set a rangeof 1-1/2 to 3 percent so as to be generally consistent with thequarterly objective and--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're going to get all excited if it'sless than 1-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a hypothetical statement that does not express any conflicting viewpoints or opinions.


Passage number 377.
MR. CORRIGAN. I'm not. That's the problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Corrigan is simply stating that he is not something, indicating that he may not be agreeing or approving of a particular situation or problem.


Passage number 378.
MR. PARTEE. It really ought to be zero to 3 percent orsomething like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is providing a suggestion or opinion about what the percentage should be, but there is no disagreement or contention expressed.


Passage number 379.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I don't know if it would behelpful, but part of the reason for wording such as this or the otherwording you suggested is technical. I understand that if theCommittee put a number in there of 2 or 3 percent, we would construct-41-5/18/81the target on 2 or 3 percent or whatever the number is; and atwhatever point the Committee felt they were willing to have ashortfall, as money was coming in short we simply would lower thenonborrowed targets commensurately, if that's what the Committeeintends this kind of instruction to mean. Under that assumption wewould really need to know pretty much in a general way what the lowerlimit is below which the Committee doesn't want the nonborrowed pathlowered any more. That was why we felt it might be useful to tie itto the March-to-June target the Committee had already set.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing technical information and explaining why certain wording may be useful, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 380.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The effort is to get some sense of a rangewithout saying we have a range that's only one or two percent [wide].That [kind of range] sounds more rigid than I think we can afford tobe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their desire to have a range that is not too narrow or rigid.


Passage number 381.
MS. TEETERS. What Steve is implying is that the lower limitwould be the 1.3 percent rate of growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information about what Steve is implying, but it does not suggest any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 382.
MR. AXILROD. Or whatever by saying "somewhat less." It'sliterally what the Committee set for itself at the previous meeting.That's what this kind of wording would imply: That it's somethinglike the lower limit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the interpretation of the wording used by the Committee in a previous meeting.


Passage number 383.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am inclined to feel that we ought to getsomething in there [that gives some definition to the] "or lower."It's something of an experiment, but I think it may be usefulexperimenting to see whether we like referring back to the quarterlyranges in these interim meetings. We may get in trouble becausesometimes we may not want to refer back to them. But if we don't, wedon't. In this case I think it may be useful [to do so]. This otherlanguage may be better, saying whatever growth rate we want to use--perhaps an annual rate of 2 or 3 percent--and maybe putting in an "orlower" and whatever the consistent number is for M2. I don't know.[We could say]: "A shortfall of growth in M-1B from the 2-month ratespecified above would be acceptable in light of the rapid growth inApril and the objective adopted by the Committee on March 31 forgrowth from March to June at an annual rate of 5-1/2 percent or less."This other way tried to compress it into one sentence; maybe thatisn't wise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their inclination towards a certain approach and acknowledging the potential challenges or drawbacks of that approach, but there is no explicit contention or disagreement with any other viewpoint.


Passage number 384.
MR. FORD. Are you going to leave out the fed funds range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a simple question asking if someone is going to exclude the fed funds range.


Passage number 385.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I'll get to that. Let's take it onething at a time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their intention to address a certain topic or question in a specific order.


Passage number 386.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Speaking for myself, I feel thatthere is some value in referring back; I don't think it's enormous.Either formulation, as spelled out here or with a separate sentencetalking about accepting a shortfall in the more straightforward way isokay. I think pretty much everybody would want to have X percent orlower at a minimum, and I think there's some slight advantage inreferring back to that target for the period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion and suggesting that referring back to a target percentage has some value, although not a significant amount. They also mention that both formulations are acceptable.


Passage number 387.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, as nearly as I can see at themoment, I think we are only left with whether we take this or make ittwo sentences. The question is whether to put in 2 or 3 percent tostart with. It doesn't bother me much either way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker mentions a question or decision to be made, but states that it doesn't bother them either way, indicating a lack of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 388.
-42-5/18/81MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, the way you have separated that andmade it into two statements to my view and Lyle's--he and I werechatting--eliminates the problem he raised of the 3 percent not reallybeing consistent. If you say the Committee would also accept a lowerfigure, which in a sense would be consistent with the 5-1/2 percent, Ithink you have eliminated the problem--assuming that you can getpeople to vote for the 3 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement clarifying a point made by Mr. Chairman.


Passage number 389.
MR. PARTEE. "3 percent or lower" is what it says.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "3 percent or lower" is what it says.


Passage number 390.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Actually, now the way it's written here itjust says 3 percent and then the next sentence goes on to say ashortfall would be okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 391.
MR. PARTEE. I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee's statement does not seem to provoke any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 392.
MR. BLACK. Which would be consistent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply presents Mr. Black asking a question.


Passage number 393.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given phrase "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" does not provide enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 394.
 Now, we could say "3 percent or lower" andsay that a shortfall would be acceptable because of--MR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a numerical value and suggesting that a possible shortfall might be acceptable.


Passage number 395.
 Yes, that's what I was thinkingCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we are close to this two-sentence version. The question at the moment is the borrowing. Noteverybody mentioned it; a minority mentioned it. Of those who did thelevels suggested ranged from $2 billion to $2-1/4 billion. The latterwas the highest. We had some at $2 billion and some at $2 billionplus--$2.1 to 2.2 billion. A lot of people didn't say anything. So,I think it's clear that we start out at least at $2 billion, which isabout $150 million above where we are. The question is how much, ifany, to go above the $2 billion at the start, with the recognition--particularly if we start around $2 or $2.1 billion--that if [M-1Bgrowth in] the latter half of May comes in high, we are going to raisethat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a discussion of different opinions and suggestions regarding borrowing, but there is no outright disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 396.
MR. SCHULTZ. Starting out with $2 billion is starting out$250 million above where we are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact that starting out with $2 billion is $250 million above their current position.


Passage number 397.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not quite clear where we are atthe moment. I thought we were at least at $1.8 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing uncertainty about the current situation.


Passage number 398.
MR. STERNLIGHT. The borrowing that we are aiming for--theborrowing consistent with this week's nonborrowed [path]--would beabout $1860 million. Borrowing for the 3-week subperiod would beabout $2 billion. But if you want to take where borrowings actuallyhave been this week thus far, it's $1.7 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating the borrowing amounts and clarifying the current borrowing amount for the week.


Passage number 399.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We know where it has been this week sofar. We only have two numbers. What we were aiming for this week atthis moment on our present track is $1860 million, I take it. And wehave been averaging $2 billion, so $2 billion really isn't all thatmuch of a change. It's a little higher than where we are aiming rightat the moment, but not higher than where we have been. I don't think$2 billion implies all that much of a change, so we may want to makeit just a shade higher than that. But a lot of people haven't beenheard from. Whom do we have for something between $2.1 and $ 2.2-43-5/18/81billion--$2.15 billion, I suppose, just to split that--which is about$300 million higher than this week's figure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing financial figures and potential adjustments, but there is no conflict or opposing viewpoints presented.


Passage number 400.
MR. SCHULTZ. Doesn't that have something to do with the factthat there aren't any excess reserves out there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Schultz.


Passage number 401.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's swinging up and down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "It's swinging up and down" is neutral and does not indicate any conflicting viewpoints or opposing stances.


Passage number 402.
MR. AXILROD. Well, we tend to adjust to that, so if [thedemands for] excess reserves turn out high, we tend to supply them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a general observation or tendency without arguing against any opposing viewpoint.


Passage number 403.
MR. SCHULTZ. But the point is that if we move borrowing up,we ought to get a fairly quick effect, shouldn't we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Schultz is posing a question and seeking clarification.


Passage number 404.
MR. AXILROD. Well, I think $2150 million probably would beconsistent with a higher federal funds rate than we have experiencedthus far, [which is] in the 18-1/2 percent range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a personal opinion or speculation about a possible scenario.


Passage number 405.
MR. GRAMLEY. What would you guess that would be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 406.
MR. AXILROD. I would say between 19 and 20 percent, give ortake some.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage presents a statement without any contention or disagreement. It simply provides a numerical estimation without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 407.
MR. PARTEE. Which is right at the very top of the range thatwe have specified here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Instead, it provides a statement of fact or observation.


Passage number 408.
MR. SCHULTZ. It sounds strong to me. That's why I startedout with $2 billion. But I certainly would be interested in moving itquickly, depending upon what kind of reactions we see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It reflects the personal opinion and perspective of the speaker.


Passage number 409.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me just try $2.1 billion and seewhether there's a consensus for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a possibility (trying a certain amount) and questioning whether there is a consensus for it.


Passage number 410.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We're down to voting members.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement simply states a fact without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 411.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm asking for a vague consensusnow. How many are happy with $2.1 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for a consensus on a specific amount, without any indication of disagreement or opposing views.


Passage number 412.
MR. PARTEE. Would accept or would make one happy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It presents a question about accepting something or making someone happy, but does not involve any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 413.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I wasn't getting that precise. Iwas trying to get to some kind of consensus. I take it there's nooverwhelming happiness at $2.1 billion. I don't know which directionto go from the $2.1 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that they were not being precise and admits their intention of reaching a consensus. The mention of "no overwhelming happiness at $2.1 billion" does not imply disagreement but rather uncertainty about the appropriate next step.


Passage number 414.
MR. PARTEE. I could accept it. But try $2 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 415.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll try it. Does $2 billion make peopleunhappy. I have a lot of no hands raised here. Does $2.2 billionmake people happier.SPEAKER(.). How about $2.1 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 416.
MR. PARTEE. I think you hit the right number, but it'swhether it's preferred or acceptable.SPEAKER(.). $2.1 billion is acceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers seem to agree that $2.1 billion is an acceptable or preferred number.


Passage number 417.
-44-5/18/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is $2.1 billion acceptable. We'll remainvery tentatively there at the moment. Let's [discuss] the federalfunds range. First of all, the question has been raised whether weshould have it at all, I guess. Did you hand out these other--SPEAKER(.). Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply presents a question and then confirms the acceptance of a certain amount of money.


Passage number 418.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have a series of reworded sentences. Ihave one reworded sentence that assumes we keep it; let me see whatthe change is from what we now have. Maybe Mr. Axilrod can explain itto me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a request for clarification and understanding.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 419.
MR. AXILROD. The essential sentence that you have there saysthat if it appears during the period before the next meeting thatfluctuations in the funds rate, taken over a period of time, within arange of __ to __ percent are likely to be inconsistent, etc., theManager will inform the Chairman, who will then decide whether thesituation calls for supplementary instructions. That sounds as if thefederal funds rate is an objective within the [context] of theinstructions. The proposal, in line with some of the [points] raisedby Committee members, essentially has the same beginning but it triesto make the federal funds rate seem more like a consultation pointthat involves a little more flexibility. It says that if it appearsduring the period before the next meeting that pursuit of the monetaryobjectives and related reserve paths is likely to be associated with afunds rate range persistently outside a range of _ to _ percent,then the Manager will inform the Chairman--the same sort ofinstructions as before--but then it says "who will then decide whetherconsultation with the Committee is necessary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The contention arises from the different perspectives on how the federal funds rate should be treated in the instructions. Mr. Axilrod argues that the rate is an objective, while the proposal suggests it should be seen more as a consultation point with flexibility.


Passage number 420.
"MR. SCHULTZ. When I was looking at this before, the onething I didn't like about it was the use of the word "necessary." Isthat a good word or is "advisable" a better word there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a personal preference and seeking an opinion or recommendation.


Passage number 421.
 If we sayit's necessary, are we not then implying that again the fed fundsrange is part of the--MR. PARTEE. That's a good point. This construction with"advisable" would be better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speakers are discussing a point and considering a different construction that could be better.


Passage number 422.
MR. AXILROD. Well, it reads to me literally as saying thatthe Chairman could permit the funds rate to go almost anywhere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their interpretation of the statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 423.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I think that's a mistakeanyway. If we are all saying that the purpose of the funds range isto trigger a consultation, then we should not imply so clearly thatthe Chairman can veto a consultation and in effect abolish the FOMCand run a one-man FOMC.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: The phrase "I think that's a mistake" indicates disagreement or contention with the idea being discussed.


Passage number 424.
MR. ROOS. Why wouldn't the same wording apply to theborrowing assumption and to the aggregates. In other words, isn'tthis an implicit prerogative of the Chairman on any of this. He cancall us any time as long as he doesn't call collect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and seeking clarification on the Chairman's prerogative.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 425.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we ought to discuss whetherwe want this at all, which I guess is the question you're raising.I'm obviously at the hands of the Committee, but I don't find anydifficulties myself, and I see some advantages, in saying if interestrates move extremely enough the Committee at least wants to review-45-5/18/81what the heck it's doing. I think that's the question. If we reallythink that, then I'm inclined to feel that we ought to say it. If wedon't think that and genuinely don't think this is anything to beworried about, then we [could] leave it out. Now, we could write thisto say that if either the money supply is moving well outside itsrange or if the federal funds rate is moving well outside its range,we would consult. And I think that is true in a sense. Thedifference in the implication is that if the money supply is runningoutside its range, we know what to do if it doesn't involve conflictswith these other things. We know what to do in the sense of thegeneral direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and suggesting that the committee should discuss whether they want to review the situation. They also mention the possibility of leaving it out if they don't think it's something to be worried about. This shows that there is different perspectives on whether the situation should be addressed or not.


Passage number 426.
MR. SCHULTZ. I think if the money supply is running outsideits range, you will consult [with the Committee]; and if the fed fundsrate is running well outside its range, then you may consult.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating that if certain conditions are met (money supply running outside its range or fed funds rate running well outside its range), they will consult with the Committee.


Passage number 427.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not so sure we would consult ifit were running outside the range; it depends upon how far. It'slikely to run outside the range in the short run, so we would make allthese adjustments in borrowings and stuff that we talk about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their uncertainty about whether or not they would consult based on the extent to which something runs outside the range.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 428.
MR. SCHULTZ. All right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage provided, there is no apparent contention or disagreement. The statement "All right" simply suggests compliance or agreement with a previous statement or proposition.


Passage number 429.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, if it went far enough.... What Ithink disturbs people is that we would want to look at [our decision]again if it implied a very large change in financial conditions thatwas not necessarily contemplated at the time of the meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the possibility of revisiting a decision under certain unforeseen circumstances.


Passage number 430.
MR. CORRIGAN. If we use some language like this, is itabsolutely essential that the language be right in the directiveitself. Let me explain where I'm coming from. The advantage to afederal funds rate consultation guideline is that the federal fundsrate, whatever else it is, is the only thing we have in the short runthat is fairly unambiguous. Borrowings and the money supply andreserves and those things are all over the lot. The funds rate atleast is unambiguous. I certainly agree with the idea of trying toget the markets and everybody else to recognize the de facto role thatit plays. But I'd like to see something [about the federal fundsrate] preserved, and I wonder whether it can't just be part of thegeneral discussion and not right in the directive language itself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their agreement with the idea of recognizing the role of the federal funds rate and suggesting a way to include it in the directive language.


Passage number 431.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It could. It can be anything we want. Atthe present time, I am somewhat allergic to making that big a changein the directive because it will then give more significance to itthan I think it's worth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses their hesitation towards making a significant change to the directive, but there is no conflicting viewpoint or argument being presented.


Passage number 432.
MR. WALLICH. Couldn't we perhaps say specifically that theManager's operations are not to be constrained by the funds rate butthat if the funds rate moves outside etc., the Committee will consult.Then it is clear that it is not a constraint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting a specific wording to make it clear that the Manager's operations are not constrained by the funds rate, but rather that the Committee will consult if the funds rate moves outside certain parameters.


Passage number 433.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we can say that. But theexplanation you gave I'd be perfectly happy to put in the generaldiscussion as background for this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker agrees with the explanation given and is willing to include it in the general discussion.


Passage number 434.
MR. BLACK. I like this, Mr. Chairman. It's a logical stepin the process of moving where I think we eventually ought to be, ifwe can get the aggregates under control, of not having any limits. It-46-5/18/81fits in with the step where we define the limits as a consultationpoint and it allows the Desk to move a bit before we have thatconsultation rather than delaying it maybe for a couple of days.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 435.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, it's for more than a couple of days, Ithink, under the current directive; we've done that historically.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a statement discussing a historical practice.


Passage number 436.
MR. BLACK. I mean that if you decided to have aconsultation, you might notify us a day or so ahead, and meanwhile theDesk might go ahead and go outside [the funds range].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is simply suggesting a course of action or making a proposal.


Passage number 437.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think they've been doing thatanyway, but I agree with you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is agreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that they agree with the other person's point, indicating harmony of opinion.


Passage number 438.
MR. BLACK. But this makes it clearer to the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Black.


Passage number 439.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right. I think this comes pretty close.We can quibble about the language, but the intent of this is to beconsistent with what we've been saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any sign of contention or disagreement. The speaker acknowledges that there might be minor points to discuss, but ultimately agrees with the overall intention expressed.


Passage number 440.
MR. BLACK. I think that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply agrees with the previous statement.


Passage number 441.
MR. SCHULTZ. I rather like the other alternative we weretalking about, which is that a Committee consultation may be calledfor by the Chairman if it appears during the period before the nextmeeting that the federal funds rate is likely to be significantlyoutside a range of _ to _ percent for an extended period.SPEAKER(.). I think that's pretty much the same.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Schultz expresses his preference for a specific alternative, and the speaker responds by indicating that they think it is essentially the same as what was previously discussed.


Passage number 442.
MR. SCHULTZ. I thought that was pretty straightforward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Schultz, is stating that he found something to be straightforward, indicating that he understood and agreed with it.


Passage number 443.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'll tell you. What I don't likeabout that--and we're talking about nuances--is that it has noconnotation that we're following a reserve path. That sentence in andof itself can be interpreted to mean that we really set this federalfunds range as a range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's personal opinion and concerns about the lack of connotation in a sentence.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 444.
MR. PARTEE. Also, it seems to me that there ought to be aprofessional judgment on the part of the Manager that it's going torun well outside the range rather than that the Chairman is makingthis decision. If we want it to be a technical question, it seems tome it ought to be a Manager's question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, suggests that the decision of whether something is running well outside the range should be made by the Manager rather than the Chairman. This disagreement is evident in the statement "it seems to me that there ought to be a professional judgment on the part of the Manager."


Passage number 445.
MR. ROOS. If any mention of this were totally omitted, wherecould the problem conceivably arise in the markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is presenting a hypothetical situation and asking a question, but there is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 446.
 If we just stopreferring in any way to a federal funds--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there are two questions. Forgettingabout the market, there is just the question of what the Committeewants to say and whether it wants to have a consultation. If we do,then I think we ought to put it down. But so far as the markets areconcerned, I think that it will be read as--SPEAKER(.). As an underlying focus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing two separate questions and expressing their opinion on each one. They mention the possibility of a consultation and consider the potential interpretation by the markets. However, there is no clear indication of disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 447.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --a further step in the direction towardignoring this, and they would expect more instability rather than less-47-5/18/81in some sense. They'd feel we had changed in some more fundamentalway than this discussion seems to imply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is simply stating that if a further step is taken in the direction of ignoring something, there would be an expectation of increased instability. It suggests that this expectation implies a fundamental change, but there is no explicit disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 448.
MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, I like the way it was in theoriginal here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the speaker's preference for the original version.


Passage number 449.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you mean the way it was last time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple question seeking clarification or confirmation. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this statement.


Passage number 450.
MS. TEETERS. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the fact that there is someone named "MS. TEETERS," who is likely engaged in a disagreement or argument based on the context provided.


Passage number 451.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The way it has been.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no clear contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 452.
MS. TEETERS. The way it has been, where the situation callsfor supplementary instructions from the Committee. I think that'swhat it is we want. I'd rather not have all that stuff aboutnecessary and persistent and the rest; I'd just leave it alone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Teeters is expressing her preference for not including certain criteria in supplementary instructions from the Committee.


Passage number 453.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can live with it the way it is. This isan effort to say what we've said more informally.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their acceptance of the current situation and their willingness to continue with it as it is.


Passage number 454.
MS. TEETERS. I think we can just say it informally and leaveit that way. It has caused a useful consultation for everybody; ithas marked a point at which we make a decision as to whether we'regoing to do it or not do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 455.
MR. SCHULTZ. But, unfortunately, the way we have said it hasled to the feeling on the part of a lot people in the markets that westill do have a fed funds rate target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing regret over the way something has been communicated, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 456.
MS. TEETERS. But, Fred, we've violated the range practicallyevery time, with only one exception.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. Teeters is stating a fact about violating the range, with no opposition or argument presented.


Passage number 457.
MR. SCHULTZ. I understand what we've done. It's just that Ithink there still is a misperception in the market, which it seems tome we might be able to clear up with some rewording. I do have somereluctance about changing it, just on the basis on the fact that everytime we make a change there is some confusion in the market. So,whether it's worth making the change is a question. My feeling isthat it would be good if we did change it. I would hate to see usgive up some kind of fed funds range because I think the uncertaintiesthat we're dealing with here and the relationships between theaggregates and the economy are so difficult that the fed funds ratetells us something. There can clearly be a situation in whichsomething is happening out there and we ought to be consulting. Butthat's what we're doing. We keep telling people that that's whatwe're doing and they don't believe us very well because this rangeappears in the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 458.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Altmann reminds me, and I will remindyou, that in what we're going to publish Friday or whenever we publishit, we have a paragraph in the general discussion that says: "Withrespect to the federal funds rate,"--it probably should say thefederal funds rate range--"it was stressed that the Committeespecified an intermeeting range for fluctuations over a period of timeto provide a mechanism for initiating timely consultation betweenregularly scheduled meetings whenever it appeared that fluctuationswithin the specified range were proving to be inconsistent with theobjectives for the behavior of reserve and monetary aggregates. Thus,-48-5/18/81the limits of the range were indicative of the conditions under whichthe Committee would wish to consult to reexamine its short-runobjectives and were not intended as binding constraints on Systemoperations pending such consultations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 459.
"MR. GUFFEY. When will that be published. Is that in thedirective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 460.
MR. ALTMANN. That's in the policy record for the Marchmeeting, which will come out this Friday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage consists of a statement made by Mr. Altmann regarding the release date of a policy record. It does not imply any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 461.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I take it that there is a general feelingthat we should continue to specify something. Is that correct.SPEAKER(.). Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 462.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's a majority. One can make anargument that in the light of all we have said the present language isincreasingly well understood and that we always run some danger of arenewed misinterpretation by changing it at all. So, we can justleave it as it was. That's one option. The other option, if I'mreading it right, is something very close to what was distributedhere, which is not a very drastic change anyway. Which of those twooptions commands the greatest support. Let me try the option of notchanging the language at all. Who is for that. Do I conclude fromthat that there is positive support for at least a modest change inthe language by the other 15 people sitting here. If that is right,then we are down to the particular wording. You have one version infront of you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing two options and trying to determine which option has greater support among the 15 people present.


Passage number 463.
MR. GRAMLEY. I have a suggestion, which incorporatesGovernor Schultz's thoughts and I think gets around the points thatboth you and Governor Partee raised. It reads as follows: "TheChairman may call for Committee consultation if it appears to theManager for Domestic Operations that pursuit of the monetaryobjectives and related reserve paths during the period before the nextmeeting is likely to be associated with the federal funds ratepersistently outside a range of __ to __ percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply presenting a suggestion that incorporates different thoughts and addresses the points raised by others.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 464.
"VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But if you say "persistently" thendon't you have to say that the Chairman will call for a consultation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage because the use of the word "but" indicates a contrasting or opposing view. The statement suggests that if someone claims that something will happen "persistently," then they must also acknowledge that the Chairman will call for a consultation. This implies that there may be doubts or disputes regarding the Chairman's actions.


Passage number 465.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I don't think we ought to deny theChairman the opportunity to make a decision on his own.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 466.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you can be sure that the Chairmanwill [do so], whatever the language says. So this is just a nicety ofwhatever language it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses confidence that the Chairman will fulfill a certain action regardless of the language being used. The phrase "nicety of whatever language it is" suggests that the specific wording or formalities of the language are not of great significance.


Passage number 467.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Oh yes, I know that. I'm not talkingabout substance; I'm talking about images.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply emphasizing their awareness of a certain fact and clarifying the topic they are discussing.


Passage number 468.
MR. PARTEE. It says "may," but it certainly implies thathe's going to do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, acknowledges that the statement says "may" but interprets it as implying that the person talked about will definitely take action.


Passage number 469.
MR. SCHULTZ. I prefer "may" because "will" implies thatthere is a target there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by Mr. Schultz simply expresses a personal preference regarding the choice of words, "may" versus "will," without any evident conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 470.
-49-5/18/81MR. PARTEE. I think that version is considerably better thanthis one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states the opinion of Mr. Partee that one version is considerably better than another. There is no indication of contention or disagreement within the passage itself.


Passage number 471.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, in substance, it seems to me to saythe same thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage expresses that the speaker believes the substance of a certain idea or statement to be the same as something else. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 472.
MR. PARTEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Yes, there is a disagreement or contention in the passage indicated by the response of "Yes" by Mr. Partee. However, since the passage is not provided, the specific details of the disagreement cannot be determined.


Passage number 473.
MR. GRAMLEY. Exactly the same, but it leaves in the reservepath and the monetary aggregates, it lets the Manager for DomesticOperations make the technical decision, and it says the Chairman "may"call a consultation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no explicit contention or disagreement present in this passage. The speaker is describing a proposal that is similar to another one but includes some additional details.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 474.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Read it again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: Without providing the passage, it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement present in it.


Passage number 475.
MR. GRAMLEY. "The Chairman may call for Committeeconsultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations thatpursuit of the monetary objectives and related reserve paths duringthe period before the next meeting is likely to be associated with afederal funds rate persistently outside a range of _ to _ percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is stating a provision where the Chairman can call for committee consultation if certain conditions are met.


Passage number 476.
"MR. PARTEE. That certainly puts the reserve issues first;there's no question about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement made by Mr. Partee is a reflection of agreement or acknowledgement of a given fact.


Passage number 477.
MR. GRAMLEY. And I think it's a clear statement of whatwe're trying to accomplish and what is available presently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states Mr. Gramley's belief about the clarity and availability of a certain statement.


Passage number 478.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Very honestly, I don't detect asubstantive difference, but it's perfectly all right with me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing agreement and acceptance of a situation or opinion.


Passage number 479.
MR. BLACK. I don't think there's a difference, but I thinkit's worded a little better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In the given passage, Mr. Black simply expresses his opinion that there is no difference between two things, but he believes one is worded better. There is no indication of contention or disagreement, as no conflicting viewpoints or arguments are presented.


Passage number 480.
MR. GRAMLEY. It's just a matter of wording, really.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "It's just a matter of wording, really" suggests that there is no contention or disagreement. It implies that the issue at hand is simply how something is expressed rather than a fundamental disagreement about the content or concept.


Passage number 481.
MR. GUFFEY(.). Mr. Chairman, for the moment, I'd like to tryto make a case to keep the language as it is presently. The marketsand the public have not seen the March change in the language, which Ithink is rather specific and good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion to keep the language as it currently is.


Passage number 482.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not a change in the directivelanguage; it's an explanation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is clarifying that there is no change in the directive language, but rather an explanation provided.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 483.
MR. GUFFEY. Yes, it's an explanation. But if we then comealong a month from now and publish a directive, which may mean thesame thing to us but changes maybe 60 words, that will give rise tothe analysts publishing from now until at least the end of the yearall sorts of interpretations. I think that's what we don't want. Itseems to me that consistency would best be served by leaving thelanguage as it has been published in the directive, with an informalunderstanding in the Committee with the Chairman that it is aconsultation point as described in the record.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Guffey expresses his opinion that consistency would be best served by leaving the language as it has been published in the directive, while others may have a different view on this matter.


Passage number 484.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think the argument for notchanging it at all is that it may be more confusing to change it.We'll see whether your comments changed to more than 4 votes thenumber who want not to change it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting two different viewpoints ("the argument for not changing it at all" and "whether your comments changed to more than 4 votes") without expressing personal disagreement or taking a stance.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 485.
-50-5/18/81MR. PARTEE. I must say that I think that's incorrect, Roger.I wasn't at that telephone conference call and I read with someamusement the paragraph that was just [quoted]. I think it isstretching things to say that the earlier instruction could beinterpreted in the way it was interpreted in that meeting. And Ithink what is now being proposed is consistent with the interpretationin the telephone conference call. It was a stretched interpretation,which now needs a different instruction, I think, if we're going tostay with it and use it. So, I do believe a change is necessary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, expresses disagreement with Roger's interpretation and suggests that a different instruction is necessary.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 486.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Have you convinced anybody, Roger. Do youhave more than 4 votes for not changing it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is potential contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is questioning whether Roger has been successful in persuading others, suggesting that there may be differing opinions or resistance to changing something.


Passage number 487.
MR. GUFFEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "MR. GUFFEY" does not provide any information or context to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It appears to be a neutral reference to someone's name or title.


Passage number 488.
 I'm more convinced myself, but it--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think Roger has a point that thereis a danger. We will, of course, publish the policy record from theearlier meeting and it has this language, which I think exactlysummarizes our feeling about it. Then if we come out with anotherdirective, there is a danger that some of the Fed watchers may believethat we mean to change the significance of this paragraph on page 9[in the March] policy record.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their own conviction, but also acknowledging that Roger has a valid point and expressing agreement with the language in the policy record.


Passage number 489.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any change we make may be confusing. Idon't disagree with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker explicitly states that they do not disagree with the statement.


Passage number 490.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right. And since the policy recordparagraph on page 9 expresses exactly what we're trying to do, then itseems to me, even though I guess this may be too unorthodox, that wecould simply refer here to that policy record paragraph.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and suggesting a course of action based on that agreement.


Passage number 491.
MR. PARTEE. Always. At every meeting refer to that policyrecord interpretation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that policy record interpretation is always referred to at every meeting.


Passage number 492.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Look, we can attempt to handle thatproblem. I think there is some danger, which we can't get around,that with any change in wording somebody will look at it and say: Dothey really mean what they say. We can put in the policy record whatwe mean: That what we really have done is to change this languageslightly to make sure it conforms with what we said last time.SPEAKER(.). Sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging potential concerns and suggesting a way to address them.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 493.
MR. GUFFEY. But we'd be taking a risk if we do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Guffey presents the argument that there would be a risk involved in taking a certain action. This implies that there may be others who disagree with him and believe that the risk is not significant or worth considering.


Passage number 494.
MR. PARTEE. That's the way to do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement or approval for the way something is being done.


Passage number 495.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But couldn't we simply say, takingLyle's language, for example, "as called for in the policy record ofsuch and such a date" so it makes quite clear that this is simply asummary version of the larger explanation in the policy record.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply suggesting using a specific language for clarification purposes and does not indicate any argument or disagreement.


Passage number 496.
MR. GRAMLEY. But this is supposed to be the operatingparagraph of the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement or remark by Mr. Gramley.


Passage number 497.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's only a formal point as to whetherit's desirable or not to be in the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing a view about a formal point of whether being in the directive is desirable or not, without any opposing viewpoints being presented.


Passage number 498.
-51-5/18/81MR. PARTEE. Well, you don't mean to put it in the directive.You mean to have in the policy record entry for today's meeting areference to the previous policy record saying that the Committeeadopted this language in furtherance of its determination in theearlier meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 499.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only mentions the role of Vice Chairman Solomon and does not provide any information about any disagreement or contention involving him.


Passage number 500.
 No, I had meant--MR. PARTEE. Oh, I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply clarifying their intended meaning in response to a misunderstanding.


Passage number 501.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any context or further information. Please provide more details for a more accurate analysis.


Passage number 502.
 I raised the question of whether itwould be appropriate to have a reference in this one-sentence summaryto this larger explanation in the policy record as consistent--MR. SCHULTZ. I don't like that much, but I think what Chuckis suggesting is fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion but agreeing with Chuck's suggestion.


Passage number 503.
MR. PARTEE. We could reference it again in the record fortoday's meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting that they reference something again in the record for today's meeting.


Passage number 504.
MR. ALTMANN. An interpretation of the funds rate range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a statement made by Mr. Altmann without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 505.
MR. PARTEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 506.
MR. ALTMANN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation:
The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It only mentions "MR. ALTMANN" without providing any context or further details about him or the situation.


Passage number 507.
 You mean reiterate it in this--MR. PARTEE. Then that becomes an explanation for why wechanged this wording, so that people don't think there's somethingmore that we did, because after all it will come out [later]. Theywill know about this wording and then they'll have the explanation ofthe wording at the very same time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is clarifying the reason behind changing the wording and wants to ensure that people understand the explanation.


Passage number 508.
MS. TEETERS. But that explanation goes to what's here now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. TEETERS is stating her viewpoint and providing an explanation for it.


Passage number 509.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Unless people are ready to change theirminds, I think there are these problems. I'll just return to myquestion: Has Roger convinced anybody that there is greater danger inchanging the words at all.SPEAKER(.). No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and asking a question about whether anyone has been convinced of a specific viewpoint.


Passage number 510.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's always a danger of some confusionhere. There may be a little but I think we can handle it withoutundue risks. I could certainly live with it the other way. It's nobig deal to me. If the issue had never come up in the first place, Iwouldn't change it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is expressing neutrality and contentment with the situation. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 511.
 But I--MR. SCHULTZ. This is not my day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that it is not the speaker's day.


Passage number 512.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, Roger has my vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that Roger has their vote without expressing any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 513.
MR. PARTEE. But he had it before, didn't he.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for confirmation or clarification about a previous possession.


Passage number 514.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The passage is not providing any conflicting information or presenting differing viewpoints. It is simply stating a fact or opinion without any opposition or disagreement.


Passage number 515.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He didn't. Let's try it again: How manypeople would vote for no change [in the directive wording]. We're upto five; we have one more. That still is a minority.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the number of people who would vote for no change in the directive wording.


Passage number 516.
-52-5/18/81MR. WALLICH. On [some] grounds I'd vote that way, though notbecause I like what we have now. But I don't like the change to whichwe're going, and I suspect we're not going to change it again soon, sowe're losing an opportunity to improve it permanently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker does express some personal opinions and hesitations, but there is no clear contention or disagreement present in this passage.


Passage number 517.
MR. SCHULTZ. What would you do. Would you go further thanwhat we're suggesting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking for the listener's opinion on a possible course of action.


Passage number 518.
MR. WALLICH. I would stress the deviation from theaggregates and then come in from the funds rate.MESSRS. PARTEE and SCHULTZ. But that's what Lyle's versiondid.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage portrays agreement and collaboration between Mr. Wallich, Mr. Partee, and Mr. Schultz.


Passage number 519.
MR. WALLICH. No, I don't think he mentions the deviationsfrom the paths.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any deviations from the paths, so there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 520.
MR. SCHULTZ. Yes, he did.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is because the speaker simply answered a question with a straightforward "yes" response.


Passage number 521.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, those are the first words.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MR. PARTEE simply acknowledges that those are the first words.


Passage number 522.
MR. SCHULTZ. That's exactly what he did.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "That's exactly what he did" expresses agreement or confirmation, rather than contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 523.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have a consensus on Mr. Gramley'sreworded version which, if I can read it, says: "The Chairman maycall for Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager forDomestic Operations..." I don't know what happens if it appears tothe Chairman, but not to the Manager.SPEAKER(.). Then you better talk to the Manager.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker is raising a question about whether there is a consensus on Mr. Gramley's reworded version of a statement. They express uncertainty about the situation where it appears to the Chairman but not to the Manager. This implies a difference in interpretation or understanding among the speakers.


Passage number 524.
MR. SCHULTZ.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage involving Mr. Schultz.


Passage number 525.
 I have a feeling the Chairman can talk theManager into--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "...that pursuit of the monetaryobjectives and related reserve paths during the period before the nextmeeting is likely to be associated with a federal funds ratepersistently outside a range of __to __ percent." Do I have aconsensus on that. I hope I have more than 5 votes anyway. Allright, let's assume that. Now we have to put figures there, it sohappens.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own hope for consensus and suggesting the need to fill in specific figures.


Passage number 526.
MR. PARTEE. 5 to 50 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement of a range without any conflicting views or opposing opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 527.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You still don't have a consensus on 3percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The phrase "You still don't have a consensus on 3 percent" suggests that there is a lack of agreement or disagreement regarding the topic mentioned.


Passage number 528.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information about Mr. Partee's opinions or thoughts to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 529.
 We don't want to have--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will come back [to that]. Actually,very few people specifically commented on [the funds rate range].Among the people who specifically commented, we have one mentioning aceiling of 20 percent and three a ceiling of 22 percent. My notesonly have that many comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating the lack of comments on the funds rate range and providing the limited information they have on the specific comments received.


Passage number 530.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I can't provide the information you're looking for.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 531.
 I said I would accept 16 to 22--MR. SCHULTZ. With a "B" specification.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "With a 'B' specification" suggests that the speaker has a different condition or requirement than what was initially mentioned.


Passage number 532.
-53-5/18/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right. Well, I think it's probably achoice between 16 to 21 percent and 16 to 22 percent. I think thereis an implication--these people may be wrong--that the upper end ofthis range is much more likely to be binding than the lower end duringthis period. And the range isn't absolutely symmetrical [around thecurrent level]. I'm not sure it's so far from the [expected rate],depending upon what reserve number we put in there. But I would alsopresume that there is a bias; people recognize that it may be a bitasymmetrical, but they want to consult if it gets above whatevernumber we now put in, which seems to me to lie between 21 and 22percent. How many 22s do we have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is just a discussion about different percentage ranges and the possibility of bias in decision-making.


Passage number 533.
MR. CORRIGAN. This is strictly as a consultation point,you're saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Corrigan is simply stating that the information he is providing is for consultation purposes.


Passage number 534.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that's right. It looks as if that'sthe prevailing view. How many would prefer 21 percent. It looks likewe put the upper limit at 22 percent; 16 to 22 percent, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their observations and asking for confirmation from the audience.


Passage number 535.
MR. GRAMLEY. Have we ever had a 6-point range before.SPEAKER(.). Yes.SPEAKER(.). Yes, we have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers agree and confirm that there has been a 6-point range before.


Passage number 536.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage involving Mr. Partee.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 537.
 Yes, we've backed away from--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. Now we have this rewordedsentence and we have that range tentatively settled at 16 to 22percent. Let's come back to the borrowing. Is $2.1 billion theconsensus.SPEAKER(.). Ask for a vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is evident from the phrases "we've backed away from" and "Ask for a vote." These indicate differing opinions or a need to settle a dispute through voting.


Passage number 538.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How many people are willing to put in $2.1billion immediately. That looks pretty good at a quick look. Now wecome back to the [wording of the] paragraph. What I am suggesting is:"In the short run the Committee seeks behavior of reserve aggregatesconsistent with a substantial deceleration of growth in M-1B fromApril to June to an annual rate of __ percent..." The question iswhether we put in "or lower" there. The sentence continues with acomma and then: "after allowance for the impact of flows into NOWaccounts, and with growth in M2 at an annual rate of about __ percent.A shortfall in growth of M-1B from the two-month rate specified abovewould be acceptable, in light of the rapid growth in April and theobjective adopted by the Committee on March 31 for growth from Marchto June at an annual rate of 5-1/2 percent or somewhat less." Is thatgeneral language okay. I think that's where we arrived before. Wehave to fill in the blanks and decide whether to put in "or lower".As nearly as I can see, it's a simple choice between 2 or 3 percent.How many 3 percenters do we have.SPEAKER(.). If it's "or lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 539.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. Let me assume it's 3 percent orlower, if we take the 3 percent.SPEAKER(.). Okay, I'll go with that rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply agreeing to go with the stated rate of 3 percent.


Passage number 540.
-54-5/18/81MR. ALTMANN. Five voting members.SPEAKER(.). Well, what's the alternative--"somewhat lower".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 541.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The alternative, I think, would be 2percent without the "or lower," but the "lower" appears in the nextsentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply describing different possibilities or alternatives.


Passage number 542.
MR. FORD. We're going to say "lower" not "somewhat lower".How far are you going with this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their intention to use the word "lower" instead of "somewhat lower" and then asks for clarification on how far the conversation will go on this topic.


Passage number 543.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What the next sentence says is that ashortfall in growth would be acceptable. It refers back to theearlier [decision on the quarterly growth rate]. The choice isbetween "3 percent or lower" in the first sentence, which we just hadan indication of views on, or 2 percent in which case I think we leaveout the "or lower" but the [concept of] lower appears in the nextsentence in the form of a shortfall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining the options related to the growth rate and the use of the term "lower" in the context of a shortfall.


Passage number 544.
MR. PARTEE. Do you want hands.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement asking if someone wants hands.


Passage number 545.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, for the 2 percent without the "orlower."SPEAKER(.). Just voting members.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact about the voting members being 2 percent without the condition "or lower".


Passage number 546.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know whether we're gettingclose here. Let me just take the voting members and go over it again.How many--just the voting members now--prefer the 3 percent or lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It appears to be a statement of uncertainty and a request for clarification.


Passage number 547.
MR. ALTMANN. Five.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 548.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Five, okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states the number "five" with the addition of the word "okay" as a confirmation or agreement.


Passage number 549.
MR. BLACK. There's an exception.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. The statement is presented as a fact or assertion, without any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 550.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Was your hand up or down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 551.
MR. CORRIGAN. I accept this.SPEAKER(.). Do you prefer it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Corrigan accepts the statement, and the speaker is asking for Mr. Corrigan's preference.


Passage number 552.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I asked for preferences at this point.Now, let me just make sure. Who prefers the 2 percent period. Six.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification from the group.


Passage number 553.
MR. ALTMANN. Six.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states "Mr. Altmann. Six" without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 554.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's great. Six and five.SPEAKER(.). [Not] including you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement. The phrase "That's great" suggests a positive response, and the mention of numbers ("six and five") does not inherently imply any conflict or disagreement. The inclusion of "[Not] including you" does not necessarily indicate disagreement either; it could simply be stating a fact.


Passage number 555.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're down to splitting hairs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "splitting hairs" typically means engaging in petty or unnecessary argument, suggesting a lack of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 556.
MR. PARTEE. How about 2-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In the given passage, Mr. Party suggests a percentage of 2-1/2. There is no mention of any disagreement or contention. It is a simple statement or question about a specific percentage.


Passage number 557.
MR. SCHULTZ. How about "2-1/2 percent or somewhat lower".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This statement does not indicate any form of disagreement or contention. It simply presents a suggestion for a specific percentage or a possibly lower percentage.


Passage number 558.
MR. FORD. Or "slightly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
This passage is a fragment of dialogue and does not include any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 559.
"-55-5/18/81MR. RICE. Why don't we find out what people can accept.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply suggesting a course of action without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 560.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me try. Who would accept the 3percent or lower. Ten.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It is a partial statement, with the speaker expressing their intent to try to discuss or explain something.


Passage number 561.
MR. PARTEE. All but Tony.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that all but Tony agreed or were in consensus about something.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 562.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're within very narrow grounds. I'minterested in maximizing the happiness at this point. I biased thisthing now. A lot of people will find the 2 percent unacceptable now,I presume. How many will accept the 2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "A lot of people will find the 2 percent unacceptable now, I presume" suggests that there are differing opinions on whether the 2 percent will be accepted by many people.


Passage number 563.
MR. SCHULTZ. Accept 2 percent. I'll accept either one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Schultz is suggesting that he is willing to accept either a 2 percent or a 1 percent offer, indicating that he does not have a strong preference or argument for one over the other.


Passage number 564.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Eight. I'm afraid I succeeded in biasingthe thing.SPEAKER(.).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker succeeded in biasing something.


Passage number 565.
 No, I was going to vote--MR. SCHULTZ. I just really can't get awfully excited overthis thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their lack of enthusiasm about a particular thing.


Passage number 566.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It looks like 3 percent or lower. Andmaybe we should just start the second sentence by saying "Theshortfall...," which refers back to the "lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests a possibility ("maybe we should"), without presenting conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 567.
"MR. PARTEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response "Yes" is simply acknowledging or agreeing with something.


Passage number 568.
MR. SCHULTZ. This is becoming a theology session.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating an observation that the situation is turning into a session about theology.


Passage number 569.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right, now we have 3 percent or lowerwith this two sentence approach. We have 16 to 22 percent and we haveborrowing at $2.1 billion [without] an allergy toward raising theborrowing if [money growth] comes in high.SPEAKER(.). M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating different percentages and amounts without expressing any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 570.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, M2. Where are we on M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for information about the current status or location of something called "M2."


Passage number 571.
MS. TEETERS. 6-1/2 percent.SPEAKER(.). M2 is 6-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply restates the interest rate given by Ms. Teeters.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 572.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. For conforming purposes, we'veput in 6-1/2 percent. Because we said "or lower," we can put in 6percent; that's [about] halfway between "B" and "C" and it's a niceround number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The statement presents both sides of the argument for the conforming purposes, suggesting either 6-1/2 percent or 6 percent. This indicates that there is disagreement on which percentage to use.


Passage number 573.
MR. BLACK. 6-1/2 percent is [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It only states a percentage without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 574.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, put 6 percent in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 575.
MR. PARTEE. Six percent looks about right, doesn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement followed by a question seeking agreement or confirmation.


Passage number 576.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It just squares the thing. Okay, so we'vegot 3 percent or lower, 6 percent, 16 to 22 percent, and $2.1 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The sentence simply lists different percentages and a monetary value without indicating any disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 577.
MR. SCHULTZ. And we'll be lucky to hit any of them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing doubt or lack of confidence rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 578.
-56-5/18/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Is it clear what we're voting on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 579.
MR. WALLICH. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage is a simple statement where Mr. Wallich expresses a lack of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 580.
MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, may I call your attention to thesecond line of the general paragraphs, which I think is not entirelyconsistent with the views of the Committee on what is happening in theeconomy. It says: "...suggested that real GNP will probably growlittle in the current quarter." That sounds like an awfully flateconomy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. 

The speaker, Mr. Gramley, expresses disagreement with the statement in the second line of the general paragraphs. He believes it is not consistent with the views of the Committee on what is happening in the economy. Therefore, he argues that the statement suggests an overly pessimistic view of the economy, indicating a flat economy.


Passage number 581.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The word "Right" alone does not indicate contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement without any conflicting ideas or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 582.
MR. GRAMLEY. This is a fairly optimistic group. I wouldsay: "suggested that GNP will grow more slowly in the currentquarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that the group is fairly optimistic and gives their own suggestion about the growth rate of GNP in the current quarter.


Passage number 583.
"MR. SCHULTZ. Yes, or not [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 584.
 That gives usmore room--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where does this all appear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not show contention or disagreement as it does not involve conflicting viewpoints or opposing positions. It is simply a statement providing information about having more space.


Passage number 585.
MR. GRAMLEY. It's in the second line of the generalparagraphs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the second line of the general paragraphs.


Passage number 586.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's perfectly safe to say that itwill grow more slowly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement expresses an opinion and does not present any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 587.
MR. PARTEE. Than 8-1/2 percent or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It appears to be a straightforward statement or response without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 588.
MR. GRAMLEY. Or even, if you like, "will grow slowly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: This passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by someone named Mr. Gramley.


Passage number 589.
""Grow little" sounds as if the economy--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I agree. "Grow more slowly" isperfectly all right. We'll make that change. Okay, you all know whatyou're voting on. Mr. Secretary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, I agree. - This statement indicates agreement with the suggestion of changing "grow little" to "grow more slowly".


Passage number 590.
MR. ALTMANN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a person's name, "Mr. Altmann."


Passage number 591.
Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesPresident Corrigan YesGovernor Gramley YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Schultz YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich YesPresident Winn YesMR. SCHULTZ. My word.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The word "Yes" suggests that all the individuals mentioned are expressing agreement or confirmation.


Passage number 592.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about Mr. Partee or any discussion or conflicting viewpoints involving him.


Passage number 593.
 I think that's the first unanimous vote--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can go grab a sandwich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states an observation and then suggests grabbing a sandwich.


Passage number 594.
MR. SCHULTZ. That's pretty good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "That's pretty good" reflects a positive evaluation or agreement.


Passage number 595.
-57-5/18/81 -58-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Thank you. Wait a minute, do we haveanything else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a sequence of numbers and a pause in the form of a question.


Passage number 596.
MR. ALTMANN. Only the date of the next meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement only provides information about the date of the next meeting, without any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 597.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to confirm the date of the nextmeeting. Let me just say that I assume we can confirm that. But it'sa meeting where we have to review the annual targets, so I think it'squite likely we might want to come in here the afternoon before.SPEAKER(.). What's the date.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their thoughts and assumptions about confirming the date of the next meeting.


