Passage number 1.
 Hornstein, Senior Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond  John Fernald, Senior Research Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank of San FranciscoTranscript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on June 18–19, 2013  June 18 Session  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good afternoon, everyone.  President Pianalto is not able to join us today.  She has a family emergency.  Greg Stefani, First Vice President, Cleveland, will be taking her chair.  We’re sorry about the circumstances, but welcome to the meeting. On a slightly better note, this is the last meeting for David Reifschneider.  Dave has attended 65 FOMC meetings.  Even more impressively than that, he has authored or coauthored more than 50 memos that have been distributed to all of you for your edification, and I think it is worth pointing out that Shakespeare only wrote 39 plays.  [Laughter].  David’s forward guidance is that he will be lifting off sometime in 2013:Q3, but the alt sims put the 70 percent confidence range at anywhere between tomorrow and 2017.  [Laughter]  David, you are a Federal Reserve institution.  We’ll miss you as a colleague and as a friend, and congratulations on the new stage.  [Applause] Before we get to the regular agenda, I have a couple of items I want to talk about briefly.  First, after some discussions, R&S would like to do an experiment with Tealbook, Book A, for the next meeting.  The idea is to present the Domestic Economic Developments and Outlook section in a more concise bullet-like form that would be, we hope, better structured and more usable by readers and would spare the R&S staff many, many late hours trying to figure out exactly the right adjective in their prose.  [Laughter]  David Wilcox, who is here, of course, assures me that this is only an expositional experiment, that there will be no skimping on data analysis, the forecast round, or any of those critical inputs.  So we’ll see how that works.  We’re going to try it for July, and, depending on feedback, we could continue that or not.  This is my own commentary:  The Board members have seen something called the “Wascher notes,” whichis a very short summary of the forecast, and found those very useful.  This is essentially what we’re trying to accomplish.  This is just an experiment.  We will be soliciting your reactions.  If you have any early comments or questions, David Wilcox will be happy to respond.  Any questions or comments.  [No response] The second item I want to mention briefly.  In previous meetings we’ve had a good bit of discussion about the exit principles.  As you know, in June of 2011, in our minutes we put out a somewhat formal set of principles about how we would normalize our balance sheet in the longer term.  We’ve had some discussion about whether or not we could update those principles.  I think on most elements there was a good bit of agreement, but as the memo you got suggested, we really weren’t able to come to a full agreement on a new set of bulleted principles to put out immediately.  A few people objected, in particular, to the idea that MBS sales would not be an early part of the exit strategy, and a few others were concerned mostly about the timing, that putting it out now would be perhaps a bad signal about our imminent exit from accommodative policies.  So we were not able to get, at this point, the kind of agreement we had in 2011 where I think we had only one dissent.  What I’d like to do first, of course, is to continue working on this.  As we get closer to the appropriate time, we’ll need to have clarification, and the markets and the public will like to have clarification. For now, the memo that was circulated suggested four summary points, which I’ll read to you in just a moment in case you don’t have them.  What I propose to do in my press conference is to have a short paragraph that says:  We’re working on this, here are some of the things that we see, we’ll be back to you when we have more information, but we don’t have a full update at this point; in addition, any conversations we have now, obviously, as we’ve done before, will bereflected in the minutes in the usual minutes style, which presents different points of view, and so on. For your recollection, the four points that were in the memo that was sent to you—One:  “Meeting participants generally continued to view the broad principles released in the minutes of the June 2011 FOMC meeting as appropriate.”  That’s the whole sentence.  We were thinking in terms of the use of the IOER, the funds rate target, reserve draining tools, et cetera. Two:  “However, participants agreed that the details of the eventual normalization process likely would differ from those specified two years ago, and that the Committee would need to provide additional information about its intentions closer to the time when normalization becomes appropriate.” Three—and this is the one about MBS; I think it reflects both sides here:  “While participants continued to think that the Federal Reserve should hold predominantly Treasury securities in the long run, a substantial majority of participants now anticipate that the Committee will not sell MBS as part of the normalization process, except that, in the longer run, limited sales could be used to reduce or eliminate residual holdings.”  That, I think, reflects the balance of views there, but I’ll open the floor in a second. Finally, four:  “The Committee’s current focus is on providing monetary accommodation to promote a stronger economic recovery, and so the Committee judged that additional discussion of policy normalization should be deferred.”  Again, those were the principles that were circulated.  I recognize, exactly as I said at the beginning, that we don’t all agree on a full set of principles.  Is there any concern about how we propose to proceed.  Any comments.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 2.
MR. LACKER.  I would just suggest consideration of another aspect of timing.  I think our intermeeting experience showed a couple of instances in which communicating about two or more separate aspects of our policy over the next several years sometimes confused markets.  If an effort is made following this meeting, either through our statement or your press conference, to try to clarify markets’ understanding of our strategy, my sense would be that that would be focused on clarifying their understanding of our strategy regarding the reduction in the pace of our asset purchases, and these normalization points could be a substantial distraction from our ability to convey a clear message in that case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker suggests that clarifying the Federal Reserve's strategy regarding the reduction in the pace of asset purchases should be the focus, while noting that discussing the normalization points could be a substantial distraction. This implies that he disagrees with the idea of including the normalization points in the communication strategy.


Passage number 3.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  A number of folks have expressed that concern.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply states that some people have expressed a concern without providing any conflicting viewpoints. The inclusion of President Plosser's name does not necessarily indicate disagreement but could imply that he is aware of the concern.


Passage number 4.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I share those concerns.  I also would like to express my concern about the MBS signal.  I know many people are thinking about the idea that we do not sell MBS, but I think one of the reasons we’re reconsidering our exit strategy is that we put in some tactical aspects to that strategy, which we now seem to be uncomfortable with, and we need to reconsider.  I view the decision not to sell MBS as exactly one of those tactical things that may come back to haunt us later.  We really don’t know what the housing market is going to look like two or three years from now.  We don’t know what the status of Fannie and Freddie is going to be two or three years from now, and so I would caution us to steer away from making these sorts of tactical decisions on MBS at this point in time. We made a very good statement in the most-recent exit principles that said that when the time came to shrink the balance sheet or sell assets that we would announce in advance what our plan would be, and that we would approach the shrinking of the balance sheet in a careful and gradual manner.  That was a perfectly adequate signal to send, and I would encourage us to movein that direction rather than to be very specific about MBS.  If we choose some of the strategies—for example, selling short-term maturity Treasuries—we could find ourselves in a few years having a SOMA portfolio that was 60 or more percent MBS.  We are making a tactical decision here, or at least signaling a tactical decision, that may come back to haunt us later, and I would encourage us to be very careful about what we say.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show contention or disagreement. Instead, it shows Mr. Plosser expressing his concerns and suggesting caution in the decision-making process.


Passage number 5.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, again, it’s only an expectation, and it’s not an official Committee decision in either case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It only states that the mentioned expectation is not an official Committee decision.


Passage number 6.
 MR. PLOSSER.  But I think it will be hard to back off on, once we say it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Plosser believes it will be difficult to change a certain statement once it is made.


Passage number 7.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no passage provided to analyze.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 8.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, I just want to second both comments.  One is, it’s pretty clear that what people are looking for most is some clarity about dialing back or dialing up, and you’re going to be focusing on that, I think, during the press conference or we may put it in the statement, depending on the discussion.  So this, to me, would be additional noise.  I’m not sure about the timing of it.  And I completely agree with President Plosser.  It’s not clear to me why we would remove one of the tools in our toolkit, depending on circumstances. Bill has been very kind in responding to the specifics.  There is, according to the tabulation, a substantial majority, but if you use the words “substantial majority,” that sounds like it’s a decided deal, and I do worry about the wording in point 3.  I just wanted to register my agreement with both President Lacker and President Plosser.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement and raises concerns about the timing and wording in the passage. They agree with President Lacker and President Plosser.


Passage number 9.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Any other comments.  I don’t think this is trivial.  I do think it’s important to distinguish it from the more immediate issues about our policy, but I have talked about this before, and it is something that will be very much on the minds of markets as we talk about exit and winding down and those sorts of things, and about what our salesstrategy will be.  What I’d like to do is take a straw vote here on whether or not I can use language like this—or I can change it from “substantial majority” to “most” or something like that if that would help.  President Dudley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by President Dudley seeking feedback and suggestions on language to be used.


Passage number 10.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I just want to interject.  This is also about the degree of monetary policy accommodation.  If we do not sell agency MBS, we’re actually adding a little bit of monetary policy accommodation.  It’s completely relevant to the current setting of monetary policy.  So that’s why I would not defer it. I also think that the market has already made the adjustment that we’re not going to sell agency MBS, in large degree.  I don’t know the timing.  What was the last Survey of Primary Dealers in terms of expectations of agency MBS sales.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and discussing the relevance and impact of not selling agency MBS on monetary policy, without any opposing views or conflicting statements.


Passage number 11.
 MR. POTTER.  Most dealers expect no MBS sales in the projections that we have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply states that most dealers do not expect any MBS (mortgage-backed securities) sales in the projections they have.


Passage number 12.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So why would you want to keep them hanging with the residual uncertainty when you could eliminate that uncertainty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting a statement and questioning why someone would choose to keep uncertainty rather than eliminate it.


Passage number 13.
 MR. FISHER.  So you’re saying, President Dudley, that this is certain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by Mr. Fisher is simply summarizing President Dudley's previous remark without challenging or contradicting it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 14.
  This underscores the certainty that we would not— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It’s not certain—a substantial majority favors it.  I think that’s accurate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "It’s not certain" contradicts the statement "This underscores the certainty" by suggesting that there is not complete certainty about the substantial majority favoring it. Therefore, the disagreement exists regarding the level of certainty.


Passage number 15.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, we could check that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a neutral statement suggesting a potential course of action.


Passage number 16.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without knowing the content of the passage, it is impossible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 17.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Anyone else like to comment.  [No response]What I’d like to do, I’m just going to ask for a straw vote on whether I should use this language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 18.
 MR. BULLARD.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It merely refers to someone addressing another person as "Mr. Chairman."


Passage number 19.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is insufficient information provided in the given passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 20.
MR. BULLARD.  I guess I’ll weigh in here.  I think the message in talking about exit strategy is that the Committee’s riled up about exit strategy and was thinking about exiting.  That is going to swamp anything to do with whether we may or may not sell MBS and whether that’s an easier policy.  It’s hard to read exactly how this would be received.  I don’t think we have to talk about it at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 21.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Governor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement acknowledging the presence of a governor.


Passage number 22.
 MS. DUKE.  I’m sorry.  Could I just make one comment from the other side of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Ms. Duke is simply asking for an opportunity to make a comment from a different perspective.


Passage number 23.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 24.
 MS. DUKE.  I agree with all of these concerns, but at the same time, I would expect that the communication is going to get even more difficult when we get to September and there’s a question as to whether or not we’re going to step down purchases.  And then as we go past that, we’ve already raised the question of whether or not we’re going to sell MBS, and if we don’t resolve that question, it’s going to continue to be out there, and I think we could need to address it at a time when it was even more awkward to try to address it.  So it seems like doing it this way is the lowest key way to take this off the table and still defers the actual decision on what we’re going to do until a time when we do have a better idea of exactly what we’re facing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with certain concerns and suggesting a strategy for addressing them.


Passage number 25.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  In terms of the confusion that President Bullard was concerned about, I will separate it very sharply from the main message of the press conference.  I’m not that concerned about that particular issue, but that is the concern a number of people had about going out now with a formal set of principles.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions President Bullard's concern about confusion and separates it from the main message of the press conference.


Passage number 26.
 MR. POWELL.  I’m perfectly prepared to support including it in the press conference tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement indicated in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Powell, is expressing his willingness to support and include something in the press conference.


Passage number 27.
  However, it strikes me that there is another alternative to address this concern, which is to put it into the minutes in July as a—CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  This kind of material reflecting this discussion here—some said this, some said that—we’re going to put it in the minutes in any case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In this passage, the speaker is simply presenting an alternative solution or suggestion. There is no indication of any disagreement or argument in the statement.


Passage number 28.
 MR. POWELL.  But in terms of action, I suppose that it’s already in the minutes in that sense.  It’s not really a separate statement.  You’re going to read it as a statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply clarifying that the action mentioned is already recorded in the minutes and does not need to be stated separately.


Passage number 29.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No.  I’m just going to have a paragraph that says we’ve talked about this.  It will be a paragraph that is going to say early on, one of the things we talked about was this exit strategy issue.  We haven’t decided yet.  We’ll be back to you as things get clearer.  One point of note is that a substantial majority thought that this was the likely outcome, but, of course, all of this is still up in the air and it will be a long time before this is relevant.  End of story, then on to the main policy.  That’s essentially my plan.   Any other comments.  [No response]  People should just vote the way they think is best.  I don’t have a life-or-death attachment to this, but if I get asked about it, I’m going to say what I’ve said before, which is that it is a fact that it’s not necessary to sell MBS in order either to exit or to ultimately get back to a predominantly Treasury portfolio. Let me ask of all participants, who would support putting this in the press statement.  [Show of hands]  Okay, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12—14.  I get about 15.  All right.  Thank you.  I will be very careful and put very little emphasis on it.  Let us turn now to the formal agenda, item 1.  I will turn to Simon Potter to talk about “Financial Developments and Open Market Operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply describing the speaker's plan and asking for support on a specific issue.


Passage number 30.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Questions for Simon.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 31.
 MR. FISHER.  First, Mr. Chairman, I’d like to thank Simon for coming to Dallas and meeting with money managers and investors who are not based in New York and for distinguishing the Fed in his presentation.   I want to make sure I heard you correctly.  When you’re talking about panel 19, you said that written comments indicate the market would not be surprised if purchases are reduced after the September meeting.  Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude and seeking clarification on a specific point.


Passage number 32.
 MR. POTTER.  The written comments from dealers suggest that they’re unsure about whether purchases could be reduced at the September meeting.  That reflects them trying to understand some of the market reaction that they’ve seen and the recent commentary from the Fed.  But their economic projections, I think, still point a little bit toward the December meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply describes the uncertainty among dealers regarding the possibility of purchase reduction at the September meeting and mentions their economic projections pointing towards the December meeting.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 33.
 MR. FISHER.  Did you say they would not be surprised.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is indicated by the statement "Did you say they would not be surprised", which implies that Mr. Fisher's initial statement was met with disbelief or disagreement.


Passage number 34.
 MR. POTTER.  They would not be surprised, but I qualified it in that particular way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Potter, mentions that "They would not be surprised," indicating that there is agreement or understanding among the people being referred to. When he says "I qualified it in that particular way," he is simply explaining the specific manner in which he communicated the information, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 35.
 MR. FISHER.  And then, regarding your discussion of the JGB implementation challenges, I would be grateful to be briefed on that—not now, but at some point.  I wouldn’t want to take up the rest of the table. I do have a comment about the dynamics of high-yield debt, Mr. Chairman.  Again, Simon is in better contact than I am, but my sense is that the sophisticated guys have gotten out of that market.  I mean, we’re seeing in the past two weeks record sales from the ETFs and mutual funds.  If my memory is correct from my old practice, the standard spread for high yield was LIBOR plus 900.  Right now we are at LIBOR plus 450 or so.  And then if you look atwho’s selling the stuff, most of them have only been in the business of late—they’re kids.  So I worry that we have to think about the consequences of our policy, and then how we express ourselves and what the Chairman says during his press conference:  How is this corps of kids going to manage to guide a $2 trillion bond market through a 450 basis point adjustment.  It’s a comment, but also in a way a question, because this is a very tight spread, and this is a significant market.  Again, my perception, talking to my contacts on the street, is that the big boys are out.  And then when you talk to the people that are on the receiving end of the sales pitches, there’s almost a desperation of those trying to sell these deals right now, and you’re seeing that reflected in some of the outflows now from the ETFs and the mutual funds.  But it’s important to understand the dynamics.  It’s a different experience base, and we can’t quantify that, but I’m a little worried about how it’s going to be managed as rates rise.  Is that a legitimate concern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker is expressing concern about the ability of inexperienced individuals ("kids") to manage a $2 trillion bond market and navigate potential challenges as interest rates rise.


Passage number 36.
 MR. POTTER.  I think that’s a concern.  I would take some comfort that rates did go up very quickly and were volatile, and most of the issues we’ve seen have not been in the U.S.  Now, it might be that the growth backdrop is strong in the U.S. and that was one of the themes we’re trying to understand—how much that is driving it right now.  I think in the financial stability briefing there’ll be some discussion about high yield.  Is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Potter is simply expressing his thoughts and concerns about interest rates and the potential impact on financial stability.


Passage number 37.
 MS. LOGAN.  A little bit, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 38.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes.  So there will be some more there.  I’d say in terms of the high frequency market dynamics you’re talking about, it’s reasonably encouraging how smooth it has been, given how much volatility we have seen in interest rates.  And volatility took a hit really quickly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating an opinion about the smoothness of market dynamics in relation to interest rate volatility.


Passage number 39.
MR. FISHER.  So if you look at the emerging market and you look at the global high-yield market, maybe one of the benefits is some of these kids have grown some gray hairs.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is making a statement about the potential benefits of experience in the emerging market and global high-yield market. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage.


Passage number 40.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions for Simon.  [No response]  Okay.  Thank you.  We do need a vote to ratify the open market operations since the May meeting.  Any objections.  [No response]  Seeing none, item 2, the “Economic and Financial Situation.”  Let me call on Thomas Laubach to introduce the discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 41.
 MS. IHRIG.3  I am going to continue the presentation, discussing the “Summary of Economic Projections” in the next handout.  Exhibit 1 shows the trajectories of your forecasts for key economic variables.  The top panel shows the gentle pickup in the growth of real GDP projected over the period; the second panel displays a gradual decline in the unemployment rate; and the bottom two panels point to some acceleration in inflation, although most of you see inflation as still running a little below the Committee’s 2 percent objective by 2015.   The second exhibit compares your current projections with those in the March SEP and the June Tealbook.  The general message from the changes in the central tendencies is softer real GDP growth and lower inflation in the near term, and a lower level of the unemployment rate both in the near term and over the forecast period.  As reflected in the top panel, the revisions to your forecasts for real GDP growth tended to be small, and they were concentrated in the first half of this year, in response to the incoming data.  As shown in the second panel, most of you revised down your near-term forecast for the unemployment rate and carried this revision forward.  In the bottom panels, your 2013 forecasts for inflation moved down considerably, reflecting the low readings in recent months.  But a number of you noted that factors now putting downward pressure on inflation were likely to prove transitory, and your inflation forecasts for 2014 and 2015 were roughly unchanged.  The Tealbook forecast is for economic growth near the upper end of your central tendencies over the projection period.  Meanwhile, the Tealbook projections for unemployment move from the upper end of your central tendencies this year to the lower end by 2015.  For inflation, the Tealbook projections are again near the lower ends of your central tendencies throughout the projection period.  Exhibit 3 provides an overview of your assessments of the appropriate path for the federal funds rate.  As shown in the top panel, four participants believe that the federal funds rate should increase this year or next, while the rest of you think that it will not be appropriate to begin raising the funds rate until at least 2015.  The middle panel of the exhibit provides your current assessments of the appropriate target for the federal funds rate at the end of each year of the forecast period and over the longer run.  On balance, although your views of the year when it will be appropriate for the  3 The materials used by Ms. Ihrig are appended to this transcript (appendix 3).  federal funds rate to leave the effective lower bound have not changed much, those who expect the first tightening to be appropriate in 2015 now call for a modestly higher rate at the end of that year than you reported in your March forecasts, which are shown in the bottom panel.  This is consistent with a slightly earlier date of liftoff or a more rapid increase after liftoff.  By contrast, a few of you who judge that liftoff before 2015 will be appropriate now see the funds rate rising more gradually than you did in March. With regard to securities purchases (not shown), half of you indicated that your assessment of appropriate policy is about in line with the assumption in the Tealbook baseline forecast, which is conditioned on purchases totaling $750 billion in 2013.  Seven of you think that it will be appropriate to have a larger purchase program, in the range of $900 billion to $1.25 trillion, and most of these participants see purchases continuing into 2014.  In contrast, one participant noted that it would be appropriate to end the purchases immediately, and a couple of others focused their comments on concerns about exit or communications. Exhibit 4 depicts the economic conditions that you anticipate at the end of the year in which you judge that it will become appropriate to raise the federal funds rate from its current target range.  Recognizing that liftoff may occur before year-end, the series shown are only illustrative of the market conditions around the time of liftoff.  Your projections for the unemployment rate at the end of the year of liftoff range from about 5½ percent to 7 percent, with the median a touch above 6 percent, while your inflation projections for that time are in a range of 1½ percent to 2¼ percent, with a median of 1¾ percent.  All 15 of you who see the initial increase in the funds rate occurring in 2015 or later (shown by the gray circles and blue square) project unemployment below the Committee’s 6½ percent threshold at the end of that year; nearly all of this group also see inflation at 2 percent or below.  All but one of the participants who judge that the first funds rate increase should occur in 2013 or 2014 (shown by the blue triangle and white diamonds) see the unemployment rate at the time of the first funds rate increase as still above 6½ percent.  Most of these participants pointed to concerns about inflation as a primary reason for expecting that it will be appropriate to raise rates before 2015.   The final exhibit reviews your assessments of the uncertainty and risks surrounding your economic projections.  As shown in the top two panels in the column on the left, the majority of you now judge the current level of uncertainty about GDP growth and unemployment to be broadly similar to the average level over the past 20 years, although a number of you continue to see it as higher.  The panels to the right indicate that the majority of you continue to view the risks to GDP growth and unemployment as broadly balanced, though the rest of you see downside risks to growth and upside risks to unemployment.  Regarding the bottom-left panels, a majority of you continue to view the uncertainty associated with your inflation projections as broadly similar to the average level of uncertainty over the past 20 years.  As in March, most of you see the risks to your inflation outlook, shown to the right, as broadly balanced, with a few of you, on net, seeing it as weighted to the downside.  In assessing the uncertainty and risks to the outlook for real activity andprices, many participants noted the current issues surrounding U.S. fiscal and monetary policy.  Thank you.  That concludes the staff presentations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply presenting and summarizing forecasts and projections without any evident disagreement or contention.


Passage number 42.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  We had four presentations.  Are there questions for our colleagues.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contentions or disagreements. It simply expresses gratitude and asks if there are any questions.


Passage number 43.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I had a question about the total payroll employment number in exhibit 2.  The June Tealbook forecast for the change in total payroll employment between August 2012 and the fourth quarter of 2013 is 500,000 higher than it was in last September’s Tealbook.  So of that 500,000, if I think about the range of possible outcomes, how many standard deviations away from the mean is it.  Is that really unusual.  Is that a big increase relative to what everyone expected, in terms of statistical uncertainty, or can it just be interpreted as being reasonable due to noise of some kind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a question about the total payroll employment number in an exhibit and seeks clarification on the level of statistical uncertainty.


Passage number 44.
 MR. LAUBACH.  I hate to say it, but I am afraid I’d have to get back to you with an answer on that.  I don’t have a probability distribution for payroll employment at my fingertips.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they do not have the information readily available and would need to provide an answer later.


Passage number 45.
 MR. WILCOX.  I suspect that over a period of nine months that a forecast error of 500,000 on the level of employment is a pretty small event.  I think the impression that I’m left with, as a consumer of this chart, is that things have improved more or less as we expected and, indeed, a little better than what we had expected, but, in probability space, pretty close.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no explicit contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their belief that a forecast error of 500,000 on the level of employment over a nine-month period is a small event. They also mention their impression that things have improved as expected, or even better, but acknowledge that in probability space, it is still relatively close.


Passage number 46.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thanks.  That’s helpful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 47.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Did you have an intervention, President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Insufficient information.


Passage number 48.
 MR. LACKER.  President Kocherlakota, just to help the staff, were you asking about the probability distribution around a certain period-ahead forecast or around realized values of employment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply stating a question asked by Mr. Lacker to President Kocherlakota for clarification on the topic of probability distribution.


Passage number 49.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I’m not actually quite sure what you’re asking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty or confusion about the question being asked.


Passage number 50.
   MR. LACKER.  I’m not sure what you’re asking—variance of what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker is simply expressing confusion or lack of clarity about what the speaker is asking.


Passage number 51.
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage provided does not contain enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 52.
  What I was asking is that if you form a probability distribution of possible outcomes as of August 2012— MR. LACKER.  Outcomes, not forecasts.  I mean, do you want to know if the forecast has changed significantly.  Do you want to look at the distribution of the forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification on what information is being requested.


Passage number 53.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I see what you’re asking.  Either one is fine with me.  I would be interested in both.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their willingness and interest in both options.


Passage number 54.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think what he’s asking is, given the forecast, how likely is the actual, surprisingly good, outcome.  In other words, is it statistically significantly different from the mean of the forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification on how likely it is for the actual outcome to differ significantly from the forecasted mean.


Passage number 55.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, exactly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kocherlakota's response simply acknowledges agreement or understanding with the previous statement.


Passage number 56.
 MR. LACKER.  You’re comparing two forecasts of the level at a future date.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that two forecasts are being compared.


Passage number 57.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  That’s true.  We’ve moved forward nine months.  How likely is it that that forecast has gone up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a fact about the forecast moving forward nine months. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 58.
 MR. LACKER.  Do forecasts fluctuate a lot or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking a question about the fluctuation of forecasts and seeking clarification or confirmation.


Passage number 59.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  No, it’s really about the forecast.  You’re right.  That’s a correct correction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers agree that the correction made is correct and there is no contradiction or argument between them.


Passage number 60.
  MR. WILCOX.  Dave might have an answer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Wilcox is simply suggesting that Dave might have an answer to a question or problem.


Passage number 61.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Not exactly, but I think the question is even slightly different than the way you’re putting it.  [Laughter]  I think it is, how unusual is it, given that GDP came in the way we expected it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is simply a response to a question, with a touch of humor.


Passage number 62.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Oh, that wasn’t what I was asking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kocherlakota simply states that his question was different from what was understood or expected.


Passage number 63.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  But I still think that David’s answer is going to be correct.  And the forecasts do change dramatically at times.  You can see that in terms of the forecasterrors we do.  They blow up really fast.  And David’s point about the confidence intervals for the unemployment rate that you see in Thomas’s chart—those blow up very fast; it’s almost certainly not surprising.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage does not contain any contentious or disagreeing statements. It is simply discussing the changing nature of forecasts and the fast changes in forecast errors and confidence intervals.


Passage number 64.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not mention any opposing views or argument. It simply has someone expressing gratitude or courtesy.


Passage number 65.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage simply states the title/name "President Fisher" without any contradictory or conflicting statements.


Passage number 66.
 MR. FISHER.  First, I wanted to thank Sean for including the margin debt chart, a thing I’ve been concerned about.  The thing I worry most about is the rate of increase, as we saw in 2000 and 2007, but I appreciate that very much. I just want to make a comment on the international presentation, exhibit 5.  You may remember that the business operators we were talking to—I believe I mentioned specifically Emerson Electric, Apple, the miners, the shippers—were indicating that the data were weaker than what was being reported and weaker than expectations.  For what it’s worth I’m still hearing that, and I see this reflected in your Q2 number, but still the business operators in China are concerned about the slowdown, particularly on the industrial side.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude for the inclusion of a chart and then making a comment about their own concerns and observations regarding international business data.


Passage number 67.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I had a couple of questions about the energy projections.  One is at one point IF started using macro information as well as futures curves to project oil prices, and I didn’t hear much about that.  And then the other question I have is that it sounded like from your discussion of natural gas versus oil that one could almost make the case, or at least it’s a possibility, that the trade barriers would be welfare-improving if there were enough externalities of lower natural gas prices.  I was just wondering if anybody had thought that through.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is a series of questions and statements seeking clarification and information.


Passage number 68.
 MR. GRUBER.  On the first point, we have implemented over the past couple of years this adjustment to the futures curve–based forecast for macro outcomes.  We’re continuing to dothat.  We found that it has helped us a little bit on the margin to improve the forecast over the pure futures-based forecast.  We haven’t written it up every time.  Generally, the adjustment factor has been quite small.  So the idea is that we look at the futures curve, and then if we think that we have a more optimistic forecast, let’s say, than outside forecasters and they’re going to be surprised on the upside, we actually want to adjust the curve up a little bit in order to accommodate that.  It turns out now that we’re actually slightly more pessimistic than the outside forecasters that we look at in consensus.  We have actually added about a negative ½ percent adjustment to the oil price going down every year but pretty much on the margin, a small adjustment. As far as the welfare improvement of trade barriers, there currently is a trade barrier for oil—an export ban on crude oil.  One of the things that we’re seeing though is that there are ways to get around these barriers in some sense, because we’re exporting a lot of product now even though we’re not exporting the crude.  For natural gas, there’s a permitting process for the building of new export terminals.  There are only two terminals that are currently permitted to be built.  There’s a big debate going on about whether or not the government should allow more to be built.  But even if we weren’t exporting the raw, natural gas and were exporting things like coal and such, there’s some fungibility basically in how this energy is going to get exported, whether it’s gas or coal or manufactured products supported by lower natural gas prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily giving information and describing their implementation of adjustments to the futures curve-based forecast.


Passage number 69.
 MR. KAMIN.  If I could just add a word to Joe’s comments.  There are two issues.  One of them is the non-normative issue.  In the context of our energy development, would some continued difficulties exporting our product actually be helpful to U.S. manufacturing.  And the answer is “maybe,” but there’s not much data to support that yet, right, Joe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both individuals seem to agree that there is not much data to support the idea that difficulties in exporting the product would be helpful to U.S. manufacturing.


Passage number 70.
 MR. GRUBER.  That’s correct, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Gruber simply agrees with the statement that is mentioned.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 71.
MR. KAMIN.  Then going to the welfare implications, it could be that bottling the natural gas in the United States is helpful to U.S. manufacturing, but that might not be beneficial to overall welfare.  The dynamic spin-offs from the improvements in manufacturing competitiveness might not end up being that great, and we might be better off just acting as a primary commodity exporter and reaping the income gains from that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker suggests that bottling natural gas in the United States may benefit U.S. manufacturing but might not be beneficial to overall welfare. They argue that the potential improvements in manufacturing competitiveness might not be significant and suggest that the country may be better off just exporting the natural gas as a primary commodity. This view challenges the assumption that bottling natural gas for domestic manufacturing is the most beneficial option.


Passage number 72.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think with just enough increasing returns and perfect competition, you probably could get either answer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing that the outcome could vary depending on the specific conditions of increasing returns and perfect competition.


Passage number 73.
 MR. KAMIN.  Exactly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Mr. Kamin. Exactly" indicates agreement or confirmation rather than any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 74.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Are there other questions for our colleagues.  Governor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if there are additional questions for their colleagues.


Passage number 75.
 MS. RASKIN.  Yes.  This is a question, Sean, for you on interest rate risk at banks.  I was hoping you could unpack a little bit your statement about banks being positioned to benefit actually from a modest basis point increase.  And I’m wondering whether we should be concerned with the possibility that there is a potential nonlinearity in the models that banks use to look at how deposits react to changes in interest rates.  Maybe liquidity is so plentiful now that assumptions regarding stickiness really aren’t that relevant.  I  just wanted to know if you had anything to add about what those models look like, how they would perform, and how they may be performing under prolonged low interest rate environments.  Then also if there’s anything you would want to add about banks’ interest rate risk-management practices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for further clarification and information.


Passage number 76.
 MR. CAMPBELL.  Sure.  To start the response, I should say I’m not the person who was principally involved in the actual supervisory work that was done and that I canvassed in my remarks, but I can say a little bit about what I know, and maybe Nellie or somebody else can fill in the gaps where there are any.In terms of unpacking the results a little bit, we think a rise in interest rates is going to potentially have two impacts.  The first is on the securities side of the bank’s balance sheet.  To the extent that they are holding long-term fixed-rate assets, the bump up in rates is going to depress the value of those assets.  The second thing that will happen is that, to the extent that the banks have a deposit franchise and rates are rising, that basically gives an uplift to net interest margins and is going to result in an income stream going forward that, in principle, you would think about valuing as an asset on the bank’s balance sheet.  That would moderate the effect of the securities’ decline. And the analysis that was done, again, by my colleagues looked at a variety of different changes in interest rate scenarios and tried to put those two pieces of the puzzle together.  This analysis suggests that for modest interest rate increases of between 100 and 200 basis points, you actually might get an increase in total overall bank valuations.  In some empirical work, I think they also looked at stock price reactions of banks to interest rate changes and found similar modestly rising interest rates give a kick, or an increase, to total bank equity valuations. In terms of thinking through the point that you just made, I think the work that has been done in the past generally shows that deposits are a little bit on the sticky side.  But recent experience has shown more than anything else that assuming that “past is prologue” is a potentially dangerous recipe, or that one might want to tread lightly in doing that.  I know that my colleagues who are engaged in this work are thinking about a range of models that could be used to try to think about the transitory or potentially flighty nature of deposits in a rising rate environment.  But to be quite frank with you, I don’t have any specific knowledge of exactly what’s being done either at the banks or on the supervisory side to think about “robustifying”those models to make sure that they’re robust to changes in assumptions about how sticky deposits might be in the future.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information and discussing the potential impacts of rising interest rates on bank valuations and deposits.


Passage number 77.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, Mr. Stefani.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 78.
 MR. STEFANI.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I had a question on life insurance companies, and there was a lot of focus in the materials on life insurance companies.  We talked with several contacts in our District from large life insurance firms, who indicated that they would really benefit from a gradual rise in interest rates.   I know the Tealbook uses assumptions of 200 basis points over a two-and-a-half-year period in terms of their definition of a gradual range anywhere from 100 to 300 basis points.  But it did emphasize that a sudden and sharp rise in interest rates would pose serious problems to the life insurance industry.  And I’m not sure how to compare stress tests for life insurance companies with stress tests for the banking sector.  I was just wondering if the staff has done any analysis or had any perspective on how life insurance may differ from banking or how they may fare given economic assumptions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their question and seeking clarification or analysis from the staff.


Passage number 79.
 MR. CAMPBELL.  Sure.  Again, in some sense I’m channeling the work of my colleagues from the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, but I will relay to you my understanding of their work.  Again, Nellie or somebody else can step in to fill in the gaps where there may be some.   Actually, a key difference, potentially, between insurance companies and banks is that, if I think about an insurance company’s balance sheet, at least under current conditions, the liability side of its balance sheet is actually significantly longer in terms of maturity than its assets.  We think of it as being completely flipped for a bank.  So liabilities that are potentially short-term are basically short-term deposits, and the assets are longer-term.  And so that’s why,from the perspective of thinking about the stress testing for an insurance company, if you have liabilities that have a longer maturity than your assets, then the case of a modest gradual interest rate rise can actually be somewhat beneficial to the insurance company, whereas for the bank, the analysis is a little bit different.  That’s a key difference that I think was raised in the context of their analysis that suggests that thinking about stress-testing insurance companies is different from banks.  I don’t know if that answers your question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It mostly consists of the speaker explaining their understanding of their colleagues' work and highlighting a key difference between insurance companies and banks. There are no conflicting views or disagreements presented.


Passage number 80.
 MR. STEFANI.  Yes.  I didn’t know if insurance companies are particularly more or less sensitive, given those assumptions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage neither presents nor implies any disagreement or contention. It is a neutral statement regarding the sensitivity of insurance companies to certain assumptions.


Passage number 81.
 MR. CAMPBELL.  Right, and so again, to compare very briefly the kinds of analysis that we’ve done in the context of banks and insurance companies, in the case of banks, there has been actually a very rigorous quantitative review that uses statistical and econometric models to think about what would be the actual basis point impact, if you will, of a certain rise in interest rates.  Since we don’t directly regulate any insurance companies, our analysis has been largely based on publicly available data and I would characterize it as largely qualitative and not so quantitative.  We have looked at some qualitative numbers and some analysis that’s available in 10-Qs and other regulatory filings, but I don’t think we’ve gotten to a place with respect to our insurance company analysis that would allow us to drill down and make quantitative statements about the size of the change in the value of the assets on the insurance company’s balance sheet that would result from a 150 basis point rise over a six-month period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an explanation of the different types of analysis conducted on banks and insurance companies, stating that the analysis on banks is rigorous and quantitative, while the analysis on insurance companies is largely qualitative and not as quantitative. The speaker is not expressing any disagreement or contention with others.


Passage number 82.
 MR. STEFANI.  Okay.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Stefani is expressing gratitude for something.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 83.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  If you indulge me for one more question, in exhibit 3 you have the fiscal impetus shrinking very substantially in 2014 and 2015.  President Williams, I think there were some reports of research at the San Francisco Fed, the thrust of which was thatfiscal restraint was going to be much greater going forward.  If you’re not aware of this, I don’t want to put you on the spot, but is there an easy resolution between that research and this from the Board staff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents a disagreement or contention between the speaker and President Williams regarding the expected level of fiscal restraint in the future. The speaker mentions reports of research suggesting that fiscal restraint will be greater, while President Williams seems unaware of this research and presents a different perspective.


Passage number 84.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it is not providing any conflicting ideas or opposing opinions.


Passage number 85.
 WILLIAMS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage does not provide any information or context to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 86.
  Yes, I don’t want to try to answer in detail because I’ll probably get it wrong, but my recollection was that they had CBO assumptions about pretty strong rising tax revenues in their analysis, which I think was one of the factors, but that’s about as much as I can comment on what the— MR. WILCOX.  Eric Engen had taken a look at the San Francisco research.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states their lack of knowledge on the topic and mentions a colleague who has analyzed the San Francisco research.


Passage number 87.
 MR. ENGEN.  Actually, yes, what it was showing is not so much what the direct restraint was, but the restraint relative to what historical norms were.  You may remember, Vasia Panousi’s briefing to the Board in the middle of May showed that fiscal restraint at all levels of government in the United States now relative to historical average recovery periods is much, much greater.  So, the actual amounts of restraint are consistent with what we have in the staff fiscal impetus measures for the United States, but the difference between what it is now and what it has been historically is still relatively wide.  So that’s the reconciliation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an explanation and clarifying some facts related to fiscal restraint, without expressing any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 88.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  That’s helpful.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statements are positive and express gratitude.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 89.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes, I’d like to follow up on this.  I was puzzled by the numbers in the panel of exhibit 3 referred to as “Fiscal Impetus,” which shows the percentage point contribution to real GDP growth.  You may have just answered my question because it shows a number well below negative 1, and the Tealbook reports minus 0.7 for 2013.  I ask this because the change is pretty substantial between 2013 and 2014, which is, of course, the measure of the lift we would get from the waning of fiscal drag.  Yet in the Tealbook, it goes from negative 0.7 to negative 0.4, which is about 0.3 less than what was shown here.  Is this the reconciliation that this panelthat shows contributions to real GDP growth is relative to some trend, is that right.  Do I have the right Tealbook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Lacker is expressing confusion and disagreement about the numbers presented in the exhibit and the Tealbook report. He is questioning the discrepancy between the numbers and seeking clarification.


Passage number 90.
 MR. ENGEN.  I think so.  It is marked “June,” yes.  This is the restraint on the pace of economic growth.  One way to think of it is the change in that restraint coming from fiscal policy.  One reason why it’s so big in 2013 is the sequestration, which is very front-loaded.  It puts a big downdraft on government purchases.  Also for this year, there’s the effect of the payroll tax cut expiration and additional other income tax increases.  Those are all front-loaded in a sense. The easiest way to think about it is in terms of government purchases.  There’s a big downward step in the level, but the further restraint on economic growth next year and the year after is a lot smaller because there’s not additional downward pressure in each one of those years.  At that point the level is lower and it stays relatively flat, and so the drag on the contribution to real GDP growth is getting smaller.  Does that help.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining the factors that contribute to the restraint on economic growth.


Passage number 91.
 MR. LACKER.  Maybe I’m being dense about this.  I’m comparing a table that says “Contributions to Changes in Real Gross Domestic Product” in the Tealbook, Book A, and a panel in exhibit 3 that shows contributions to real GDP growth.  So is this the change in the contribution.  I don’t understand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply portrays the speaker expressing confusion and seeking clarification on a comparison between two sources of information.


Passage number 92.
 MR. ENGEN.  In this table, it’s just G.  So what the blue bars in the panel “Fiscal Impetus” also show are not only the changes in government purchases, G, but also any changes in taxes and transfers as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply explaining that the blue bars in the "Fiscal Impetus" panel show changes in government purchases, as well as changes in taxes and transfers.


Passage number 93.
 MR. WILCOX.  It’s the discretionary component.  It’s not the automatic stabilizer component.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This statement does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply clarifies that the topic being discussed is the discretionary component, rather than the automatic stabilizer component.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 94.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The use of the word "Okay" at the end of Mr. Lacker's statement suggests agreement or acceptance.


Passage number 95.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of positive statements and expressions of gratitude.


Passage number 96.
 MR. BULLARD.  While we’re on this topic, when this is calculated, do we also look at what happens if you cut government spending today and there are taxes that you’re not going to have to collect over the next 10 years.  Is that also part of the calculation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a clarifying question.


Passage number 97.
 MR. LAUBACH.  I believe what this measures is, as David just mentioned, any discretionary measures being taken up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker expresses agreement with the statement made by David, indicating that there is no disagreement or contention present in this passage.


Passage number 98.
   MR. WILCOX.  I think it’s a first-round effect.  I don’t believe there’s any effort to, in some sense, dynamically close the government budget constraint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both statements from "MR. WILCOX" express his opinion or belief about a specific issue related to the government budget constraint.


Passage number 99.
 MR. ENGEN.  Oh, we don’t do that in our calculations of fiscal impulse, but FRB/US certainly would account for the fact that there would be less government debt and less need to have a fiscal rule raising taxes or whatever in the future.  It would be reflected in the longer-term extended forecast based on FRB/US.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply mentions that their calculations of fiscal impulse do not account for certain factors, but acknowledges that the FRB/US model would consider those factors in the extended forecast.


Passage number 100.
  So those kinds of dynamic effects— MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  So when I’m looking at a picture like this, I’m looking at a partial equilibrium calculation that’s just telling me, okay, here’s the reduction in government expenditure, even though there’s some positive effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a continuation of a statement, and Mr. Bullard is acknowledging and adding to the previous point made.


Passage number 101.
 MR. ENGEN.  Yes, it’s partial equilibrium and it is near term, relatively speaking.  But the dynamic effects you’re talking about are reflected in the extended forecast using FRB/US.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both parties are discussing the same topic and expressing agreement in their statements.


Passage number 102.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  But the way we run it, we would never expect they’d make it up in the next 10-year window because the federal government never makes it up over the next 10 years.  So if you did it the way you’re thinking, it wouldn’t make any difference in the numbers because they would be spread out so far in the future, at least the way we usually do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is explaining how the government typically operates and expressing a hypothetical scenario, without any conflicting opinions being presented.


Passage number 103.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you.  I don’t see any other questions.  We have on the agenda an opportunity here for comments on financial stability issues.  Let me start with President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a series of statements and a transition to a new topic.


Passage number 104.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just wanted to make a couple of comments in regard to money market funds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that the speaker, Mr. Rosengren, wants to make a few comments regarding money market funds. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 105.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Probably surprises everybody.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "probably surprises everybody" does not indicate any contentio or disagreement, but rather suggests that something unexpected occurred.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 106.
  [Laughter] MR. ROSENGREN.  The SEC has announced their new proposal, which I had hoped would reduce financial stability concerns for money market funds.  Unfortunately, as structured, it’s not at all clear that the SEC proposal will produce greater financial stability, and I just wanted to highlight three problems. First, for institutional prime money market funds, which account for approximately 40 percent of the industry, the proposal would require a floating NAV under one potential reform option.  Unfortunately, it’s not clear how many assets will, in reality, be priced.  For assets with a maturity of 60 days or less, funds will continue to be able to use amortized costs rather than market values.  Since two-thirds of prime money market fund securities have remaining final maturities of 60 days or less and weighted average maturities of approximately 43 days, a fund’s net asset value still will not reflect market values for a significant percentage of assets.  As a result, funds will have an incentive to purchase volatile and risky assets with less than 60 days to maturity because funds can avoid reporting market values for that subset of assets in their holdings.  By smoothing fluctuations in the reported NAV, investors may be misled about the underlying risk in a fund’s portfolio. Second, retail prime money market funds will not be required to have a floating NAV.  Presumably this is predicated on the fact that such funds have historically experienced lower run-   risk vis-à-vis institutional prime funds.  However, a significant number of both retail and institutional prime funds have taken significant credit risk and required sponsor support.  Thus, prime retail funds also should be required to have a floating NAV, with all assets priced at market values. And third, the second option allows the money market fund board at their discretion to impose gates or redemption fees.  Since it is at the discretion of the money market fund board, I would view this second option as the do-nothing option.  This alternative likely increases flight risk because when fees or gates are triggered by explicit events, investors will be able to reasonably perceive the imposition of a gate or fee and thus will be incented to run in advance.  In addition, the imposition of gates and/or redemption fees by one prime fund will provide a strong incentive for investors of other funds to redeem as well, in anticipation of those funds also possibly imposing gates and/or fees. It’s regrettable that important alternative enhancements already have been discarded in narrowing the reform options to two.  However, if from this point forward one focuses only on the SEC options that have been included, it would be important that the SEC ensures that valuations do reflect market values on all of the assets under the floating NAV option so that the NAV truly floats.  I would hope that the FSOC will not be passive, given that the SEC proposal falls far short of what we would like to see to reduce financial stability concerns.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Rosengren, expresses disagreement with the SEC proposal for money market funds. He highlights three problems with the proposal and suggests alternative enhancements that have been discarded. He also expresses hope that the FSOC will take action due to the shortcomings of the SEC proposal.


Passage number 107.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It only expresses gratitude and a title given to the person speaking, which does not imply any conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 108.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Can I make a two-hander.  First, I agree with President Rosengren.  I think there are two other issues that are probably worth highlighting.  The government funds that are exempt are defined as 80 percent of assets in governments, so you could have 20 percent of your assets in other stuff.  It is not really obvious why you would wantto allow that distinction.  And the retail exemption is that retail investors can withdraw as much as $1 million per day.  It seems like a pretty high ceiling for retail investors.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The individual states their agreement with President Rosengren and then adds their own viewpoint on two additional issues.


Passage number 109.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Thank you, President Kocherlakota" is a polite expression of gratitude.


Passage number 110.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me make a couple of comments.  I thought that the risk discussion in Tealbook, Book A, drew a great connection between the QS analysis and the risks to the macroeconomic outlook posed by financial system vulnerabilities.  And I found the “Boom–bust” scenario in the Tealbook to be informative.  So I thank the staff for these very valuable exercises.  Based on my assessment of these exercises, I would say that right now these risks aren’t sufficiently material to justify a reduction in monetary policy accommodation. This conclusion leads me to a suggestion about how the staff analysis could be further enhanced.  Going forward, it would be useful to have a slightly more quantitative evaluation of the likelihood of something like the “Boom–bust” scenario in Tealbook, Book A.  So should I see the probability of that scenario as being 1 in 1,000, 1 in 100, or 1 in 10.  Without those kinds of quantitative assessments, it is difficult to make decisions about whether to take costly actions to defray possible risks to financial stability. Now, I want to be very clear here.  I don’t see my request for quantitative assessments to mean that I am asking for extensive theoretical modeling or econometric estimation.  I have made reference to 1 in 1,000, 1 in 100, and 1 in 10 deliberately because I wanted to connote determination of orders of magnitude, with 1 in 1,000 being, well, 10 times 1 in 100.  And so the idea is just to translate the staff’s judgmental views of the risks to the financial system into rough estimates of the likelihood of the tail events that we might be concerned about.  That is one set of comments, which is on the usefulness of tying together the QS analysis to the risks of themacroeconometric outlook, and then a suggestion to make that even more helpful by making it quantitative. To move to the second topic, my staff have been working with staff in New York on the magnitude of a particular kind of systemic risk associated with our asset purchase program, which is the interest rate risk that it creates for the federal government.  The asset purchase program involves our exchanging reserves for long-term assets.  And we can think of these reserves as being essentially floating-rate debt, so it is an instrument with zero duration, and our balance sheet is tied to the federal government as a whole through our remittances to Treasury.  So if you think about the consolidated government balance sheet, which includes the Fed as well, our asset purchases are increasing the duration of the federal government’s assets and decreasing the duration of the federal government’s liabilities because we are buying longer-term assets and then decreasing the duration of the liabilities by issuing reserves, essentially, to pay for the program.  This means the program is reducing the duration of what one might call the federal government’s negative net worth position.  So you’ve got a gap between the assets of the federal government and the liabilities that it owes that is being filled by taxes, but you want to know what the duration of that is to know the duration of the value of the taxes that you have to collect.  In the past, some around this table have worried that the kind of shortening of duration of this negative net worth position could create funding challenges for the federal government if interest rates rise sufficiently.  And Governor Stein, I think, has been especially important in making this point.   Our staff’s work on this is still preliminary, but it suggests that, as of the end of December 2012, this potential issue is not a quantitatively material consideration.  Over the past six years there has been a large expansion of the federal government debt, and the Treasury hasalso been engaged in lengthening the duration of its outstanding obligations.  So if you put together the Treasury’s actions with the Fed’s, the joint impact of both—the asset purchases plus the Treasury’s actions—has been a relatively small impact on the duration of the negative net worth position of the consolidated balance sheet.  It is sort of in the Treasury’s favor; it has actually lengthened the duration of the negative net worth position slightly. There are two reasons why the Fed’s impact has been so small—to me, surprisingly small.  First, so far at least, our transactions have been only a fraction of the expansion of the federal government’s liabilities.  And, second, because of prepayment considerations, the Fed’s mortgage-backed securities have surprisingly low duration.  It is closer to 3 years than 30 years.  That, again, was a surprise to me; that really influences the calculation. Just to be clear, nothing that I have said changes the prior staff estimates of the impact of the LSAPs, as long as we take as given the Treasury’s decisions about what they are doing.  As long as it is exogenous to us, the staff’s estimates are exactly right about the impact of the LSAPs.  My point is different.  When you combine the LSAPs with the expansion and terming out of the federal government debt, the joint impact of that has not had a material impact on the duration of the negative net worth position of the federal government.  So at least in this sense we don’t have to worry about our asset purchases having created a systemic risk.  We haven’t really changed the interest rate risk faced by the federal government.  But, as usual, this is an issue that deserves ongoing monitoring.  If we were to do more in terms of buying assets, et cetera, we would have to be thinking about this more.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing their comments and suggestions on the risks to the macroeconomic outlook and the interest rate risk created by the asset purchase program.


Passage number 111.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: cannot run for office again due to term limits. Yes, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply states a fact about President Bullard's inability to run for office again.


Passage number 112.
MR. BULLARD.  I just have a question for President Kocherlakota.  On the MBS, you said that the prepayment risk was small, but that would change, I guess, as rates went up.  Was that part of the analysis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question for clarification.


Passage number 113.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  That is obviously going to depend on interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the answer to the question will depend on interest rates.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 114.
  And that is being done on an ongoing basis, actually, in New York to calculate the— MR. POTTER.  I think it’s the reverse, right.  The prepayment risk is higher right now.  The duration is going to extend massively as rates go up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that the duration will extend massively as rates go up, while MR. POTTER disagrees and says that he thinks it's the reverse, implying that the prepayment risk is higher right now.


Passage number 115.
 MR. BULLARD.  Yes, sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. "Yes, sorry" is a response indicating agreement or acknowledgment.


Passage number 116.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thanks, Simon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Thanks, Simon" shows a polite expression of gratitude, indicating a positive interaction.


Passage number 117.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information or context to indicate any contention or disagreement. The phrase "Vice Chairman" is a neutral term and does not suggest any conflicting opinions or disputes.


Passage number 118.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I thought I would make a few comments in terms of market developments, given that markets haven’t been very stable recently.  I’m of two minds about the recent backup in interest rates and the increase in volatility.  On the one hand, I see it as a good thing that market participants now better understand that eventually we expect to become more confident about the prospects for a substantial improvement in the labor market, and then, when that time arrives, we will dial back the pace of our purchases.  I also think it is a good thing that investors understand that there is two-way risk with respect to fixed-income assets.  A bit of volatility is also good to shake out leveraged hot money from long positions.  This volatility presumably reduces the risk to financial stability of a very sharp and larger adjustment later.  On the other hand, to the extent that the backup in rates reflects an increase in risk premiums caused by poor communication on our part, it disturbs me.  If our poor communication is causing risk premiums to increase, then what we are doing is essentially undercutting the effectiveness of our own policies.  With not much ammunition left, I think it isimportant that we are able to put in place policies that could be as effective as possible in keeping financial conditions easy, so we can more readily achieve our objectives. Now, one might argue that the move in U.S. fixed-income markets has been pretty large relative to the shift in outlook, which is very small and, in terms of our own communications, I think that is probably correct.  But it is probably typical for a period when volatility has been low in the run-up.  The policy setting has not changed recently, and there is forward commitment to keep rates low until some economic thresholds that are a considerable ways off in time are reached. What is happening, I think, is that the hot money in leveraged carry trades has been forced to exit.  Also, the backup in rates has been exacerbated by the convexity hedging associated with mortgages.  And, finally, I think there has been a reversal of bond mutual fund inflows, which is not surprising, given that some of the investors may not have fully appreciated the potential price risks associated with the fact that they were making longer-duration fixed-income asset investments. I expect that, absent surprises from us or in the data, the markets will settle down of their own accord now that you have shaken out some of the hot money.  And I am not particularly worried, except to the extent that we have contributed to the volatility and the selloff in fixed-income markets by communicating poorly.  That is really the concern, and I will have some more to say about communication tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their thoughts on market developments and expressing both positive and negative perspectives on the recent volatility and backup in interest rates. They express concern about the impact of poor communication on risk premiums but also acknowledge the benefits of volatility in removing leveraged hot money. Overall, the speaker is highlighting the need for effective policies and better communication to achieve their objectives.


Passage number 119.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you.  Any other comments.  [No response]  Seeing none, coffee is ready.  Why don’t we come back at a quarter to four, and we can begin the go-round.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 120.
 [Coffee break]CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Why don’t we recommence, and we will start with the economic go-round.  We will begin with President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the discussion will continue and mentions the next topic that will be addressed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 121.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My forecast is similar to that of the Tealbook and to my submission for the previous SEP.  However, I have a somewhat easier monetary policy assumption than in the Tealbook, with purchases being reduced somewhat this year but extended into next year, for a cumulative total over $1 trillion.  With that assumption, I expected the unemployment rate to reach 7.3 percent at the end of the year and 6.7 percent at the end of next year.  My forecast for inflation has changed somewhat.  While I had among the lowest inflation forecasts in the previous SEP submission, I have lowered my inflation forecast a bit further to reflect that actual inflation outcomes continue to surprise on the downside. While working on the forecast, I wrestled with three issues.  The first is that inflation outcomes have been significantly less than expected.  The core PCE index is now at a low for the historical series at 1.05 percent.  Total PCE is now at 0.7 percent.  The Tealbook assumes that these are temporary aberrations, and that we will soon be back on a path that gradually approaches 2 percent.  While this is probably the best estimate, our confidence that expectations are so well anchored that we do not need to be concerned about persistently low inflation is certainly being stretched.  The TIPS five-year, five-year-forward breakeven inflation measure is now as low as it has been since 2011, and some measures of inflation expectations also have been drifting down. While some may be reassured that the CPI measures of inflation are not as low as the PCE measures, our target is expressed in terms of the PCE measure.  The choice of the PCE measure for our target is based on the belief that it is a better measure of inflation.  The PCE measure, by construction, better addresses substitution effects, and it employs spending weightsfrom a business rather than a household survey.  Furthermore, research by my staff has found that when there are large gaps between CPI and PCE inflation rates, the CPI series tends to correct toward the PCE.  While not conclusive, this evidence suggests some caution in how to interpret the very low PCE inflation rates.  The risks of persistent PCE inflation misses becoming more embedded in expectations is one of the reasons why my forecast has been predicated on somewhat more accommodation than assumed in the Tealbook. The second issue I wrestled with is the underlying strength in the economy, particularly given the recent increase in interest rates, with most long rates 40 to 50 basis points higher now than at our previous meeting.  It is noteworthy that the restrictive fiscal policy has not resulted in a larger adverse impact on the economy, given the significant tax increases at the beginning of the year and the sequestration starting to bite.  In part, I attribute this to accommodative monetary policy that has helped to offset the fiscal restraint.  Comparing final sales to domestic purchasers with final sales to private domestic purchasers shows roughly a 1 percent difference, with government spending accounting for the slower growth in final sales to domestic purchasers.  The risk is that higher interest rates may cause a slowdown in residential investment and consumer durables so that they provide less of an offset for the restrictive fiscal policy.  While my forecast assumes enough underlying strength so that this does not happen, as well as a reduction in the fiscal headwinds, the recent interest rate movements mean that I will be watching quite carefully the interest-sensitive sectors over the next several months. The third issue is the strength of the labor markets.  The unemployment rate is at 7.6 percent.  It is certainly lower than last September.  Furthermore, decreases in unemployment rates have been widespread across states.  Particularly encouraging is that some of the hardest hit states, such as California, Nevada, and Florida, have shown some of the most significantimprovements.  I would attribute part of this improvement to our actions, since these are all states that had been disproportionately affected by falling residential real estate prices and have been among the states that have most benefited from lower mortgage rates and rising residential housing prices.  Despite these positive signs, the employment–population index is little changed from last fall, and the three-month moving average of payroll employment is only 155,000 jobs per month, hardly the significant improvement I was hoping to see.  While my forecast assumes that we continue to experience a gradual improvement in labor markets, and that the unemployment rate ends the year at 7.3 percent, I worry that further increases in long rates could cause the economy to grow less than I have forecast.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker expresses disagreement with the Tealbook's monetary policy assumption and inflation forecast. They also express concern about the risks of persistent PCE inflation misses and the impact of higher interest rates on the economy.


Passage number 122.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It consists of a simple expression of gratitude towards President Lockhart.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 123.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In our conversations with directors and contacts across the Sixth District, there was little change of sentiment from earlier in the year regarding economic and business prospects for the remainder of the year.  Sentiment was not uniform, but, to generalize, our contacts perceived the downside risks to have lessened somewhat as the year has progressed.  But, at the same time, we detected little conviction that there would be a marked improvement in business conditions and a meaningful pickup of activity in the second half.  We also heard from our contacts a repeat of themes that we had heard in earlier months:  holding fire on expansion-oriented investment, investment instead for productivity gain, reticence to hire additional workers, and uncertainty regarding the impact of the Affordable Care Act. Our anecdotal inputs this cycle presented a mixed picture that has not materially changed from recent months and suggests some caution in assuming a breakout to higher, broad-based growth in coming months.  My forecast submission, based on my Bank’s reading of the data andanecdotal soundings, reflects this ambivalence.  My submission did not change greatly from my March forecast.  The basic narrative of the economy, as I see it, is a continuing modest pace of growth, with the second half a little better than the first half.  I am projecting acceleration in 2014 from 2.3 percent this year to just short of 3 percent next year.  But I confess that my conviction weakens as I try to predict 2014 and 2015.  My forecast anticipates steady progress in employment conditions, with an assumption of continuity at around 175,000 jobs per month for payrolls.  And my forecast treats the current low inflation readings as transitory, with gradual convergence to the Committee’s target.  All that said, the most disquieting element in the current picture is inflation.  The price numbers could indicate the economy is weaker than I think.  We have spent considerable effort in Atlanta parsing the incoming price data.  Various cuts of the data do not, in my opinion, suggest the breadth or degree of downward price pressure we saw in 2010.  Still, it is hard to dismiss the softer incoming numbers, although this morning’s CPI data are encouraging. Prior to this morning’s reading, the sticky-price CPI—a snapshot of the CPI market basket focused on prices that tend not to adjust very often, and may, therefore, be more forward looking—has been slowing recently.  Also, Atlanta’s most recent Business Inflation Expectations Survey showed a small drop in expectations of unit cost increases for inputs over the next 12 months.  These are small changes, and I don’t want to overstate their meaning.  I think the case for a gradual strengthening of prices in the near term and a relatively quick return to our inflation target is a little stronger based on this morning’s data, but still rather weak. I am viewing the risks to my outlook on GDP growth, unemployment, and inflation as broadly balanced, at least over the near term.  However, the current circumstances of weak quarterly growth and soft inflation indicators make me feel a little apprehensive about thisforecast and whether the risks are truly balanced.  But for the moment, that’s my story, and I’m sticking to it—a well-worn Washington expression.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents different viewpoints and levels of uncertainty regarding the economic outlook. While some contacts perceive a lessening of downside risks, there is little conviction that there will be a marked improvement in business conditions. The speaker also expresses ambivalence and apprehension about their forecast, particularly regarding inflation.


Passage number 124.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply expresses gratitude to President Fisher.


Passage number 125.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is a polite expression of gratitude and a sign of respect towards President Bullard.


Passage number 126.
 MR. BULLARD.  I’m indeed disturbed, Mr. Chairman, that President Fisher has become “the new normal.”  [Laughter] The Eighth District economy, like the nation as a whole, is growing at a modest pace.  Year-to-date nonfarm payroll employment has increased about 1 percent in the District versus 1.7 percent nationally.  A number of large firms with important operations in the District have recently announced District-based expansion plans.  That’s encouraging.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing concern about the state of the economy, but there is no conflicting viewpoint or argument being presented.


Passage number 127.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Thank you" and the mention of President Williams do not involve any conflicting ideas or disagreements.


Passage number 128.
  MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is not providing any information or statements that can be agreed or disagreed with. It is simply stating a vague abbreviation "MR," which does not convey any specific meaning or disagreement.


Passage number 129.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The economy continues to improve, and I have been particularly encouraged by the resilience of private spending in the face of tax increases and the sharp government spending cuts.  The fiscal drag is not completely behind us yet, but in the second half of this year and into next year, I see growth picking up as headwinds continue to ease and the economy gains further traction.  Overall my outlook for growth and unemployment is similar to that in the Tealbook, and I view the risks as broadly balanced.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the speaker's positive outlook on the economy and unemployment.


Passage number 130.
 In conversations with my business contacts—that is, those who haven’t moved to Texas—[laughter]MR. FISHER.  There won’t be many left after a while.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "There won't be many left after a while" is a humorous remark, causing the speaker and the audience to laugh, but it does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 131.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual passage provided. Please provide the passage in question for a specific analysis.


Passage number 132.
 WILLIAMS.  Both of my business contacts report.  [Laughter]  In those conversations, I’m reassured not only by what they say, but also by what they don’t say.  So everything related to housing is turning hot, hot, hot, and even outside housing, the tone is becoming a bit more positive.  More of my contacts see consumers gaining confidence about jobs and turning more upbeat as the values of their homes and their 401(k) accounts climb.  Now, just as importantly, my contacts say little about sequestration, fiscal austerity, or the weaker global economy, except as an afterthought.  Although these are certainly risks to the larger economy, they don’t seem to be looming as large in business plans and decisions today. Regarding the labor market, since our April meeting we’ve seen two months of respectable job gains, and while the unemployment rate hasn’t moved from the March reading, it’s fallen markedly since we began our asset purchase program.  Of course, the key question is whether the unemployment rate is currently giving us a reliable read on the strength of the labor market.  One crosscheck on the unemployment rate is to compare it with alternative indicators of labor market slack from surveys of households and small businesses.  Relative to last August, more households report that jobs are plentiful and more small businesses report having a job vacancy that’s hard to fill.  Over history, these indicators track the unemployment rate quite closely.  Both are currently in line with an unemployment rate in the low to mid-7 percent range.  That is, the current unemployment rate corresponds pretty well with public perceptions about the strength of the job market.  More broadly, as I mentioned last time, a range of other indicators point to growing momentum in labor markets. One worrying development is a continuing decline in inflation, now running well below its 2 percent longer-run target, and, like others, I see some of this slowing in inflation asreflecting transitory influences.  But that said, a reversal in transitory factors may not be immediate.  For example, one of the transitory influences, the sequestration-induced decline in Medicare reimbursement prices, could produce echoes over time, since private insurance contracts are often renegotiated relative to Medicare prices but with a lag.  Importantly though, the slowdown in inflation appears broad based.  It’s not just medical care or nonmarket prices.  In the PCE data, almost 85 percent of consumer expenditures are on goods and services for which inflation over the past year has slowed compared with the year before.  You have to go all the way back to the Volcker era to see such a widespread disinflation in the PCE prices. My SEP submission takes into account the weak recent inflation data and still-considerable slack in labor markets but balances these downside factors with well-anchored inflation expectations.  And so in this tug of war between the data and slack versus expectations, the recent data have pulled my inflation path slightly lower.  I now expect inflation in the next few years to be a bit further below our 2 percent objective and to remain there longer.  Nevertheless, my core PCE inflation forecast is only a touch lower than the Tealbook.  Like the Tealbook, I expect both employment and inflation to remain below mandate-consistent levels beyond 2015.  That is, we will be missing both objectives on the same side, a forecast that has long caused some consternation and puzzlement, including to some in this room. In a research paper I’m presenting next month, I find that uncertainty about the effects and costs of unconventional policy can, in fact, make it optimal to aim to close employment, output, and inflation gaps, even gaps of the same size, slowly over time.  This analysis pretty simply applies Bill Brainard’s conservatism principle for monetary policy under uncertainty.  Namely, it’s optimal to attenuate or moderate the responsiveness of monetary policy to shocks when faced with uncertainty about the effects of policy actions on the economy.  There has beena lot of research that has explored the nuances and robustness of Brainard’s conclusion.  When it comes to conventional policy—the fed funds rate—I think past research has found that parameter uncertainty typically doesn’t matter that much quantitatively, and I reach the same conclusion in my analysis.  But when I look at unconventional policy, I find that policy attenuation turns out to be much larger, especially when thought of in terms of the current situation when conventional policy is already constrained at the zero lower bound and the focus is really on unconventional policy actions.  To study this, I measure uncertainty about the effects of LSAPs using estimates from the research literature based on work done by economists at the Federal Reserve Banks and at the Board.  And in my model, as I calibrate the model to the data, optimal policy aims to close gaps over several years.  It’s actually quite consistent with what you see in the SEP, the projection from the Committee, over the past year.   I should emphasize that this analysis argues for strong use of unconventional policy.  I don’t want to make it sound like it’s an analysis that says you sit on your hands, but it does not argue for policy to the extent that would appear desirable absent uncertainty.  Now, I worked this out for a specific model, and obviously there are caveats around that.  But given the large uncertainty we face about the benefits as well as the potential costs of LSAPs that the model doesn’t incorporate, I find that Brainard’s conservatism principle does ring true to me. This thinking also informs my views about the appropriate stance of monetary policy going forward.  I continue to assume the funds rate liftoff will occur in the third quarter of 2015, and I continue to assume that we’ll purchase around $750 billion of assets this year in line with Tealbook, Book A.  That said, like President Bullard, I would like to mention that if inflation does remain persistently low over coming months, which is not what I expect, that would argue for increasing the total amount of our purchases.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their perspective based on the information they have received from their business contacts and their analysis of various economic indicators.


Passage number 133.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information about contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude to President Evans.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 134.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The recent private-sector data have been positive on balance.  Consumers seem to be holding their own despite tax increases and very modest wage growth, and the labor market is doing considerably better than it was last September.  Still, in a truly vibrant labor market, we would have seen a breakout in hiring, and some soft spots remain.  For example, our temporary employment contacts have seen flat-to-negative orders over the past several months, and recent months’ employment reports show that 200,000 each month is not yet sustainable. The business sector also has lagged more than I expected.  Investment has been sluggish, and we’re not seeing any signs that cap-ex will turn around anytime soon.  In a typical recovery, some lag in investment would be expected and the delay would not be especially noteworthy.  But in the current episode with its extended period of high unemployment and continued consumer deleveraging, I think we need businesses to lead the recovery by more than what is typical.  And so, especially in light of their relatively healthy financial condition—as President Fisher pointed out, any CEO worth their salt must have made improvements—I find this business sluggishness a particular downside concern. Regarding my anecdotal contact reports, the news this time was better than the dour commentary I heard last round, but it’s still far from uplifting.  As you, Mr. Chairman, heard firsthand two weeks ago, my directors are stingy with their upbeat reports.  Many of the director and business messages are pretty mixed, and that’s an improvement.  For example, both Caterpillar and Deere were relieved that their sales had not dropped off further.  Still, their businesses are much softer than they had initially planned for this year.  Even if sales improve in the second half of the year, these heavy-equipment manufacturers are unlikely to shift into anexpansionary mode with regard to cap-ex or hiring.  Indeed, in the United States, they currently are contracting slightly by making small layoffs in mining and construction equipment manufacturing. Among my international business reports, the general consensus is that Europe is doing horribly, but that the downturn may have bottomed out.  At the same time, China’s long-awaited rebalancing seems to be in train and appears to be heading for the lower range of expected growth, say, in the neighborhood of 6 to 7 percent. On a positive note, when talking with the business community, it remains clear that our accommodative monetary policies are helping to support growth.  My auto contacts continue to report strong light motor vehicle sales, and they cite attractive financing rates as an important contributing factor. Although mortgage rates have risen recently, they remain low and help support the improved environment for home sales and residential construction.  Increasingly, competitive lending rates for small businesses are also a positive factor.  One of my banking directors who runs a medium-sized community development bank noted that small business customers are confident enough to seek concessions on rates and terms on bank loans.  He said if a customer is hearing about deals getting done in the 4½ to 5½ percent interest rate range, they are coming in and asking for 3 to 3¾ percent.  My last CDIAC meeting also had an extended discussion about greater competition for borrowers and broken interest rate floors.  This isn’t great news for bankers, but it is good news for small businesses.  It’s another sign that our policies are having broader competitive effects on the economy, and that’s an excellent development. My national outlook has not changed much since our previous meeting.  We’ve revised our forecast for growth in 2013 down a bit.  The main reason is that we finally threw in the towelon the hope that a compromise agreement might scale back the sequestration.  We’ve also brought down our inflation forecast some.  Here, recent developments point to a substantial risk that inflation will undershoot our 2 percent long-run objective for much too long of a period, unless, of course, we have a sufficiently robust recovery. Accordingly, in constructing my SEP projections under appropriate monetary policy, I assume a substantially more accommodative stance than the Tealbook.  Specifically, we assume that our LSAPs continue through the first half of 2014 and that the funds rate remains unchanged until late 2015.  I also assume importantly that our communications to the public convey a strong confidence that the Fed will employ our tools as long and as fully as necessary.  With these policy assumptions, my SEP projections have growth accelerating to above potential in 2014 and 2015.  This forecast is also premised on many normal recovery factors, including pent-up demand and the waning of deleveraging effects.  Under our assumed appropriate policy path, the inflation trajectory reaches our 2 percent objective a bit more quickly than in the Tealbook’s extended projection.  It gets there in 2016, just beyond the SEP forecast horizon.  In addition, our longer-run inflation projection displays a modest overshooting of 2 percent.  I see this as being consistent with my reading of optimal policy in the monetary economics literature, and also with our view that appropriate policy takes a balanced approach and that inflation misses are symmetric about our 2 percent target.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. One point of contention or disagreement in the passage is the outlook for the labor market. The speaker acknowledges that the labor market is doing better than it was last September, but also mentions that there are still some soft spots and that hiring has not broken out as expected.


Passage number 135.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  First Vice President Stefani.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude from someone named Stefani, who is presumably the First Vice President of a certain organization or company.


Passage number 136.
 MR. STEFANI.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Qualitatively, the broad contours of the Cleveland forecast are little changed from the previous meeting and the previous SEP.  I expect a gradual pickup in GDP growth, which will bring the unemployment rate down toward its natural rate and pull inflation up toward our 2 percent objective, broadly similar to the Tealbookoutlook.  However, some of the details of the Cleveland forecast have changed, as the labor market has progressed faster than anticipated earlier in the year and inflation readings have surprised to the downside.  So I’ll focus most of my comments on these two areas today. Starting with the good news, there have been a couple of developments that I find encouraging and that give some confidence that the labor market and the economy will continue to progress.  First, despite fiscal headwinds, consumer spending seems to be holding up, and attitudes have improved.  Second, as measured by job gains, the labor market continued to improve in April and May.  My District contacts expect this labor market trend to continue in the coming months.  In fact, one of the CEOs at a large paint producer and retailer in our District who claims to be one of the largest college graduate recruiters in the nation reported that he sees significantly more competing recruiters visiting campuses today compared with last year.  Clearly, not all firms are back to normal in their hiring, but hiring plans seem to be moving in the right direction.   While the Tealbook also notes the increasing progress in labor markets, the recent progress does not narrow the Tealbook’s estimate of the unemployment gap, since the staff has further revised down its view of the natural rate of unemployment over the next couple of years.  This helps the staff, in our view, to reconcile the surprising employment gains given the mild GDP growth that we’ve experienced so far this year.  However, as the staff memo on assessing the recent decline in the unemployment rate acknowledges, there are other reasonable explanations for the error in Okun’s law and considerable uncertainty surrounding each possible explanation. In my evaluation of the natural rate of unemployment, I continue to be guided by my staff’s model of labor market flows.  Their model uses current estimates of the long-run trends,as well as flows from unemployment to employment and vice versa, to calculate an implied natural rate.  The core of the model focuses on how well the labor market is matching unemployed people with job openings.  So far, the model has not indicated that there is any better or worse functioning of the labor market since the recession.  This has caused me to leave my estimate of the natural rate of unemployment at 6 percent, where the model says it has been for a considerable period of time.  My staff’s recent analysis of the economic environment would generally produce a lower amount of employment growth than we have been seeing recently, particularly if we’re also experiencing demographically driven declines in the labor force participation rate.  So I continue to be encouraged by the decline in the unemployment rate and the employment growth that the economy has experienced this year. Now, regarding inflation, in preparing for this meeting, my staff spent some time assessing the surprising decline of PCE inflation and trying to better understand why PCE inflation measures have fallen to 1 percent, while CPI measures have edged down but stayed closer to 2 percent.  They identified the global slowdown and appreciation of the dollar as important sources of disinflation in both the PCE and CPI measures.  Reflecting these forces, import prices and the core goods component of both PCE and CPI inflation have sharply decelerated over the past year.  The recent decline of PCE inflation relative to CPI inflation has been primarily driven by the services components of the two series.  While inflation in a number of PCE services categories has slowed noticeably, inflation in core CPI services across a range of categories has stayed pretty close to 2 percent. Low growth in labor costs, as measured by the ECI, is directly connected with today’s low levels of inflation in both PCE and CPI services prices.  With the labor market recovering and my business contacts expressing concern about increases in health-care costs, I do not expecta further slowing of labor costs that could eventually pull services inflation lower.  In addition, a range of measures of inflation expectations, including those from the Cleveland staff model, remain stable.  Based on this analysis, I lowered my inflation forecast, but I continue to expect PCE inflation measures to gradually rise toward 2 percent. As to the balance of risk around my outlook, I believe the risks are weighted primarily to the downside for GDP growth and to the upside for unemployment because of ongoing fiscal challenges in the United States and the potential for further slowing in growth abroad.  I judge the overall risk to inflation as broadly balanced, with downside risks that a faltering recovery could pull down inflation and upside risks that a large balance sheet could eventually cause inflation expectations and, in turn, inflation to rise.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is providing an overview of the Cleveland forecast and discussing developments in the labor market and inflation. They also provide their own evaluation and assessment of the natural rate of unemployment and inflation. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 137.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude from President Plosser.


Passage number 138.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude from President Lacker.


Passage number 139.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context in the passage provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 140.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Growth in the District continues, with strong employment gains in the construction and service sectors.  The District’s manufacturing survey showed activity expanding in May after several months of decline.  The outlook for the housing sector remains strong even as low inventories threaten to constrain the pace of sales in some areas.  Agriculture remains positive, with strong demand from emerging markets.  However, farm incomes may weaken somewhat heading into 2014 because of an expected increase in corn inventories and lower prices.  Most producers, I think, should be able to weather a potential downturn in income, but those who are more highly leveraged could face difficulties.  Finally, oil drilling activity in the District continues to expand, while natural gas drilling has declined further.  Our energy contacts remain optimistic about future levels of activity because of high oil prices, increasing natural gas prices, and increasing opportunities for export activity.Regarding the national economy, my forecast is largely unchanged since the previous meeting.  Despite 1½ percentage points of fiscal tightening this year, the economy continues to grow at a moderate pace of about 2 percent.  Moreover, as the economy continues to recover, I expect growth will pick up to about 2½ percent in 2014 and 3 percent in 2015.  The pickup in growth reflects an improving labor market, rising household net worth from both the stock market and housing, and modestly higher foreign growth.  Housing, in particular, I think, remains positive.  For example, I note that the Tealbook projects house prices are likely to rise more than 10 percent this year, which would mark the second consecutive year of nearly double-digit increases. We also continue to see improvements in the labor market.  More than 2 million net new jobs have been created over the past year.  Measures of labor market slack have been steadily declining since 2010, and employment growth continues to outpace what is needed to absorb population growth.  Other indicators, such as the BLS employment diffusion index, continue to show that the recovery in the labor market has breadth, as far more industries continue to add jobs relative to those industries reducing employment.  For example, that 12-month diffusion index has remained around 70 since early 2011.  By comparison, it remained near 60 between 2004 and 2007 when the previous expansion was in high gear.  While a faster pace of overall employment growth would be preferable, the broad base of industries adding jobs is reassuring. We have also seen indicators like the quit rate move higher over the past year across a number of sectors.  A higher voluntary quit rate suggests workers are increasingly finding better labor market opportunities.  The layoff and discharge rate has also moved lower and remains near its 10-year low.  Wages and salaries in goods-producing sectors have also started moving a bit higher, while nominal wage growth in the service sector has remained between 1½ and 2percent.  Combined, these observations suggest that while slack remains in the labor market, the overall trends are positive. As others have noted, recent inflation readings and the decline in longer-term inflation expectations bear watching, although the softness appears likely to be temporary.  The deceleration in the core CPI price index has not been as pronounced as the PCE, and wage inflation has held steady.  Both of these factors, combined with expectations for stronger growth in employment, suggest PCE inflation should gradually firm. In terms of financial stability, I appreciate the staff analysis and their conclusions, as best they can judge, that the near-term risks to financial stability appear low.  Yet, as risks surface in multiple areas, I remain concerned that they are symptomatic of conditions that give rise to excessive risk-taking, reaching for yield, and distortions in asset prices.  Given our open-ended asset purchases and an extended period of near-zero rates, I expect that strong demand for these riskier assets is not likely to abate.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a report on various sectors of the economy and provides information and analysis without any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 141.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It only expresses gratitude and addresses President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 142.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 143.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My views haven’t changed significantly since the previous meeting.  I’m still uncertain about how the tug of war between the large amount of fiscal drag and improving underlying fundamentals will play out. Relative to the Tealbook, I’m a bit more pessimistic about the near-term outlook—that is, that the growth rate during the second half will pick up appreciably.  As I noted at the previous meeting, I don’t see the factors in place for an early reacceleration in economic activity.  Fiscal drag and slowing growth abroad are significant constraints.  They are likely to offset to a large degree the positive effects of the housing recovery and higher household wealth.  My assessment is that since the previous meeting, the data have been mixed at best.  While it’s true that consumer spending has held up quite well and housing is recovering, against this you have lack of momentum in terms of investment, weakness in manufacturing activity, signs that growth abroad is still slowing, and a tightening of financial market conditions.  With respect to financial market conditions, it’s true that stock prices have held up relatively well, but in terms of fixed-income markets, we’ve had a roughly 50 basis point rise in long-term Treasury yields and comparable rises in other corporate bond and mortgage rates. With respect to labor market conditions, I would characterize the recent payroll employment gains as high relative to the growth rate of economic activity.  In other words, I think they overstate the improvement in the labor market.  Also, when I’m looking at the labor market, I’m struck by the fact that the hiring rate remains depressed and has not improved much over the past few years.  The improvement in net hiring has come almost exclusively through a slowdown in the pace of layoffs.  So my conclusion from that is the labor market is still far from being healthy.On the inflation side of the ledger, I’m getting a bit more concerned that inflation will stay too low relative to our objective, compared with the previous meeting where I was relatively unworried.  That’s because inflation expectations, as measured by the five-year, five-year-forward TIPS breakeven yields, have come down about 30 basis points since the previous meeting.  You could argue that we’re still broadly within the range of recent years, but if the downward trend were to continue, then you’d have to say we were in some more troublesome territory.  We’d be getting back to where we were in the fall of 2010 and, in that case, the idea was that inflation was going to go up because inflation expectations were anchored; that would be a less-compelling argument now, in my opinion. The biggest issue I have currently is that there seems to be a bias toward rushing to judgment in terms of dialing down the pace of asset purchases.  It’s important to resist the impulse to parse the data in a way to justify an early reduction.  If we try to do that, we’re risking our credibility.  We should be balanced in our assessment of the data.  The fact is that the payroll gains we’ve seen overstate the growth momentum of the economy.  If in subsequent months the data are consistent with a dialing down of the rate of asset purchases, I’ll be very supportive of such an action.  I won’t be happy, however, if what we do is rationalize why it’s okay to dial down when such an action is not really supported by the data and the outlook.  If we do that, it could be viewed as broadly inconsistent with our prior commitment, and that would risk our credibility.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker disagrees with the idea of rushing to reduce the pace of asset purchases and argues that it is important to resist the impulse to do so without sufficient data and justification. The speaker also expresses disagreement with the idea that the recent payroll gains accurately reflect the growth momentum of the economy and argues for a balanced assessment of the data.


Passage number 144.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Thank you" and "Governor Yellen" are expressions of gratitude and respect.


Passage number 145.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply expressing gratitude towards Governor Duke.


Passage number 146.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Conversations with my banker interlocutors—previously known as contacts [laughter]—indicated very little change in banking conditions.  Loan demand is still weak.  Competition remains fierce.  Credit quality is improving rapidly.  And, in fact, several noted that problem assets are moving more quickly and at prices significantly above appraised value.All but one of the large banks noted a very preliminary, but still noticeable, strengthening in demand for small business loans.  Most of the smaller banks, whose overall lending is indicative of small business demand, reported the same pickup.  Everyone cautioned that the change was very recent, and no one was willing to call it a trend, but the fact that it came up so often is worthy of attention.  And it seems to corroborate the strengthening and the sentiment reported by the NFIB. As you might expect, banks in the mortgage business reported falloff in refinance applications as mortgage rates spiked up.  But for the same period they reported that purchase loan applications increased.  It is still early, but I view this trend as reassuring that the improvement in housing demand is being driven by more than low rates, and, thus, may be able to withstand some backup in the rates.  Unfortunately, mortgage conditions are still extremely tight.  To the extent that tight mortgage credit is being driven by concerns about the outlook for the economy or house prices, credit conditions should improve as the underlying fundamentals do.  But I think it highly likely that a good portion of the tightness results from regulatory changes and uncertainty about the regulatory environment.  So in addition to our monetary policy actions, I think it is imperative that we, as regulators, do everything we can to finalize regulatory proposals and continue to measure the accumulated effect of all of the regulatory requirements enacted since the financial crisis.  It would be a real shame if potential homeowners who are currently shut out of cheap credit by tight underwriting find that, by the time we get credit flowing to all creditworthy borrowers, house prices and interest rates have moved up so much that homeownership remains still unaffordable to them. Despite the fiscal headwinds, I believe the economy is finally beginning to find its legs.  Consumer sentiment, business sentiment, and homebuilder confidence all point to recovery. Household balance sheets, corporate balance sheets, and the financial system have all strengthened, and I would say are now quite supportive of recovery.  The strength shows through in private spending levels that keep surprising to the upside.  The weak payroll reading we saw earlier has been revised up.  And while monthly jobs are not being created at the pace we would like to see, job creation is stronger than we might have expected in the face of the sequestration.  Early in the year, staff was suspicious of the drop in the unemployment rate, but it now seems quite real and likely to be sustained.  Such progress may not meet the standard of substantial improvement, but I do believe it is notable and should be reflected in our policy decisions and our communications. I hadn’t planned any comments on inflation, but I just have to say I think it must be somehow important that, despite lower inflation readings, the price of happiness is going up in “The Happiest Place on Earth.”  [Laughter]  So, Mr. Chairman, I continue to have confidence in my somewhat-optimistic forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker is presenting their observations and opinions on various topics but there is no indication of conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 147.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Would you like to elaborate on that place.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The question is posed in a neutral tone, simply asking for further explanation or elaboration on a specific topic.


Passage number 148.
 MS. DUKE.  Disney.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 149.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Oh, Disney.  I actually thought about Bhutan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply mentions Disney and Bhutan without expressing any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 150.
  [Laughter] MR. FISHER.  This is the new Mickey Mouse indicator.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a simple statement about a "new Mickey Mouse indicator." There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 151.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no disagreement or contention indicated in the passage as it only mentions Governor Tarullo without providing any further context or information.


Passage number 152.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think this go-round was going about according to form until we got to Jeff.  And I am still trying to absorb the cumulative effect of Jeff’s, Narayana’s, Bill’s, and Janet’s interventions.  But I think roughly the following is what I take from them, which is that Jeff is the only one of the four who has fundamentally changed the outlook that he puts forward, although not his monetary policy prescription.  I found Janet’sintervention most interesting because there was such a dichotomy between her projections and most of her analysis, which presumably reflects her uncertainty about the projections.  And Bill kind of loaded up on the pessimistic end of it. What I take from all of that discussion is that, first, I join Janet in having observed that continually for the last four years the staff and many people on the Committee have seen a burst in growth just around the corner which is, to use my favorite metaphor, like the green light across from Gatsby’s deck that keeps receding into the future at all times.  And the question now is whether this time is different.  The argument for the proposition that this time is different is some combination of the view that deleveraging and some of the other obvious headwinds associated with the crisis and the recession have abated significantly enough that you can now have people building up credit again, and some burst of growth—along with the view that the sequestration and the tax increases have been putting some constraints upon growth.  If you project out to the point at which the sequestration and tax increases are not going to be constraining, at least anew, then growth would look pretty good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is summarizing the different perspectives and opinions expressed by others in the discussion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 153.
  At this point, that is the question for all of us:  whether Jeff’s capitulation comes just at the point where his previous view would have been vindicated— MR. LACKER.  Just in time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of the phrase "just at the point where his previous view would have been vindicated" suggests that there is a difference in opinions or perspectives.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 154.
  [Laughter] MR. TARULLO.  —or whether, on the contrary, Janet’s downside concern and the position reflected in Jeff’s capitulation turn out to be the better analysis.  And, like Janet, I think it is going to be hard to tell whether that is the case, at least for a little while yet.   But that does seem a pretty consequential question, because it is going to implicate the question not only of the continuation of the purchases but also what kind of impact we think the more accommodative monetary policy will have over time.  I think many of us would draw fromthat assessment that more accommodation was needed, but presumably at least some of us would draw the conclusion that monetary policy is going to remain relatively ineffective in counteracting those tendencies until there are some more structural changes in the economy.  At some level, that has always been the issue before us, but I felt it was presented in starker relief today than it has been for some time now. I have a bunch of stuff here, most of which has already been said by other people, so I won’t repeat it.  I will just say a couple of things on labor markets.  And this, in a sense, builds on what Esther said, although I think it leans in a slightly different direction.  The point I was going to make around labor markets is essentially that, regardless of what you think about how much improvement there has been, there is quite likely a substantial amount of room for further improvement.  Thus, there is a substantial amount of need for further accommodation.  To begin with, though, it is probably worth reminding ourselves how many currently important questions about labor markets don’t have particularly good answers right now.  For one, we don’t have a good explanation for the decline in the labor force participation rate, one that is noticeably greater than the trend which was assumed prior to the recession.  We don’t know, as several people have already alluded to, whether the quits, layoffs, job openings, and other indicators of labor market dynamism will return to pre-recession levels or, as in the past two much milder recessions, they will never get there.  And we don’t know whether, given the severity of this recession, the change to a new normal will be even greater.  All of that implicates the broader question of why there has been an apparent secular decline in labor market dynamism over the past 20 years or so.  We have all of those questions, which are potentially quite important and about which there are already debates.  As I say, I don’t have particularly good answers at this juncture.  My second point is that the analytics behind efforts to answer those questions are necessarily complicated by at least a couple of factors.  One, the significant changes in labor markets that have taken place since previous severe U.S. recessions limit the utility of the data and the learning from those recessions in trying to project what is going to happen now.  And, second, the duration of the most recent recession and the slow pace of recovery raise the plausible prospect of hysteresis effects of a sort that we have not really observed previously in U.S. labor markets.  That is, even if one believes, as I do, that the story during the recession and for some time thereafter was one of aggregate demand shortfalls and cyclical unemployment, the persistence of long-term unemployment and the permanent disappearance of so many jobs may now be having some structural effects.  So there may come a time when we will need either to get some good answers to the questions about labor markets I noted a moment ago, or to make some assumptions about what those answers may be, in order to have a working sense of how much can be done to increase employment before we hit up against structural limits. But the third point is that that time hasn’t come.  I would say, on the contrary, that current observations of what is going on in labor markets, and debates around what is going on, suggest that we may be actually further away from that point than we might have thought not so long ago.  Consider, first, that there really is still no evidence of wage inflation.  There is a little bit of a pickup in compensation, but nothing resembling wage inflation across the labor market more generally.  I note that apparently the past few quarters of ECI data may not be very accurate, so we may have to revise that.  But at least, based on what we know, I think that is the case.  Mismatch indexes continue to suggest that at least this particular form of structural limit on employment growth has not become particularly binding.  As Esther pointed out, the dispersionof employment gains is actually, in some sense, a pretty good sign that we are not hitting up against structural limits. The second point I would make in this regard relates to the current state of debate over what is going on in labor markets.  And it is notable that virtually no one is suggesting, for example, that the natural rate of unemployment is at 7 percent.  The debate now is whether it is at 6 percent or whether it is lower.  And, similarly, the question about the unemployment rate that is most discussed is whether it understates labor market slack, not whether it reflects or overstates labor market slack. And third, while the questions I noted earlier would argue against too strong an expectation that any particular labor market indicator will return to its pre-recession level, the fact that so many such indicators are still so far from those levels seems to me to reinforce at least a presumptive inference that while we may not be able to specify with much assurance just how much labor market slack remains, it is very likely to be quite a bit.  So the implication for economic policy, of course, is that quite apart from the issues surrounding the pace and duration of our asset purchase program, which we will discuss tomorrow, there is still a very strong case for substantial accommodation in monetary policy as a whole.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker mentions different viewpoints on the effectiveness of monetary policy in counteracting economic tendencies, and also discusses the lack of consensus on various questions about labor markets.


Passage number 155.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is a simple expression of gratitude towards Governor Raskin.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 156.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Since the time of the April Tealbook, the economy has done a bit better despite the ongoing drag from higher taxes and the sequestration.  But I emphasize the words “a bit” because, compared with how far we have to go, the improvement is really very modest.  In my view, it is far-fetched to think that the economy will run out of available capacity anytime soon, at least as far as the labor market is concerned.  Yes, the unemployment rate has declined more quickly than we had anticipated last summer.  But Ithink part of this is likely due to a further decline in labor force participation, not to a true improvement in labor market conditions.  There could be a number of reasons that people are dropping out of the labor force, and none of them really suggest vastly improved labor market outcomes.  If workers are continuing to become discouraged about job prospects, even this late in the cycle, that surely isn’t good news.  And it indicates to me that there is still substantial labor slack.  But even if some of those workers—the elderly and the disabled—will never rejoin because they consider themselves, and are considered by firms, to be unemployable, that can’t be entirely reflective of an improvement in economic fundamentals in the labor market either. For me, like many of you, the more genuine surprises have occurred on the inflation side.  The core PCE index now stands at 1.05 percent year-on-year.  This is the lowest number in the 50-year history of the series.  And inflation has been running well below the Committee’s September 2012 projection.  We can continue to take comfort in the stability of inflation expectations.  But even here the case has weakened a bit lately.  The five-year-forward TIPS breakeven inflation rate has fallen from close to 2.8 percent at the start of the year to about 2.4 percent late last week, with most of the drop occurring over the past few weeks.  This decline might imply that the recent weak inflation readings have caused long-term inflation expectations to move lower.  I am hoping that this drop is temporary.  Still, between the possibility that inflation expectations may become dislodged to the downside, and the likelihood that many workers continue to withdraw from the labor force not only because of unfavorable demographics trends but also because of discouragement, my view is that the economy is not necessarily poised for a pickup in growth that I would see as reflective of a strengthening in economic fundamentals.Moreover, I continue to view the risks to the outlook as mainly to the downside.  In particular, I remain concerned that despite the rejoicing over last year’s big drop in unemployment, real disposable personal income was essentially flat last year, posting its lowest increase since the recession.  As I have repeatedly noted, such lackluster growth in incomes doesn’t bode well for strong economic growth. Despite what I consider to be only modestly positive economic news, bond yields have been climbing.  At the same time, mortgage and credit spreads have widened, defensive stocks with bond-like characteristics have been selling off sharply, and outflows from the emerging markets have been much more dramatic.  While it is possible that market participants’ views have improved more than mine, I think some of the responsibility for the unsettled financial market conditions and rising rates lies with us and our recent communications.  Some of this may be good, or at least inevitable, because financial conditions are aligning themselves more closely with the intent of the Committee.  But some of this probably isn’t good because market participants may just be confused.  Markets, including global markets, seem to be anticipating not only the end of purchases, but perhaps also an earlier normalization of the funds rate.  Indeed, since the last round, forward rates two to three years ahead shifted up 30 to 50 basis points despite so-so activity data, further declines in core inflation, and no explicit indication from any one of us that we have changed our view on the path of short-term rates.  That sounds like confusion to me. So if short-term rate expectations are changing, I think we are in potentially dangerous territory.  Markets are conflating their expectation for the pace of LSAPs with the path of the funds rate, which raises the risk that even a modest reduction in LSAPs will have much-larger-than-desired economic effects.  If our communications aren’t streamlined with sharper messagesthat help markets disentangle the two effects—expectations for the pace of LSAPs and expectations regarding the path of the funds rate—we may run the risk of tightening much earlier or faster than any of us intends.  I will provide some more focus on this communication aspect during the next round.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker expresses disagreement with the idea that the economy has improved significantly, arguing that the improvement is modest and that there is still substantial labor slack. Additionally, the speaker expresses concern about the recent rise in bond yields and unsettled financial market conditions, suggesting that the Federal Reserve's recent communications may be responsible for confusion in the markets.


Passage number 157.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage consists of a polite expression of gratitude and a straightforward statement addressing Governor Stein. There is no indication of any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 158.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement of gratitude.


Passage number 159.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  Governor Stein’s intervention is always really interesting.  But my question is, if we had a 7.0 percent threshold in there, there is a still a risk that, because of shocks or whatever, it could take a long time to get to 7.0 percent.  Would that be credible, even within the Committee, let alone outside the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing curiosity and acknowledging the interesting viewpoints of Governor Stein. There is no indication of disagreement or debate.


Passage number 160.
 MR. STEIN.  It’s certainly an issue.  All I’m saying is that, I guess what I have learned since then, as we face the decision to actually reduce the pace, is that the benefit side of thatlooms large on my mind.  Of course, if we don’t literally do it, we might think about communicating in a way that captures some of the benefits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and perspective on the issue at hand.


Passage number 161.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Okay.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply expressing gratitude for the information received.


Passage number 162.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: This passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 163.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I see the economy as continuing along the path of gradual improvement.  My forecast is close to the Tealbook for 2013 and a bit less optimistic than the Tealbook for 2014 and 2015.  There are good reasons to expect continued improvement, and I would number among them increasing consumer confidence, strong housing markets, strong housing sales, and the prospect of declining fiscal headwinds. I will touch a little bit more in detail on housing as a bright spot.  The strength in housing prices seems to be lifting consumer confidence and supporting spending.  That seems likely to continue for now, despite higher mortgage rates.  House prices are rising for many reasons, some of them not directly a function of super-low rates.  If the Tealbook’s house price projections and the CoreLogic projections are realized, the number of underwater mortgages will be cut in half by the end of 2015.  In addition, at 2.7 percent of GDP, residential investment is still far below its historical trend level and ordinarily would have been expected to grow strongly for many years, adding more meaningfully to growth.  The big question this time is the extent to which low credit availability for constrained buyers will counteract that trend growth over time.  But, in the near term, housing should be a source of strength to the economy. Downside risks seem to me to have diminished, although I would say that the risk is in the direction of lower GDP and higher unemployment.  And I want to touch on inflation, as many others have, which has been very low and could present a real problem for our policy if expectations drop or if observed inflation breaks still lower.  Several factors suggest that it isprobably a transitory deviation, and I really want to believe that it is.  That may be the right modal forecast, but the tails seem particularly wide to me, and the more I dig into this, the wider those tails seem, I have to say.  It seems counterintuitive that inflation would be dropping in light of a growing economy and declining slack, but this clearly bears close watching.   Moving on, in my view there has been a clear improvement in the labor market since September and progress toward our economic objective of full employment.  Others have cited these numbers, but I will cite them again.  The September Tealbook forecast of unemployment for year-end 2013 was 8 percent; the June Tealbook forecasts 7.3 percent.  For 2014, the September number was 7.6 percent; the June number is 6.6 percent.  Looking out over the whole forecast period, unemployment averages a full point lower than it did in the September forecast.  So I see a substantial stock of accumulated progress toward our objective of full employment.   My conversations with investors carry a clear message that we have all heard, which is that the market does not understand when we will reduce purchases or why.  And that has got to be one reason why the financial market reaction in fixed-income markets here and around the world has been stronger than I would have expected.  This is a dangerous state of affairs, and I see the main purpose of this meeting, and the Chairman’s press conference, as addressing that. In a sense, as some have argued, the increase in rates has been healthy, as investors are becoming aware that low rates are not going to last forever and are taking appropriate measures.  But it will not be healthy or warranted if, for example, the 10-year rate backs up another 50 basis points, or if investors move the liftoff date or, for that matter, if investors conclude that serious consideration of reducing purchases is postponed indefinitely.  So it will be very important to leave the markets feeling much more certain about the Committee’s intentions.  And I would justclose by saying it’s important that the Committee, by which I really mean the Chairman, assert strong leadership to the markets on this issue at this time.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by the speaker giving their analysis and forecast of the economy.


Passage number 164.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Look at him.  No pressure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 165.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  And were you planning to highlight the 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context that would suggest contention or disagreement. It simply asks a question about someone's plans for highlighting a certain percentage.


Passage number 166.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I am not going to mention 7 percent.  The last two elements I think are much less controversial.  The third is just state contingency.  I think it is critically important that in our communication we emphasize state contingency.  If the economy performs better than expected, then we will reduce accommodation more quickly.  If it is worse than expected, we could defer the reduction by a meeting, say, or another possibility would be to substitute for asset purchases a different kind of stimulus, and President Kocherlakota suggested strengthening the forward guidance.  That would be one possibility.  But the clear point here is to make sure that people understand that we still have a very strongly state-contingent policy.  And the fourth point is, I think, again, uncontroversial, which is that there appears to be some confusion of our asset purchases approach and our rate policy, as Governor Raskin mentioned.  That is, the expectation that asset purchases might end sooner has brought in rate expectations.  It is very important that we emphasize the forward guidance on rates and suggest that those two things are separate, and there is intended to be a considerable period between the end of the asset purchases and the time that the rate thresholds are likely to be hit.  And then, of course, working backward, it will also suggest that we completely end asset purchases sometime before mid-2014. That is the qualitative kind of guidance that would be helpful, without being exceptionally restrictive.  It does encompass a variety of different policies and a variety of different contingencies.  Now, the question is how to best present this.  When I first contactedyou, I talked about either using the press conference or the statement or both.  On further consultation and discussion, I think that given the complexity of this, and the fact that the Committee probably wants to have a little bit of distance, it would be better for me to do this in the press conference, and we could discuss whether we wanted to incorporate parts of this into the statement, say, in July.  That would be something we can certainly discuss.  That being said, I know there are a few people who probably would like to put it in the statement.  The main argument for the statement is the governance.  I recognize that this is a little irregular, and I apologize. In case you want to make that point tomorrow—and I certainly think we could have a good discussion—we have circulated an alternative to alternative B, paragraph 4 here, and its language is fairly similar to what I just said.4  And if you want to use that as a starting point, we could talk about it as an option for tomorrow, if that’s what people want to do.  My preference, as I said, is to say this in the press conference where I can answer questions, where I can explain the contingency, where I can explain the fact that this is a qualitative type of reaction.  But if people feel that it is important to put it in the statement, I am happy to work with that. I do not know what the market reaction to this would be.  In principle, I think it should be positive, just on the grounds that we are reducing uncertainty to some extent, and that, at least qualitatively, this is not radically different from where market expectations are now.  However, any conversation that starts off by saying how we are going to be cutting the rate of purchases is probably going to have some short-term negative impact.  I am not going to make a guess on that, but we will just have to judge that, assuming we go forward with this, over a few weeks.  4 The materials used by Chairman Bernanke are appended to this transcript (appendix 4).But let me end where I started.  What I have tried to do here is lay out one strategy to deal with a very serious issue.  Tomorrow we can have a very useful conversation about how to approach this, but I think the option we do not have is just to leave things completely unclarified.  That would be the worst option because the markets will then not only be uncertain about what our plans are, they will have doubts about our own ability to formulate a coherent explanation.  And that is something we can’t tolerate.  I wanted to put this out for you now, so that you have time to think about it, and we can include this in the general policy discussion tomorrow.  Are there any urgent questions.  Urgent questions from President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing different options and strategies for communication, but there is no disagreement or conflict mentioned.


Passage number 167.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I will just throw this out there for something that is on my mind as I listened to you, Mr. Chairman.  First of all, I found it very helpful, what you were saying.  I thought you framed the conversation very nicely for tomorrow.  A question that occurs to me, as I listened to you, that is challenging is, if the purchase program is as effective as it has been in the past and it is being so useful, why are we stepping down.  I mean, that would be a question I guess a reporter might ask.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is providing a compliment to the Chairman and posing a question for discussion and clarification.


Passage number 168.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, I have a good answer for that.  There is a logical answer, which is that we have said that we think that the balance sheet has costs associated with it that may not be associated with other kinds of stimulus, and that the marginal costs are increasing with the size of the balance sheet, so it follows that, as the situation gets better, and as the balance sheet gets bigger, then you want to slow the pace of additions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement about the logical answer to a question.


Passage number 169.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Okay.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 170.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That would be the logic.  Bill, can you give us an abbreviated introduction to the monetary policy.  A question from Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 171.
MR. POWELL.  Semi-urgent.  It’s short.  Can you share a little more of your thinking about not communicating the idea of a low 7 percent stopping point for purchases.  Or is that something you are going to do in the press conference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for more information or clarification on the decision to not communicate the idea of a low 7 percent stopping point for purchases.


Passage number 172.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, in a recent draft, I pointed out that in this modal scenario, by the middle of 2014, unemployment would be probably close to 7 percent.  And what I thought I would do is not say that in the opening statement but reserve it for an answer if I’m asked the question, How do you know that you have achieved substantial improvement.  I could use that as an illustration.  I was a little afraid that it would become the formal bogey, and that we would then be essentially doing what Governor Stein said but without getting the credit for it, in some sense.  I am open to talking about that more, but that was the reason.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 173.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "Thank you" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply an expression of gratitude.


Passage number 174.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Bill.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 175.
 MR. ENGLISH.5  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will be referring to the exhibits that were distributed, “Material for FOMC Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives.”  The top-left panel of page 1 shows the results from the most recent Survey of Primary Dealers regarding the projected path of SOMA securities holdings, along with the staff projections of such purchases under the alternatives provided in the Tealbook.  The median dealer projection, the light blue line, is little changed from the April survey, which is shown in green and reaches almost $4 trillion by the end of this year. As Simon noted earlier, while the median dealer economist didn’t mark down the ultimate size of the SOMA portfolio, most dealers now expect a reduction in the pace of purchases later this year, somewhat sooner than in earlier surveys.  As you can see in the top-right panel, they generally anticipate that the first cut will occur at either the September or December meeting.  By contrast, in the April survey, not shown, roughly one-half of the dealers saw the first adjustment to the pace of purchases coming after the end of the year. The middle panel summarizes changes in your SEP projections for this year and next since last September when the current purchase program was initiated.  As you  5 The materials used by Mr. English are appended to this transcript (appendix 5).can see to the left, the central tendency of your projections under appropriate policy of the unemployment rate at the end of this year, and at the end of 2014, have moved down roughly in line with the decline in the actual unemployment rate since last summer. By contrast, your projections for the growth rate of real GDP, shown in the middle, have edged lower over the same period.  Your projections for inflation, shown to the right, have moved down some this year but are roughly the same next year.  While your projections show mixed changes, you appear to be less concerned about downside risks to the outlook for the real economy, with a large majority of you now seeing the risks to your projections for the unemployment rate and GDP growth as broadly balanced, as shown in the bottom-left and center panels.  And despite some concern about the low level of inflation that was expressed this afternoon, you generally continue to see the risks to the inflation outlook as about balanced, as shown to the right. Regarding the policy decision at this meeting, alternative B on page 6 continues the current pace and composition of asset purchases and maintains the threshold-based forward guidance adopted in December.  Alternative B would be attractive for policymakers who see an outlook for moderate growth, gradual improvement in labor markets, and an economy that, while recovering, is still operating well below potential and requires further monetary policy accommodation in order to support a stronger recovery. The first paragraph of alternative B is a bit less tentative than the May statement about the recent improvement in labor market conditions.  It also includes two possible changes, shown in blue, to the wording of the last sentence relative to the version that was in the Tealbook.  These changes attribute a portion of the recent low level of inflation to transitory influences.  The second paragraph includes a reference to diminished downside risks since last fall, consistent with the SEP results I showed a moment ago.  That change is intended to highlight the possibility that the Committee could choose to reduce the pace of purchases before long, if the improvements in the labor market continue. Market participants generally don’t appear to expect significant changes to the statement at this meeting.  Thus, a statement along the lines of alternative B likely would be broadly in line with market expectations.  However, the new language pointing to diminished downside risks might cause some investors to trim their assessment of the likely path of the balance sheet.  As a result, yields could rise modestly, equity prices might fall, and the dollar strengthen. Alternative C on page 8 may appeal to policymakers who have become confident that the economic recovery is on a sufficiently firm footing that it is now time to reduce the pace of asset purchases. The first paragraph of alternative C offers a more upbeat assessment of recent economic developments, and the second paragraph offers a more assertive statementthat risks to the outlook have diminished and that the Committee “is becoming more confident that labor market conditions will continue to improve over the medium term.”  The third paragraph states that in light of the improvement in the outlook for the labor market since the beginning of the program, the Committee decided to reduce the pace of Treasury and MBS purchases to $35 billion per month each.  And to forestall investor perceptions that this reduction amounts to a removal of policy accommodation, it also emphasizes that, even with these changes, the Committee’s sizable and still-expanding holdings of securities should continue to put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, support mortgage markets, and keep broader financial conditions highly accommodative.  The fourth paragraph is unchanged.  To push back against the possibility that market participants could conclude that the reduction in the pace of purchases implies an earlier exit from accommodation, the fifth paragraph indicates that the Committee “reaffirms,” rather than simply “anticipates,” that the low range of the federal funds rate will be appropriate at least until one of the thresholds is crossed. A statement like alternative C, would come as a considerable surprise to market participants, leading them to mark down their expectations for the ultimate size of the purchase program; interest rates would presumably increase, and stock prices decline. Alternative A on page 4 may appeal to participants who believe that a balanced approach to achieving both components of the dual mandate requires a greater degree of policy accommodation than is currently in train. The first paragraph of alternative A is largely the same as in May but adds a reference to slower manufacturing activity and strengthens slightly the language regarding recent low inflation readings.  The second paragraph adds the thought that with a balanced approach to policy, inflation could run modestly higher than 2 percent for a time, and it retains the reference to downside risks to the economy.  The third paragraph maintains the current pace of asset purchases and announces that the Committee does not intend to sell its agency MBS holdings.  The fourth paragraph is unchanged from May.  The fifth paragraph provides the option to lower the unemployment threshold to 6 or 5½ percent, and it ends by indicating that the Committee expects eventually to reduce policy accommodation gradually to foster strong employment growth and inflation at 2 percent or even modestly higher for a time. An announcement like alternative A would be a significant surprise to financial markets.  Longer-term real interest rates would likely fall as investors projected a lower expected path for the funds rate and a higher level of asset purchases.  Equity prices and inflation compensation likely would rise, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar decline. Draft directives for each of the alternatives are presented on pages 11 through 13 of your handout.  Thank you.  That completes my prepared remarks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 176.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much, Bill.  Are there any questions for Bill.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker thanks Bill and then asks if there are any questions for Bill.


Passage number 177.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is not enough information given in the passage to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 178.
 WILLIAMS.  Yes.  The Tealbook forecast was generated assuming $750 billion in purchases this year.  And given the big difference with what you are building in in terms of how you are describing policy for your press conference, is it possible by tomorrow to get a gauge of how the Tealbook forecast would change if our total purchases for 2013 and 2014 were something more like what the primary dealers assume or something appropriate.  Just how would that change the forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply a question about the potential impact of different purchasing assumptions on the forecast.


Passage number 179.
 MR. WILCOX.  Roughly speaking, I think we would probably add another—thinking out loud—$500 billion.  That would get us another two-tenths off the unemployment rate after three years, and about a half a dozen or so basis points on the inflation rate.  I could repeat those numbers tomorrow morning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Wilcox, is simply presenting his own thoughts and making a prediction about the potential effects of adding $500 billion to a certain situation.


Passage number 180.
  [Laughter] MS. DUKE.  So the Tealbook says there is disappointment built in as market expectations come more in line with our own plans.  How does that affect 2013, the near-term forecast.  How is that reflected in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The person simply asks for clarification regarding how the disappointment mentioned in the Tealbook affects the near-term forecast for 2013.


Passage number 181.
 MR. WILCOX.  Well, we build in the disappointment over the course of the second half of this year because we had market participants coming to the realization that the Committee has something different in mind than they currently expect.  So that would cause a backup in rates over the course of this year.  And the effect of adding in an additional $500 billion in purchases would amount to taking that disappointment effect out, essentially, mechanically.  I think that’s the way it will be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about the expected market reaction to the actions of the Committee.


Passage number 182.
 MS. DUKE.  But there is nothing that affects the outcome in that disappointment.  The effect doesn’t show up until 2015.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be determined by the absence of any conflicting statements or opposing arguments. The speaker simply states a fact about the outcome and its effect.


Passage number 183.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It would affect the timing, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "It would affect the timing, right?" is a question seeking confirmation or clarification, but it does not imply any disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 184.
 MR. WILCOX.  Well I’m not quite sure what you mean in saying that there is nothing that will affect the outcome.  It will affect the real economic outcome of inflation, unemployment, real GDP, in the way that I just outlined.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wilcox is simply expressing uncertainty about the meaning of a statement.


Passage number 185.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage only provides the title or designation of Chairman Bernanke without any additional information or context that can indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 186.
  The Tealbook forecast front loads the economic effects, though, and if market participants end up being right— MR. WILCOX.  The change in rate environment would be feathered into our outlook.  It would take a while to show up in terms of the economic outcomes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is discussing the potential front loading of economic effects and the time it would take for the change in rate environment to show up in economic outcomes.


Passage number 187.
 MR. PLOSSER.  But aren’t we basically ratifying what their expectations are with this mostly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Plosser, is posing a question and seeking clarification.


Passage number 188.
 MR. LACKER.  So it would shift the disappointment from the market to the Committee.  Certain members of the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention among certain members of the Committee. It simply states that the disappointment would shift from the market to the Committee.


Passage number 189.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Some members of the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: Based on the provided passage, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement among the members of the Committee.


Passage number 190.
  [Laughter] MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Some of those members have already been disappointed, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that some members have already been disappointed, which is a neutral statement.


Passage number 191.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions.  [No response]  All right.  If not, there is a reception and dinner available, but no business will be conducted.  And we will start tomorrow at 9:00 a.m.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there are no further questions, a reception and dinner are available, and the meeting will start the next day.


Passage number 192.
  [Meeting recessed]  June 19 Session  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  We are ready to start our policy go-round, and I have, first, President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that a meeting is about to begin.


Passage number 193.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The leadoff man has to be fast and agile, and get on base by any means.  [Laughter]  I will leave it to you to figure out what I mean by that, but that just seemed appropriate.  I am going to support alternative B, and in a moment I will get to the question of the Chairman’s scenario proposal and paragraph 4′ language as possible statement language.  Of the three alternatives presented for this meeting, B involves no substantive policy action.  The other alternative that I thought might get some serious consideration was C. I see four reasons for taking no concrete action beyond communications efforts today.  I think a cautious posture is appropriate regarding any assumption of accelerated growth.  I think a cautious posture is also appropriate regarding inflation developments.  There is not enough clarity, in my view, in the economic situation or outlook to pursue alternative C and dial back our purchases.  And as a reason to stay the course, again, substantively, communications has already produced premature tightening. So now to the question of communicating a scenario along the lines laid out by the Chairman.  I am prepared to support the scenario in its basic substance and communicating it in both the statement and press conference today.  I see three priorities necessary, currently, to restore policy effectiveness:  first, to the extent possible, to get control of the communication dynamics; second, to reduce uncertainty and enhance clarity; and, third, to communicate the Committee’s voice for full credibility and maximum impact.  Unfortunately, our communication has turned from a positive policy tool aimed at buttressing accommodation to a factorundermining the accommodative intent of policy.  I think it is time to firm up our communication, and I think it will be achieved by laying out quite explicitly the most likely policy path and doing it in an unambiguous, forceful way using both the statement and the press conference. I think there are good reasons to support this course of action in substance and something close to the paragraph 4′ draft language.  Those reasons are that, although the scenario is qualitative, it is adequately explicit; it is also sufficiently conditional to preserve flexibility.  With inclusion in the statement, it would have the unambiguous endorsement of the Committee, and I think it has a good chance of calming markets and making the policy as effective as possible over its remaining life.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Lockhart, is expressing his support for alternative B and the scenario proposed by the Chairman. He explains his reasons for taking no substantive policy action and highlights the importance of clear and effective communication.


Passage number 194.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply expresses gratitude.


Passage number 195.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Last night, as I was ripping up my comments, I asked myself:  What is the problem we are trying to solve.  And I looked at it from two perspectives.  The first is from the perspective of financial market participants.  Financial market participants are calendar based.  From expiration of futures and option contracts to loan terms, calendar dates are critical to trading strategies.  Thus, they are constantly trying to translate our words to calendar dates relevant to them.  Thus, substantial improvement in labor markets, which is defined differently by each of us, is confusing, and positions can be impacted by our speeches.  Furthermore, sentiment can shift abruptly.  The exit for both QE1 and QE2 was quite easy because it was easily translated to certain dates.   What is the perspective of central bankers.  We are evaluated by economic outcomes.  Our mandate is tied to economic variables, with no explicit time subscript.  Chairman Volcker is lauded for bringing inflation down, with little reference to the time it took.  Thus, central bankersprefer state-contingent contracts that provide plenty of optionality on how to achieve the economic outcome.  However, QE1 and QE2 had to be followed by QE3.  We did not achieve our economic outcome, even though the exit was smooth.  A statement that adds variables and clauses but is difficult to translate to time is likely to be viewed unfavorably by market participants.  It will also not prove favorable for us. So what is the path forward.  I would suggest we follow up on Governor Stein’s comments yesterday and anchor our statement by ending the purchase program once we have reached 7 percent unemployment.  It provides greater certitude to markets without fully retreating to calendar dates not tied to economic outcomes.  While that precision compromises our flexibility and does not treat all of the variables that ideally are captured by substantial improvement in labor markets, it should simplify the translation for financial market participants sufficiently to mute the communication complaints. Given the complexity of the paragraph in the alternative that was provided yesterday, I would stick with alternative B as written.  I would delete the word “somewhat” from the first paragraph because I think, as comments yesterday made clear, PCE inflation has been well below the 2 percent target.  But other than that, I would go with alternative B as written, and I would have the 7 percent endpoint discussed in the press conference rather than putting it in the statement.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the author's thoughts and suggestions regarding financial market participants and central bankers. There is no indication of disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 196.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren, do you take a position on the phrase that starts the sentence about inflation and transitory factors.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention regarding the mentioned phrase about inflation and transitory factors.


Passage number 197.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  I would prefer it not to be in; I think it’s a little uncertain at this point whether it is transitory or not.  But I think the sense of most people from yesterday was consistent with that, so I would be comfortable with leaving it in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Rosengren expresses his preference but also acknowledges that the majority of people share a different viewpoint.


Passage number 198.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay, thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a simple expression of gratitude by President Lacker.


Passage number 199.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 200.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Thank you, Governor Stein" is a polite expression of gratitude and does not indicate any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 201.
 MR. STEIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B as written.  In an ideal world, I would have liked to be in a position to support alternative C.  But, obviously, the market is not ready, and we have to solve our communication problems before we can move.  So since I’m basically going to just be echoing what Eric and Dan said, I will be very brief. I think the time has come for us to lay out an observable, verifiable anchor—as Eric said, to define an endpoint.  I think if we define the endpoint as 7 percent and at the same time make clear that we are going to take multiple steps to get there, it will dial down the temperature on the September/December thing a lot.  Basically, people can do the math:  If you are stopping at 7 percent and you are taking multiple steps to get there, it must be that the first step is going to come sometime pretty soon, and it won’t have nearly the signal value anymore because the rest of the path has been laid out.  So I think it will just make that easier. I think it is just important to be clear in our own minds.  I don’t see this as a major shift, or really any kind of shift in the underlying policy at all.  In other words, this is still an open-ended policy.  We are doing it until we achieve substantial improvement.  Before, substantialimprovement was contingent on a wide variety of data:  some observable, others not observable.  Now, we are just narrowing, in some sense, the data that we are making it contingent on.  And it is sort of a natural evolution of the tradeoff, in the sense that nine months ago, for us to pin it to a single variable, I think, would have been extremely risky.  We wouldn’t have known if it would have taken a year, two years, three years, or more to get to 7 percent.  Given the increasing cost of the balance sheet size, I think that would have just been too risky a thing to do. Now we have moved much closer, so the variance in where the balance sheet will be when we get there is much smaller.  At the same time, the need for clarity, given that a first move is coming, and given the dysfunctions associated with the market having to make conjectures about all of the things that we might be conditioning on—I think the terms of the tradeoff have changed, so it makes sense to start to define substantial improvement.  But I think this should, expressed properly, go down pretty smoothly because it is not a change in the philosophy or in the commitment or any of that in the program.  So I think it can be done well.  Again, just to agree with Dan, I would not attempt to do this in the statement this time.  I think the press conference is the appropriate place.  As things settle down, we will have the luxury of a little bit more time to try to craft it, perhaps, as something for the statement for the next go-round.  That’s it; thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses support for alternative B and acknowledges that alternative C is not currently feasible. They echo the statements of Eric and Dan, stating that it is time to define an endpoint and lay out a path to reach it. They believe that defining an endpoint will alleviate concerns about the timing of future policy changes. The speaker does not see this as a major shift in policy but rather a narrowing of the data that policy is contingent on. They mention the need for clarity and express that this change can be implemented smoothly. They also agree with Dan's suggestion to announce this change in a press conference rather than a statement.


Passage number 202.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply expressing gratitude towards President Bullard.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 203.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard, are you attracted to the unemployment contingency rule that was suggested.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is possible contention or disagreement in the passage.

Explanation: The use of the word "attracted" suggests that there may be differing opinions or preferences regarding the suggested unemployment contingency rule. This implies that President Bullard's stance on the matter might not align with the suggestion or other parties involved in the conversation.


Passage number 204.
 MR. BULLARD.  I think that’s an intriguing thing, but I don’t think we should try to make a policy like that on the fly here.  I think we should think about that more carefully.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Bullard simply states that he finds the idea intriguing but suggests taking more time to carefully consider it before making a policy decision.


Passage number 205.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states "Okay" and mentions President Fisher without providing any further information or context.


Passage number 206.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Sorry.  The last thing—you would take out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, the speaker is apologizing for something and mentioning that they would remove or take out the last thing. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 207.
 MR. FISHER.  The word “somewhat” in the first paragraph.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The mention of the word "somewhat" in the first paragraph does not indicate contention or disagreement. It is a simple acknowledgement or clarification made by Mr. Fisher.


Passage number 208.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions "President Kocherlakota," without providing any further context or information to suggest any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 209.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Several people have spoken in favor of Governor Stein’s proposal from yesterday, so before I talk, if I could get more clarity about what people are actually talking about.  Is it to outline 7 percent as being the definition of victory in this program.  That would mean potentially terminating the program at the end of 2013 if we got to 7 percent then, or potentially at the end of 2015, if it took that long to get there.  Is that what’s being proposed, just to clarify.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is seeking clarification and asking for more information about the proposal.


Passage number 210.
 MR. STEIN.  Yes.  Effectively, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. Mr. Stein is simply providing an affirmative response to a question.


Passage number 211.
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Okay.  So 7 percent is being used as the definition of victory.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states a fact about the definition of victory without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 212.
 MR. STEIN.  Or the stopping rule.  “Victory” is a morally loaded word.  But I would say “stopping rule” to be more technocratic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting an alternative phrase, "stopping rule," which they view as more technocratic than the term "victory."


Passage number 213.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage is not provided. Please provide the passage in order for me to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 214.
 MR. EVANS.  Clarification is important.  I was going to raise this issue, but since you’ve raised it, how does this translate into changes in the path.  You seem to have defined the endpoint at 7 percent, but what progress toward that would be indicative of a taper point.  I think that’s the first question the markets, once they understand that, are going to start to ask, and then they’re going to transfer their confusion to that.  Would it be, close half the gap and then you begin to taper, perhaps.  We’re at 7.6 percent, on our way to 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement and a series of questions seeking clarification and understanding.


Passage number 215.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’ve thought about this.  Let me give you two alternative approaches, one softer and one a little harder.  The soft approach is the following.  What I actually had in my draft before I took it out was something like the following.  If you refer to your language, in paragraph 4′ of alternative B, I had language similar to this, which says, “If the economy develops broadly along these lines”—you know, along the SEP lines—“we would reduce the pace in measured steps through the first half of next year, ending purchases about midyear.”  And then I had a sentence like:  “At that point, under this scenario, the unemployment rate would be around 7 percent, which would constitute a substantial improvement,” or something like that.  I was simply drawing the observation that under this scenario, we would have about 7 percent unemployment.  I think that would have a little bit of a soft sense of being the kind of improvement we’re looking for without being a fixed target. The stronger way to do it—and I suppose the advocates ought to say which way they prefer—would be in the same sentence:  “reduce the pace of purchases in measured steps untilthe unemployment rate is at approximately 7 percent, which should be around the middle of the year under this scenario.”  Or something like that—so, reversing the order of those two.  That would be the harder target.  I think one thing that makes this a little safer than you might think is that the presumption is that we’d be cutting the pace as we made progress, and I would still have the part about reducing purchases this year and so on.  If it’s a long time between 7.2 percent and 7.0 percent, at least it would be only at a very slow pace of purchases.  That would be, I think, the hard case.   So those are two scenarios.  Hearing what I’ve heard, I’m attracted at least to doing the first, just to give some guidance about what we’re thinking about.  But I think it’s a fairly strong step to make it a harder target, and I’ll need guidance from the Committee on that for sure.  President Stein, Eric. VARIOUS.  You demoted him; you demoted the Governor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 216.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  “President Stein.”  You see I’m confused here.  Governor Stein, President Rosengren.  I’m sorry.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 217.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply expresses gratitude and there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 218.
MR. BULLARD.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states "Mr. Bullard."


Passage number 219.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I can't provide the answer you're looking for.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 220.
 MR. BULLARD.  Just to follow up on some of President Plosser’s comments, what would our intent be, say, if unemployment ticks down to 7.4 percent and the staff still forecasts, or the Committee forecasts, that it is going to be a shallow pace of decline in the unemployment rate.  Would we taper at that point or not.  I think that’s a key question about how we’re going to do this.  And then you would say, okay, we’re not going to taper at that point—but then the next month, it goes down to 7.3 percent.  Now you’re that much closer.  How do you envision handling it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker poses a hypothetical scenario and raises questions about the Federal Reserve's potential actions in response to changing unemployment rates. This indicates a potential disagreement or uncertainty about how the situation would be handled.


Passage number 221.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think that the idea would be to taper roughly a third at 7.4 percent and roughly a third at 7.2 percent, but with a little bit of flexibility there—again, I’m just reacting to this discussion, which is very interesting.  But the point is, if it’s anchored by 7 percent, the integral is pretty invariant to whether it’s October or September when you make the change, don’t you think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their thoughts and responding to a discussion without any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 222.
 MR. BULLARD.  I don’t know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is a straightforward statement from Mr. Bullard indicating that he does not know something.


Passage number 223.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The phrase "President Kocherlakota" simply states the title or position of an individual without stating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 224.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I think the integral would depend on your outlook for how long it would take.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a statement made by Mr. Kocherlakota expressing his opinion on an undefined integral. There is no contention or disagreement present as it is a statement of his own viewpoint.


Passage number 225.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s what determines it, but not how quickly we react in the interim.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage as it simply presents two different factors without opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 226.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That’s right.  I think President Bullard was trying to pose a situation, if I interpreted him correctly, where we get to 7.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of agreement and clarification.


Passage number 227.
4, but we anticipate being there, for some reason, for many months, and then—CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, then we would explain that, I think.  But that’s obviously a good question.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about future plans and a response to a question.


Passage number 228.
 MR. PLOSSER.  What that would mean, though, if that forecast turned out to be wrong, is that as we get closer to 7 percent, the unwinding and the reduction would have to perhaps come very quickly in that environment.  And part of my question in my statement was to try to get us thinking about, are we prepared to do that.  That’s all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It focuses on a statement or question made by Mr. Plosser regarding potential actions in a specific scenario.


Passage number 229.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Not enough information is provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 230.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 231.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Over the past few meetings, I have expressed my concerns about ongoing aggressive monetary stimulus in the face of a growing economy, and I continue to have those concerns.  That said, my view of the appropriate path for the balance sheet is generally consistent with that of the Tealbook.  With the assumption of $750 billion in total purchases under the current program and a slowing in the pace of purchases over the second half of the year, the Tealbook is forecasting real GDP growth of 3.3 percent in Q4 of this year, with consumption growth projected to be at 3.6 percent.  This would make it the second-strongest quarter for consumer demand since the end of the recession.  From that point, growth is projected to only get stronger, as it is in the central tendency of the SEP.  Given this backdrop, I see applying any accommodation beyond this baseline assumption as raising the risk that we will adjust the pace of purchases too late rather than too soon. I thought Governor Yellen’s analogy yesterday of the driving trip from San Francisco to New York was an interesting one.  It seems to me our challenge today, though, is less about easing off the gas pedal in Denver than about understanding our destination.  Last September, the Committee set its sights on speed and a northeasterly direction, so arriving in Denver understandably lacks clarity as to whether New York was, in fact, our destination [laughter] and how far we will continue in a northeasterly direction and at what speed. Alternative B attempts to introduce a signal that the Committee is preparing to reduce the pace of purchases assuming sufficient further improvement in labor market conditions.  Given the Chairman’s recent comments about this possibility over the next few meetings and the market’s heightened sensitivity to this prospect, I’m concerned that the signal in the statement as written may not be forceful enough.  Simply acknowledging that downside risks have diminishedmay not lead the public to believe that the Committee is prepared to act in the near term, especially with no change in purchases at this meeting.  Accordingly, I could have supported alternative B if it were more deliberate in its attempt to signal an intention to begin reducing the pace of purchases as early as September.  A clearer signal that the pace of purchases could be curtailed would help pull in market expectations in line with the Tealbook assumptions and lay the groundwork for such a reduction in the very near future.  I do not find that the language in paragraph 4′ of alternative B provides this kind of clarity, although I certainly support its intention to do so.  I think this would be consistent with the Committee’s previous statements, which have made clear that substantial improvement in the labor market outlook is needed to end the purchases, but not necessarily to reduce the pace of such purchases.  Given the ongoing improvement in labor market conditions and the outlook, I view today as the appropriate time to deliberately signal that the pace of purchases will decrease in the very near future.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement with the current monetary stimulus policy and argues for a more deliberate signal to reduce the pace of purchases in the near future.


Passage number 232.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  First Vice President Stefani.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Thank you" does not express contention or disagreement.


Passage number 233.
 MR. STEFANI.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  While it was mentioned several times yesterday, the idea of what is substantial improvement in the labor market outlook seems to be one of the most important open questions facing this Committee.  To me, the changes in the labor market conditions that we’ve seen over the past nine months constitute clear improvement, and I think it’s important that we communicate this progress to the financial markets. As President Pianalto has described in past meetings, although the pace of job gains might seem slow relative to some norms of the past, research by the Cleveland staff has shown that the downward trends in job flows and labor force participation have reduced the trend rate of job growth.  Relative to this slower trend, the current pace of job gains is substantial.  And if thistrend continues, as I expect, my preference would be to start the reduction in asset purchases sooner and to proceed more quickly so that it might be finalized in the spring of 2014.  This suggested path would result in a smaller total amount of asset purchases and not further contribute to the potential complications of a larger balance sheet. Despite my preferences for a smaller overall balance sheet, I place a greater priority on clearer communications with the financial markets on the likely path of the Committee’s asset purchase program.  I think the press conference proposal that you put forward yesterday, Mr. Chairman, is a very positive step in providing greater clarity than exists today about the completion of asset purchases.  There was discussion this morning about the 7 percent unemployment threshold, and I think this level is roughly consistent with our view of where substantial improvement would lie.  But I don’t feel it’s necessarily a requirement to communicate this explicit threshold in our policy directive. With respect to the policy options, I support alternative B and do not feel strongly that the communication needs to be incorporated into today’s formal statement, as suggested in paragraph 4′ of alternative B.  I think getting the Committee to fully vet the statement language about the details provided in paragraph 4′ will take some time and consideration, and I think we should take that time to ensure that we’re all on the same page of what it means and what it says.  So I support the original alternative B language as proposed.  I’m also open to including the proposed language referencing “transitory influences” on inflation in paragraph 1.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses support for various proposals and suggestions made by the Chairman.


Passage number 234.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is gratitude expressed towards President Williams, but no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 235.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 236.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to make absolutely clear that I am opposed to three-day meetings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is a statement of the speaker's opinion and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 237.
  [Laughter]CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Hear, hear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage is a simple expression of laughter and agreement. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 238.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 239.
 WILLIAMS.  Although we have seen steady improvement in the labor market, we are still quite a way from meeting the “substantial improvement” test.  Moreover, the surprisingly low inflation readings over the past year are a source of some angst.  Therefore, the time has yet to come to adjust the pace of asset purchases lower, and I am comfortable with the policy actions described in alternative B for this meeting.  I also support, since I sent it in, the suggested modification in paragraph 1 around inflation.  I actually think this is an important point.  Inflation is running roughly at 1 percent over the last 12 months; it is one of the lower readings we have seen in a long time.  And I think making this change is actually important, both from an accuracy point of view and—remembering the discussion yesterday—because the low readings for inflation have been a big part of our discussion.  So that is a change that I strongly support. In terms of paragraph 4, I agree with, I guess, most of us that trying to come up with a good version of paragraph 4′ is beyond our capabilities over the next hour and 40 minutes, and I am comfortable with paragraph 4 as is.  And I am not only comfortable with but fully support the Chairman going through, as he discussed yesterday, the outline of the program, in terms of the forecast and in terms of the expected policy actions over the next year. I think that in terms of the 7 percent target/threshold/trigger—I am not quite sure what it is—the way you describe that in the soft version of your language is actually a very good idea.  I do have some concerns around it being a hard target because we actually haven’t had much chance to digest and think through whether it is an appropriate setting for 7 percent to be the threshold, or maybe even the trigger—I guess that’s the way I’m hearing it.  But I think, in terms of the way you described it, Mr. Chairman, in terms of your soft version, that makes a lot ofsense.  But I do think if we really were to say that 7 percent is the cutoff, we would really want to think that through.  One of the things I am struck by, and I haven’t had a chance to think about it hard, is, boy, there is not a lot of air between 7 percent and 6½ percent.  So if we literally said we are going to keep buying until the unemployment rate gets to 7 percent, but then we will start raising rates after 6½ percent, there are certain scenarios where those seemed to be pretty close together. The final point I want to make in terms of the communication around this is to reiterate something that a number of people have said.  I do view the increase in volatility in markets, or the sense of some turbulence, as not wholly negative.  I think that this is something that we had to go through.  I’m just saying, I think, what I have written down from other people:  that this was an inevitable part of the process.  And I’m looking here at the Monday morning briefing; there is a nice chart on implied volatility from interest rate options.  Yes, it has come up quite a bit, but it was at incredibly low levels.  And I don’t think we want to return to those incredibly low levels for 10-year Treasury volatility that we saw before. I was, as we all were, I think, increasingly hearing stories of carry-trade-like, hot-money behavior a lot.  What I have heard from my business contacts of late is that has come to an end.  We also heard that story in terms of some international carry trade around foreign exchange yesterday.  So I do think a goal is to provide greater clarity, greater understanding of our thinking, as the Chairman has laid out.  But the goal shouldn’t be to eliminate uncertainty in the markets about the future path of financial conditions and interest rates; it should be to get this back to more normal levels. The last comment I will make is that there is no question that financial market participants have an insatiable demand for specifics.  No matter what we do, they are going tocontinue to ask for more and more specifics.  They are going to clamor for dates.  They are going to clamor for two decimal places for the unemployment rate, and things like that.  And I think we just have to understand that is always going to be there.  We can’t give into that, in a sense.  We want to just communicate our views on appropriate policy and what that entails.  And, again, Mr. Chairman, I think your approach is exactly the right one for that.  But I just want to say, we are going to all be asked next week and the week after, “Well, are you talking about a 7.23 percent unemployment rate.” or whatever.  Because I don’t think we are going to bring to an end that kind of demand from market participants.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It mostly consists of the speaker expressing their support and agreement with various policy actions and suggestions.


Passage number 240.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of a polite thank-you message and the inclusion of the title "President" before the name "Kocherlakota."


Passage number 241.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, exactly.  And I have been asked about that many times—what does it mean.  And when I am asked about it in public, I say, boy, it would be nice to have a definition; I don’t want to give you mine because that just confuses you—it adds to the other definitions that are out there.  But it would be great to have a Committee definition.  So the idea that we are going to get a Committee definition is really exciting.  But I think we have to put some thought into what that is.  Again, I mentioned the employment–population ratio point already, but isn’t it really going to be true that if we had shocks—you know, shocks happen—that led unemployment to be above 7 percent for the next two and a half years, would we be comfortable still buying assets over that time frame.  You know, I don’t want to speak for President Fisher, but I think his willingness to go along with the 7 percent threshold might start to wane as we went along on that time path.  And, again, you should speak for yourself, but I think that it would be challenging to hold this coalition together if that is really what we are looking at. So, again, I don’t want to prejudge.  Maybe that is what we want, and I would be excited by that because I think that would give an automatic stabilizer effect that really could be quite powerful.  But we have to talk and think about that, so I really would push for waiting until July.  That is essentially the summary of all of that.What do we do in the interim.  Mr. Chairman, I don’t envy your job, that’s for sure.  It’s very challenging to address these questions.  I think that the truth is the truth, and I think there is an ongoing conversation within the Committee about what our goals are for this program.  I think it is fair to say that there is broad support for the idea that the labor markets have improved since September.  I think, definitely, we have seen that, and I think most people have spoken to that.  On the other hand, I think, again, there is also broad support for the idea that we haven’t seen substantial improvement at this stage.  So we are somewhere in between. The Committee continues to think about what that means.  I don’t think that we can offer more clarity at this point in time beyond that.  It is possible you could go so far as to say that a number of people on the Committee spoke approvingly of the idea of tapering purchases before the end of the year.  I think that is a fair summary of the discussion as well.  I think there are a number of ways to summarize the discussion without giving the sense that it really is where the Committee is likely to go, and I would advocate that instead.  It is not going to kill all of the volatility in the markets, but, as some have suggested, this is a big deal, this is a big shift, and we should expect some volatility along the way. So I don’t think we should be rushing to judgment—especially, as I indicated earlier, because I think it is important for the Committee to take ownership of this.  We make fun of the wording choices, at times, in some of the alternatives.  But there is a discipline associated with all of us going through it, all of us checking off, and the Committee voting on and agreeing to it, that I think is very helpful.  So thanks for indulging me for so long.  I like the idea of a 7 percent target, but I think that we need to think about that more.  I think we should put the time in, get it right, and come back in July and nail this down.  And I think there are a number of ways to summarize the conversation, Mr. Chairman, that will assure markets that we are aware of thisissue and that we are going to be coming back to it relatively soon with additional clarity.  If it really is an emergency situation, there are ways to have intermeeting meetings, and we can deal with it at that point.  I don’t see the situation as being an emergency at this stage.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing their opinion and offering different perspectives on the topic, but there is no clear disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 242.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Two-hander from Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the given passage. The statement "Thank you" is a polite expression of gratitude and does not indicate any disagreement or contention. Additionally, the phrase "Two-hander from Governor Tarullo" does not provide enough context to determine if there is any disagreement.


Passage number 243.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Narayana, you play into all of my predispositions about thinking stuff like this through.  But I wanted to ask you more specifically—you kept referring to July.  Jim made the point before about the absence of, at least, a scheduled press conference.  Realistically, do you think we could do this without a press conference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing agreement and appreciation towards Narayana for his thoughts and requesting further clarification.


Passage number 244.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I thought there was a reference at the last meeting to the possibility of doing a press conference.  I agree that with a decision this large, we would want to have a press conference.  So I think that it would be possible to schedule a press conference around this.  To go further along these same lines, I would not be displeased with the idea of waiting until September to make the decision.  It would depend on the market signals along the way, to a certain extent.  I think there are gains to be had in terms of thinking and studying what is going on.  Spending the time in July actually sorting through some of the questions I raised would be helpful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Kocherlakota is expressing his agreement with the idea of having a press conference and also considers the possibility of waiting until September to make a decision, depending on market signals. He also suggests that spending time in July to sort through questions would be helpful. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 245.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information or context about President Bullard or any topic that could potentially lead to contention or disagreement.


Passage number 246.
 MR. BULLARD.  I think one thing you could do is say that we are thinking hard about these questions, we hope to come back with more guidance in July, and we will schedule a press conference at that time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is suggesting a course of action and outlining a plan for addressing the questions at hand.


Passage number 247.
MR. TARULLO.  There is no great answer here, but saying that puts a kind of weight and focus on July that will exceed that of any single FOMC meeting that I have been in, at least.  Everybody will just ramp up—it will be six weeks of wild speculation, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's opinion about the potential speculation and focus on the July FOMC meeting.


Passage number 248.
 MR. FISHER.  I concur.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing agreement with an unknown statement or opinion.


Passage number 249.
  I think it would just— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Talk about scary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their personal thoughts and feelings about a particular topic, without any opposing viewpoints or arguments being presented.


Passage number 250.
 MR. FISHER.  —make things a lot more scary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by one person, Mr. Fisher, expressing his opinion about something making things scarier.


Passage number 251.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Just a somewhat, but not totally irrelevant, comment:  I have been talking to Michelle about this issue of press conferences at every meeting.  One intermediate strategy would be to let it be known that there is a scheduled press call after the non-press-conference meetings that could be activated as needed.  So we would have the option, always, of having a phone press conference after every meeting.  We haven’t, of course, put that into place, but that would be something to solve this problem.  I absolutely agree with you that having only four active meetings a year is not a satisfactory situation.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply offering a suggestion to address the issue of press conferences at meetings. The statement that "having only four active meetings a year is not a satisfactory situation" is a statement of agreement.


Passage number 252.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  I agree with the analysis you laid out in your remarks yesterday concerning the issues that face us in connection with our asset purchase program, and I support the plan that you proposed for how we would vary our asset purchases over time in the scenario in which economic developments unfold along the lines of the Tealbook or our SEP central tendency.  I think it will prove very helpful for you to lay out this plan in your comments at the press conference.  Especially from a governance standpoint, I do see a very good reason to include something in the statement, but, for today, I absolutely agree with those who have said this is not ready for prime time and we need to think it through.  So I am prepared to think it through, and I think it may make sense to put it in the statement, but just not today.As I emphasized in the economic go-round, I see the risks for growth and inflation as weighted to the downside of the Tealbook forecast.  The labor market has improved since we started our asset purchases, and by more than I anticipated at the time.  But taking account of the decline we have seen in labor force participation, as well as the limited changes we have seen so far in other indicators—like the duration of unemployment, the quit rate, and the number of people working part time involuntarily—to my mind, the overall improvement still seems rather modest.  Moreover, as I discussed yesterday, continuation of that progress is by no means guaranteed.  Inflation has also surprised to the downside.  I anticipate it will pick up over time, but that outcome, too, is by no means a sure thing.   With incoming data on growth during the intermeeting period having been mixed, the pace of job growth lower than earlier in the year, and inflation, along with some measures of inflation expectations, surprising to the downside, market participants would be stunned if we were to reduce the pace of purchases at today’s meeting, and I couldn’t support that decision.  But I could support a reduction in the pace of purchases as soon as September if incoming evidence is consistent with the Tealbook and the SEP central tendency.  I would expect to see continuing payroll gains at least at a pace in the same ballpark as we have seen in recent months and, importantly, evidence of a pickup in growth in the second half of this year that seems likely to strengthen into next year, including signs that the sort of virtuous circle that underpins the Tealbook’s forecast is actually emerging. I will be looking for evidence of a pickup in the growth of consumption and investment spending.  Without that, I will remain concerned that the progress we have seen in the labor market thus far won’t be sustainable.  Going back to my road-trip analogy, I, for one, don’t want to get stuck in Denver.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing support for alternative B and discussing the factors that would need to be considered before reducing the pace of asset purchases.


Passage number 253.
  [Laughter]CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President George, are you going to intervene on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage consists of a brief exchange between someone referred to as President George and another person, where laughter is mentioned. The absence of any clear indication of contention or disagreement suggests that there is none present in this passage.


Passage number 254.
 MS. GEORGE.  It’s not bad.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement, "It's not bad," does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses a neutral or positive opinion about something.


Passage number 255.
 MS. YELLEN.  Well, it’s nice that we have a Branch in Denver.  I’ll check in there if that happens. The data will also need to suggest that core inflation is picking up gradually and that inflation expectations remain stable.  Looking beyond the September meeting, if the economy continues to evolve in the fourth quarter and into 2014 in line with the Tealbook and the SEP central tendency, I expect to support further reductions in the pace of our purchases over time, with an expectation that they would conclude around the middle of next year. The danger in setting out a plan along these lines is that markets may lose sight of the fact that it is contingent on incoming data and, instead, build in expectations that a cut in the pace of purchases in September and beyond is baked in the cake.  Worse still, they may question our commitment to provide the accommodation that is needed to promote a full economic recovery and question our commitment to our forward guidance pertaining to the funds rate. These concerns notwithstanding, we do need to communicate more clearly what it will take for the Committee to change the pace of its purchases and how we intend to proceed over time.  Some volatility in long rates is inevitable and desirable, given that incoming news that alters the outlook should change the policy path.  And I agree with President Williams that market developments, for the reasons he described, have not been all bad.  But what is disturbing is that most market participants assign substantial blame to us for flawed communications and for the increased volatility we have seen.  And to the extent that that contributes to higher risk premiums, it is undermining the effectiveness of our policy.To minimize the downside risk from setting out a reasonably concrete plan, I consider it essential for our communications to emphasize that our decisions about the pace of our asset purchases at every stage are contingent and data-dependent.  I think it would help market participants keep that in mind if you were to follow your suggestion that in your press conference you include some specifics about what the economy would look like when the program winds down, if things evolve according to the SEP central tendency.  In particular, you could mention that at that time, unemployment would have declined to around 7 percent.  I would also suggest noting that when the program winds down, we would expect to see growth in the neighborhood of around 3 percent and inflation moving up a little from present levels.  I think adding these concrete details would emphasize that there is not a fixed calendar date that we have set for tapering the program and phasing it out over time. In connection with the proposal of Eric and Jeremy and Dan about 7 percent, I am certainly open to considering it.  But I would associate myself with Narayana’s comments and Jim’s and others’ that we really need to think hard about this.  To throw this in today as a condition, without having thought through whether it is something we really could live with—whether it is the right measure; whether it is a trigger; whether it is a threshold—we really need a lot of analysis.  This is just something that it would be utterly rash, in my view, to jump into. I hope in the next couple of months, all of us will strive in our external communications to avoid creating further confusion about the Committee’s policy intentions.  For my own part, I pledge to do so.  On language, I support the amendment of President Williams to paragraph 1 of alternative B, and I would simply say “below” and not “somewhat below.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is mainly focused on discussing the need for clear communication about the Committee's plans and the potential risks and challenges associated with reducing the pace of asset purchases.


Passage number 256.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists of a brief statement and a response expressing gratitude. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 257.
MR. TARULLO.  I think everybody is trying to do this navigation, and I just wanted to ask this:  As I understood it from some quarters, the concern about the narrative as the Chairman described it yesterday was that, in the absence of something concrete in the data realm, the focus would be on the date, on later in the year, and that would overcome any sense that there is a bunch of data that underlie the forecasts in the SEP.  I completely understand and sympathize with what Janet said, as Narayana did, about how it’s always better to think through the potential consequences.  But I just want to make sure I understand how you are thinking about it.  You are not overly concerned that the focus would just be on, okay, the Chairman said later in the year, and that is when the reduction in the pace of purchases is going to start.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It mainly consists of the speaker seeking clarification and understanding about the topic being discussed.


Passage number 258.
   MS. YELLEN.  Well, I am concerned.  I absolutely am concerned about that.  But on the other hand, I just think it is necessary to set something out.  What we are really talking about—if you remember our consensus forecast idea—we need something like that.  Unfortunately, we didn’t succeed in making that work.  But as the Chairman said yesterday, when you are thinking through your press conference remarks, it is completely legitimate to talk as if the world were to evolve in accordance with your forecast.  Now, if we had succeeded with a consensus forecast, we wouldn’t be saying the SEP central tendency, and we can’t say the Tealbook.  We would be saying, if things evolve in line with the Committee’s consensus forecast, what do you have in mind for policy.  And you recall that it was because we couldn’t decide that question with respect to asset purchases that we threw the whole thing over, and that is really what we need.  I mean, what most monetary policy committees that set out a path do is they have a policy path, and they have paths for the other variables, and then they have fan charts around it to show that it is all uncertain; it is not locked in.  And I feel like if we had succeeded in that exercise, that is what the Chairman would refer to, and we would be in a better position.  I do think there isdownside risk.  We don’t have fan charts.  It is hard to make it contingent, but I still think, considering everything, to my mind, that is the best way to go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing her concerns about the lack of a consensus forecast and the need for a policy path and fan charts to show uncertainty.


Passage number 259.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about Governor Duke or any potential contention or disagreement involving him.


Passage number 260.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement expressing gratitude towards Governor Raskin.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 261.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B as written.  I see much evidence to suggest that substantial accommodation is still necessary.  I think we need to wait for more improvement before we begin reducing the pace of purchases.  And at this meeting, I’m not prepared to take any steps that would be perceived as reducing accommodation in a way not supported by changes in the real economy. The proposed changes in paragraph 2 regarding the reduction in downside risks are at the edge of my comfort zone, and I think that this paragraph already communicates that we are beginning to lay the stage for a pullback.  I think the statement in paragraph 1 should recognize the further decline in inflation, but understand the consensus view to be that the dip is transitory.  I concur with both Presidents Williams and Evans in their reactions to the inflation language and would support their views. I agree with the overall message in paragraph 4′ of alternative B, but I’m concerned that we haven’t done the groundwork yet for making such a huge change in the statement itself rather than laying the stage in the press conference.  Just from a cosmetic perspective, I count 20 new lines of text in paragraph 4′ and the removal of 6 lines of text.  We should not do this without greater confidence—and I’m not saying perfect confidence—but some greater confidence that we will know, if not the magnitudes, then at least the direction that markets will take from this messaging.  A little more certainty from our perspective might tell us, for example, whether amessage in the statement is going to lead financial markets to further tighten, precipitate earlier contraction, or possibly be mildly expansionary.  I’ve just heard too much around this table this morning to know for sure.  I also wonder how markets will take it that we’re removing the sentence added to last meeting’s statement so early.  Do we really want to be appearing so uncommitted to such recently inserted language. Also, communication only begs for more communication.  In this regard, what would markets say about our silence on the next communication vacuum, which, to me, is the composition of purchases between Treasuries and agency MBS.  And does this silence itself create additional uncertainty.  But I appreciate the need to provide clarity.  I think the press conference provides the opportunity to remind markets of some of the statement’s existing messages, and there are plenty of existing messages we could hammer in on that haven’t been fully appreciated by markets yet.  Not just markets, but we also don’t know definitively whether banks, while making substantial steps toward responding to interest rate risk through their risk management practices, have themselves fully appreciated the potential timing of a possible surge in interest rates. So hearing the messages again will itself underscore their importance and maintain the Committee’s steady course while signaling how we intend to move forward with reductions in the pace of purchases in the context of financial stability.  So first, and I think you intend to do this, Mr. Chairman, we need to emphasize that there are a number of exits we have to manage.  There are actually two exits, not just one.  Markets and the public don’t seem, though, to fully understand that there are purchases and then there’s the federal funds rate.  And each exit, as we’ve been discussing, has different criteria.  If we permit markets to conflate the two exits, we will cause more confusion, and we will run the risk of a premature contraction.  Beginning toclarify the stopping rule for purchases is a good idea, and we should explore how it interacts with the perception of the second exit, which, again, is the liftoff of the federal funds rate.  I think there’s confusion about what happens when we hit the 6.5 percent unemployment threshold.  I think the trigger–threshold distinction isn’t fully grounded in the thinking of market participants.  Some market participants continue to think that the 6.5 percent figure is our view of full employment.  Others are ignoring the lower-for-longer language, and the decision by the Committee to look at other labor market indicators is not one that the markets have fully considered.  So I think our projections, in fact, might raise the confusion factor because they show that we’ll come to the threshold earlier than we had anticipated and perhaps earlier than markets had anticipated.  So at the same time that we’re contemplating an early reduction in purchases, we’re also, by virtue of our forecasts, contemplating an early crossing of the threshold, which to many market-participant minds will entail an earlier liftoff of the federal funds rate. Third, markets seem to think that the reduction in purchases will be on a predetermined path, but we want to slow our purchases according to how the economy progresses.  This means that markets must learn that there’s the potential for us to pause in engaging in reductions or to increase purchases.  We need to communicate such possibilities so that it’s the state of the economy that’s the real driver. Fourth, markets are confused about whether financial stability concerns would put an end to all monetary accommodation.  Given our close eye on the reaction of term premiums and their potential to suddenly mushroom, we could begin to think about clarifying that financial stability concerns could halt purchases but may not halt the need for additional forms of stimulus, if necessary.So it seems to me there are many aspects that we need to clarify:  that there are two distinct exits, not one; that 6.5 percent unemployment is not full employment, and it’s not a trigger; that other labor market indicators will be relevant to raising the fed funds rate; that a reduction in purchases will not happen on a predetermined path; and that if we begin to see dangerous threats to financial stability prior to the economy being self-sustaining, we would look for substantial forms of accommodation, if necessary.  I’d like the press conference remarks to be used to lay the foundation of these messages to markets, so that our later tightening this year will occur if economic conditions warrant and will occur without triggering dangerous levels of instability.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker supports alternative B, but expresses concerns about reducing the pace of purchases and the potential impact on the real economy. They also express concern about the proposed changes in paragraph 2 and the uncertainty surrounding the potential effects of the messaging on financial markets. Additionally, they highlight the need for more clarity on the two distinct exits (purchases and federal funds rate), the 6.5 percent unemployment threshold, the potential for pausing or increasing purchases, and the relationship between financial stability concerns and monetary accommodation. These concerns and suggestions for clarification indicate contention or disagreement within the passage.


Passage number 262.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It contains a simple expression of gratitude towards Governor Powell.


Passage number 263.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of a simple expression of gratitude from the speaker to the Vice Chairman.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 264.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Can I have a ladder, please.  [Laughter]  I favor alternative B.  At the margin, though, I think the statement is a bit too optimistic sounding in mentioning the improvement in household spending, business fixed investment, and the housing sector, and omitting references to areas where the data have deteriorated, such as the weakness evident in manufacturing.  I know I’m not going to get this, but I would actually prefer to have some of the language from paragraph 1 of alternative A referencing the slowdown in the manufacturing sector moved from alternative A to alternative B.  I understand I’m not going to get it, but I really worry that alternative B by itself is going to be perceived as a bit hawkish relative to expectations.  And then on top of that, we’re going to impose this path for reducing purchases, so we’re actually setting the stage for maybe a bigger market reaction and a greater tightening of financial market conditions than is, in fact, actually necessary.  So I worry a little bit about that.  In the same vein, and this may actually be more live, I would agree with others who want to strike the word “somewhat” from paragraph 1 in terms of the reference to inflation.  I’m perfectly happy with the introductory phrase “partly reflecting transitory influences.”  I think that’s, in fact, accurate. In terms of giving guidance about how we might dial down purchases at some future date, I think that’s very much best left to the press conference rather than the statement, particularly at this meeting, but I think even beyond that, potentially.  First, our actions are supposed to be data-dependent.  So overemphasizing a particular path in the statement is in opposition to that.  Also, highlighting a detailed path in the statement creates a hurdle orthreshold to not following that path, which I think is inconsistent with the notion that our actions are supposed to be data-dependent.  Second, if we were to put this in the statement, I worry about how we would alter the statement subsequently if the data weren’t to conform with our expectations.  What’s the threshold for such changes.  So we sort of get locked into a particular path, which, I think, then reduces the data dependency of our policy, which is what I think has made it so effective. I certainly agree that giving the market more guidance about our reaction function is important, but I think we want to do it in a way that retains our flexibility to respond to the data, and do so in a way that’s consistent with our earlier commitment, which is to follow an outcome-based policy, not a time-based policy.  For this reason, I very much favor the Chairman explicitly referencing that our central tendency forecast anticipates an unemployment rate of about 7 percent around the middle of next year.  To tie the stopping rule for purchases to an outcome rather than just to a date without highlighting the 7 percent unemployment rate—the market would just be focusing exclusively on two dates:  the start of dialing down, this fall; and the end date, the middle of 2014. I think we need to pull them away from that, back to data, because really the policy works on the fact that it is outcome based.  The more you step away from an outcome-based, data-dependent program back to a time-based program, you’re really moving away from the original conception of this program.  That conception was whatever it takes, and the whatever-it-takes aspect of this program was really important because it really removed the downside risks to the economic outlook because the market participants understood that the Fed was going to be prepared to take away that risk.  We want to do as much as possible to preserve that idea of taking away the downside risk.I also agree with Governor Yellen that characterizing the forecast more broadly is important—not just referencing the 7 percent unemployment rate, but also referencing the growth path that we anticipate at the time.  Remember, when we said this, this was about the labor market outlook.  It wasn’t about reaching a given destination in terms of the unemployment rate.  It was about the fact that we thought that growth was picking up and the unemployment rate would continue to decline going forward.  So I think that some notion of the growth momentum is also important to reference. Finally, I promised yesterday that I would say something about communications.  So I will say something about communications.  There’s no question that some of the backup in yields is just due to the fact that things are changing and the market is starting to anticipate a change in our policy, and that’s unavoidable.  But I think we did, as a Committee, contribute to the backup in yields by not being clear in terms of our communications, and I think we’re relying too much on the Great Communicator to do all the work.  I think the Committee has a responsibility in terms of how we communicate.  I think there are three things that we need to do on communication.  Number one, I think we need to continue to communicate that our actions are dependent on the data, not on time.  I think we need to just be very consistent with that.  Second, I think we need to be clear that the outlook is uncertain.  Even though we’re laying out this baseline path, if things deviate from that baseline path, policy will be adjusted accordingly.  We don’t want to get the market locked into this particular path.  Third, and most important, it’s imperative, in terms of how we communicate, that we don’t undercut the efficacy of our own policy.  This goes to Governor Powell’s comment about not talking about, well, we’re dialing this back because the costs of purchases are so horrible—that’s basically undercutting the efficacy of the policy.  I think thatonce a decision has been made by the Committee, we all should want the policy to be as effective as possible.  And I think what that means is that you should argue vociferously within this venue for the policy that you want, but, once the policy is decided, you should speak in a way that actually makes that policy more likely to be effective and succeed rather than undercut it by telling people why this is the wrong policy, why the policy will result in disastrous outcomes.  I just don’t think that makes sense in terms of what the Committee is trying to accomplish.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains disagreement over certain aspects of the statement and the communication of the Fed's policy. Different members express their concerns and preferences regarding the language used in the statement and the potential impact on the market. There is also debate about the effectiveness and communication of the Fed's policy.


Passage number 265.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, thank you, and thank you for an extremely informative discussion.  Let me try to go sequentially here.  I think there was a pretty clear majority for starting today with communicating these contingent plans through the press conference.  So I propose to do that.  I understand the desire to sort of temporize for another six weeks, but I just don’t think it is feasible, and I think that whatever benefits we would get by slight improvements in the description of our plans would be offset by significant loss of confidence and miscommunication.  This is why I ran this fire drill, which, again, I apologize for—to bring this subject up at this meeting because I thought that it is urgent, so that we take action on this today.  So I propose to give some guidance today in the press conference, and I will come back to that in just a second. If we are not going to put the full description in paragraph 4′ into the statement this time, I guess what I would propose is—I think people were generally happy with alternative B as it stands.  The one area of optionality was the sentence about inflation, the last sentence in paragraph 1 of alternative B.  I think, given that the inflation rate is at a 53-year low or something, that is probably a good enough reason to strike “somewhat.”  But at the same time, I think the sense of the meeting is that while there was a lot of concern about this, that at leastpartly, there were transitory factors.  I would propose that we just adopt President Williams’s language.  Most people didn’t speak to this, so if you are opposed to doing that, please say so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is summarizing the discussion and proposing a course of action based on the majority's opinion. They also suggest adopting President Williams's language without any opposition being expressed.


Passage number 266.
 MS. RASKIN.  Can you repeat the language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. Raskin is simply asking for clarification or repetition of the language.


Passage number 267.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It is right on alternative B.  It’s in blue.  “Partly reflecting transitory influences, inflation has been running below the Committee’s longer-run objective.”  That would be the only change I propose for alternative B—and the red text as included.  Is that acceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their agreement with alternative B and proposing a single change to it, which is seen as acceptable.


Passage number 268.
 MR. LACKER.  And strike “somewhat”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "And strike 'somewhat'" does not indicate any disagreement but rather a suggestion to remove the word "somewhat" for clarity or emphasis.


Passage number 269.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Strike “somewhat,” yes.  On the press conference and on the guidance, I am going to come down with, I hope, a middle ground here.  I have to say that the advocates of the “7 Percent Solution” certainly piqued my interest.  I think the main concern about the guidance that is summarized, for example, in paragraph 4′ of alternative B is that it may be interpreted as either too date contingent or simply deterministic.  And I must say that President Kocherlakota put it very starkly when he said that we are basically choosing alternative C today, which I don’t think most of us want to do.  A solution to that is to have an economic target or an economic stopping rule, which would tie down the integral of purchases pretty well, if we are slowing purchases over time.  I think that would provide some safety because, as I mentioned before, if it took longer than we expected, at least during that extra period, we would be purchasing at a lower rate. The other comment I would make is that we could probably soften it up a little bit to say we would also be looking at other indicators, or something of that sort.  That being said—and if I’m mistaken, I need to be corrected—but in counting noses and looking across the Committee, I saw quite a few folks who felt that this was sufficiently radical that it needs additional work.  AsI say, I would be prepared, I think, and maybe without sufficient caution, to give this a shot this time.  But given what I am hearing, there are enough people who are concerned about taking such a step without more preparation.  And I have already imposed on your goodwill quite a bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing various perspectives and ideas, but there is no explicit disagreement or argument presented.


Passage number 270.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I’m not sure that’s necessarily true.  I think you might have more support for this than you think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses uncertainty and then provides a supportive statement.


Passage number 271.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, Governor Yellen is opposed to action.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no explicit mention of disagreement or contention in the passage. However, it is important to note that the passage is incomplete and lacks context, so a definitive answer is not possible without further information.


Passage number 272.
 MS. YELLEN.  Seven percent as a stopping rule today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a percentage as a stopping rule without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 273.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No, no, soft.  The soft version.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The repetition of the word "no" and the word "soft" suggests agreement or consensus between the speakers.


Passage number 274.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s what I’m going to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states the speaker's intention without expressing disagreement or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 275.
 MS. YELLEN.  Yes, but you were asking about the hard version.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the person being referred to was asking about a specific version.


Passage number 276.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Okay.  I was confused.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement expresses a personal feeling of confusion but does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 277.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’m asking about the hard version now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a straightforward question asking for clarification about the specific version being referred to.


Passage number 278.
  I’m asking about saying— MS. YELLEN.  You’re ready for the hard version.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 279.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No, no.  Soft version.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 280.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let me finish.  I think that it is certainly worth considering saying that we will continue purchases, adjusting as we make progress, but ending when labor market conditions have improved substantially, which will be consistent with about a 7 percent unemployment rate.  Something like that.  I think that would be a good place to go; I think it’s at least worth looking at. That being said, and I am happy to do any votes or whatever anybody wants to do.  What I heard was a lot of concern that we not do that immediately.  So the intermediate strategy, which I would propose—and I invite reactions—is what I called the “soft option,” in which I will saythat we expect to end by midyear.  At midyear, unemployment would be around 7 percent, growth would be solid enough to provide additional job gains, and inflation would be returning to its target—so, a very soft indicator of what we are aiming for.  And then, that could be hardened in July, if that’s where we want to go.  Now, again, I am very open to doing the harder version, but I believe that there is too much opposition at this point.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker is proposing two different strategies ("the soft option" and the "harder version") and acknowledges that there is disagreement or opposition to the "harder version" at this point.


Passage number 281.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think that’s a good middle road for this meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. The speaker is expressing their opinion and suggesting a compromise that they believe is suitable for the meeting.


Passage number 282.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay, all right.  That’s what I’m hearing, so are there others who would like to argue the other side.  President—I did it again—Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply acknowledges a mistake and then asks if there are others who would like to present an opposing argument.


Passage number 283.
 MR. POWELL.  I would just say, I think if you use the number and suggest some softness around it, it doesn’t really matter whether you use the hard version or the soft version—the market is going to hear 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Powell regarding the market's perception of a certain number, without any conflicting views expressed.


Passage number 284.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, if I use the soft version, we will at least have plenty of deniability.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It suggests strategizing to ensure deniability, implying a cautious approach, but it does not involve any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 285.
  [Laughter] MR. POWELL.  There needs to be an answer to the question, “So, is this like a threshold.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statement that suggests contention or disagreement. The presence of laughter indicates a light-hearted atmosphere, which typically does not involve disagreement.


Passage number 286.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  And the answer to the question is, of course, we are looking at many indicators to try to judge substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market; this is indicative of the kind of progress that we would hope to achieve.  But very soft.  Governor Raskin, you look worried.  No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 287.
 MS. RASKIN.  No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Raskin, is responding to a question or comment with a simple "no" answer.


Passage number 288.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  If that’s acceptable, I will do that.  I will also try to respond to Governor Powell’s comment about cumulative progress, about concerns about avoiding a too-predetermined or noncontingent type of strategy.  Again, I realize this is notoptimal, and it is possible that markets may just focus on there being an endpoint.  But I really do think I need to be able to give answers, and, for what it’s worth, I think these answers are approximately where the Committee is—at least the center of the Committee—and, in the end, we have to be straightforward with the markets as best we can.  All right.  Unless there are any further comments about any aspect of what I just said, we do need to take a vote on the statement.  But are there any other comments.  [No response]  All right.  Matt, if you could take a vote on alternative B with the changes in the blue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement where the speaker is explaining their intentions and asking for any further comments before taking a vote.


Passage number 289.
 MR. LUECKE.  Yes.  The vote today will be on alternative B with the language as described on pages 6 and 7, except without the word “somewhat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is providing a factual response to a question and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 290.
”  And on— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions the name of Chairman Bernanke, but there is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 291.
  But including also— MR. LUECKE.  But including the blue and the red.  And it will also be on the directive on page 12 of 13 in the package as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The individuals are simply discussing the inclusion of blue and red elements and referencing a directive on page 12 of 13 in a package.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 292.
 Chairman Bernanke  Yes Vice Chairman Dudley  Yes President Bullard   No Governor Duke   Yes President Evans   Yes President George   No Governor Powell   Yes Governor Raskin   Yes President Rosengren  Yes Governor Stein   Yes Governor Tarullo   Yes Governor Yellen   Yes  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  So, President Bullard, how are you going to explain your dissent in the statement that goes out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The presence of multiple "yes" responses indicates that there is disagreement among the individuals mentioned.


Passage number 293.
  MR. BULLARD.  I am going to say that I think the Committee should show more of a signal that it wants to defend its inflation target from the low side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Bullard, is expressing his personal opinion and suggesting that the Committee should take action to defend its inflation target from the low side.


