Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeAugust 18, 1981A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in theoffices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, August 18, 1981, at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT:Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. Solomon, Vice ChairmanMr. BoykinMr. CorriganMr. GramleyMr. KeehnMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. SchultzMrs. TeetersMr. WallichMessrs. Balles, Black, and Winn, Alternate Members of theFederal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Morris and Roos, Presidents of the Federal ReserveBanks of Boston and St. Louis, respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff DirectorMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Mannion, Assistant General CounselMessrs. Burns, Ettin, Keir, Prell, Scheld, and Zeisel,Associate EconomistsMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, SystemOpen Market AccountMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMessrs. Gemmill and Siegman, Associate Directors,Division of International Finance, Board ofGovernors8/18/8Mr. Lindsey, Assistant Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat,Board of GovernorsMessrs. Czerwinski, Forrestal, McIntosh, and Smoot, FirstVice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of KansasCity, Atlanta, Boston, and Philadelphia, respectivelyMessrs. Balbach, T. Davis, Fousek, and Koch, SeniorVice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis,Kansas City, New York, and Atlanta, respectivelyMessrs. Bisignano, Broaddus, and Syron, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco, Richmond,and Boston, respectivelyMr. Duprey, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank ofMinneapolisMr. Lang, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank ofPhiladelphiaMr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply lists the individuals present at a meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee.


Passage number 2.
 Levin, Manager, Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofAugust 18, 1981CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We welcome Mr. Cross as a new participant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Cross is welcomed as a new participant in the meeting.


Passage number 3.
MR. CROSS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude towards the chairman.


Passage number 4.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments or questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without the passage provided, I am unable to determine if there is any contention or disagreement in the given passage. Please provide the passage for further analysis.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 5.
MR. WALLICH. Sam, in describing the concerted interventionof the Germans as "organized," do you have any information as towhether there was anything more than their urging others to dosomething. Were there rate ideas or quantity ideas put out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests there is contention or disagreement. Mr. Wallich questions Sam about the extent of the German intervention and asks for more information to determine if there were any specific ideas or actions that were implemented. This indicates a disagreement or uncertainty about the level of organization in the German intervention.


Passage number 6.
MR. CROSS. Not that I'm aware of. As I understand it, andof course we don't really have a great deal of information about it,it was more in the nature of urging all the participants to act and toact promptly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Cross is simply providing his understanding of the situation based on the limited information available.


Passage number 7.
MR. WALLICH. Does it look as though they have startedsomething, so to speak--a kind of [organized effort] that can berevived any time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any indication of contention or disagreement. It is simply asking for an observation or assessment of whether a certain effort has been started and if it can be revived in the future.


Passage number 8.
MR. CROSS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. We are only given a person's name, "Mr. Cross," and no further context or dialogue is mentioned.


Passage number 9.
 Well, it involved the EMS and the Swiss. Inaddition, the Germans did talk to the Japanese. I didn't mention theJapanese. The Japanese did undertake some intervention but it wasn'tentirely clear whether they would have done so anyhow or whether itwas part of the German's attempt to mobilize a general effort.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a series of facts without expressing any conflicting opinions or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 10.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think the fact that the Germans areclaiming it was successful implies that they would like to use it as aprecedent from time to time when it's necessary to have what they calla common dollar policy, particularly since we don't seem to intervenein what they consider a disorderly market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates disagreement or contention. The speaker suggests that the Germans are claiming the policy was successful for their own benefit in implementing a common dollar policy, while the speaker implies that they disagree with this approach.


Passage number 11.
MR. CROSS. If we [encountered] another one of thesesituations, it would be perfectly reasonable to expect them to do thesame thing. Some of the Germans, as you know, have not been very keenon a coordinated dollar policy; they've changed their views on thatsubject. So it is significant in that respect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating that if a similar situation were to occur again, it would be reasonable to expect the same actions. They also mention that some Germans have changed their views on a coordinated dollar policy, which is presented as a significant development without expressing approval or disapproval.


Passage number 12.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage simply mentions Governor Partee without giving any information or context that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 13.
MR. PARTEE. Sam, you spoke of the possibility of a freefall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply mentions that Sam spoke about the possibility of a freefall without any contradictory or conflicting statements.


Passage number 14.
 I don't know exactly what you mean by that, but suppose there'sa 10 or 15 percent drop in the value of the dollar in the next month,say, which I guess might be a free fall--MR. CROSS. That fits my definition.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply questioning the meaning of a statement and proposing a hypothetical scenario.


Passage number 15.
MR. PARTEE. There has been a great deal of speculation inthe dollar. Just making an analogy with domestic markets, when thereis a great deal of speculation in one direction, naturally the end ofit comes and when it does there is a stock adjustment. So, I wouldthink you're quite right that there could be a 10 or 15 percent drop--8/18/81using my figure. But what harm would it do if there were a 10 or 15percent drop in the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply speculating about a potential drop in the value of the dollar and discussing the potential consequences.


Passage number 16.
MR. CROSS. I was really thinking in terms of a suddendecline of a very major amount. For one thing, it does develop amongthe participants of the market [a recognition of] the fact that thiskind of thing can happen. It would make the participants, I wouldthink, quite chary about the extent to which they would get in thereand make a market, if it's going to be subject to that kind ofmovement. Even pork bellies have a limit on how much the price candecline. It might in a sense undermine the strength of the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement made by Mr. Cross about his thoughts on a potential decline in the market and the impact it could have on participants.


Passage number 17.
MR. PARTEE. The market mechanism itself could be harmed, youthink.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that Mr. Partee believes the market mechanism could be harmed, without any opposing viewpoints or disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 18.
MR. CROSS. I would think so, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 19.
MR. SCHULTZ. If 10 or 15 percent is a free fall, would italso be considered a disorderly market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking a question and seeking clarification.


Passage number 20.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Normally we would have thought that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 21.
MR. SCHULTZ. We might have before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 22.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In fact, normally we would consider a2 percent drop in half an hour disorderly [unless] there's a specialreason.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, the passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement, and then provides a condition under which the statement may not apply.


Passage number 23.
MR. PARTEE. Well, at an annual rate that's a very high rateof decline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about a high rate of decline.


Passage number 24.
MR. WALLICH. Could we get a little more information on thisdisorderly market. Were you able to observe whether spreads wideneddrastically, whether the two-way market just disappeared and therewere no bids at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 25.
MR. CROSS. Spreads widened and there was a kind ofdiscontinuous market. It moved down to a point and then the nexttransaction would move down the next step, all in the space of a veryfew minutes. There have been newspaper articles on it. People in themarket described it as "madness" and various other lurid words, butapparently it was, at least to participants in the market, somethingthat did shake them up considerably.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing information about a market event and describing how it affected participants.


Passage number 26.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The market is very broad and efficient.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any details or opinions that could indicate contention or disagreement. It simply states a general assertion about the market being broad and efficient.


Passage number 27.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Most of the time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or statements that indicate contention or disagreement. It simply states a general statement without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 28.
MR. RICE. Did I hear you say that the Germans consideredtheir operation a success.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply relaying information.


Passage number 29.
MR. CROSS. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 30.
MR. RICE. Why did they consider it a success.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a question asking for the reason behind considering something a success.


Passage number 31.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot determine without any additional context.


Passage number 32.
 They did check the dollar from moving-2-8/18/81MR. RICE. The dollar moved up afterwards.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply explaining that the dollar was checked and then it moved up afterwards.


Passage number 33.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No, it didn't move up after that. Atthat point it was close to 2.57 and it has been down mostly around the2.50 to 2.52 range. And there were a couple drops down to around2.47.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply provides information about the movement of something and there is no conflicting viewpoint or argument being presented.


Passage number 34.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But it did move up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that something moved up without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 35.
MR. CROSS. It moved up once after the German effort; it wentup from about 2.52 to 2.54 and then I think it went up a littlehigher. But it's now 2.47, so it has declined substantially sincethey first made the effort, and they regard it as a very successfulmove.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents information about the movement of a certain value or metric.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 36.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Since they asked for the concertedintervention, they have to consider it a successful move in a certainsense. It was sufficiently successful, I suppose it could be argued,that one can get away with calling it that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: There is a possibility of disagreement in the phrase "I suppose it could be argued". This suggests that there may be differing opinions on whether the move was sufficiently successful to be considered a successful move.


Passage number 37.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's very hard to argue that this foreignexchange market is operating very effectively at the moment. It hassome analogies with the domestic market in terms of the uncertaintiesand the discontinuities and a lack of confidence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is expressing a viewpoint about the effectiveness of the foreign exchange market, but it is not presenting an opposing argument or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 38.
MR. CROSS. Yes, it seems to have the same problem of nothaving anything it can really hold on to. There are no verities onwhich to operate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing an observation and opinion about a certain problem.


Passage number 39.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And no conviction in it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "And no conviction in it" indicates that there is a lack of belief or certainty, rather than any form of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 40.
MR. PARTEE. The last verity I can remember us discussing atlength was the question of the viability of the dollar/mark rate whenit was 2.00.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker mentions discussing the question of the viability of the dollar/mark rate when it was 2.00, implying that there was a disagreement or debate about its viability.


Passage number 41.
MR. CROSS. [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker's speech is unintelligible, so it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 42.
]VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Actually, it was 1.70.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact, which is that the number in question is 1.70.


Passage number 43.
MR. PARTEE. Well, we thought it was very low when it was1.70, but as it got back to 2.00 we thought that was about right. Andas it got above 2.00, as I recall, we were doing quite a lot ofintervening. So, maybe 2.00 is the right rate rather than 2.47.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the speaker's thoughts and observations about a certain rate.


Passage number 44.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We calculate that just the movementin July alone probably worsened our current account deficit next yearby a further $8 billion. Everybody is looking at this. The Treasuryand the New York Fed and the Board's staff are looking at a projectionin the mid $30 billion area for the current account deficit for nextyear. That's very, very substantial. The largest one we've had was,I think, $18 billion; when I was over at the Treasury it was between$15 and $18 billion. And even though markets now are not paying awhole lot of attention to current account surpluses and deficits, whenthe fashion and the mood change and they go against the dollar, we'regoing to see a lot of stories about this enormous deficit and ourexport orders just going [up].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply provides information about the current account deficit and projections, without any explicit contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 45.
8/18/81MR. PARTEE. That's why I asked the question, Tony. Itseems to me that most analysts would say that the dollar is way toohigh. And it has been bid up there by speculation in these markets.Therefore, why not get the adjustment over with and have a free fall.Wouldn't it be better perhaps to get the rate down to a more crediblelevel quickly rather than very gradually. That's why I raised thequestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. Mr. Partee is suggesting that the dollar is overvalued and should be allowed to depreciate more rapidly, which goes against the idea of gradually adjusting the exchange rate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 46.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, it would have been better. Itcan keep American industry more consistently export oriented if wedon't have such enormous swings, but that requires leaning against thewind. And if we're not going to lean against the wind and we have[the dollar at] these high levels, when a decline comes, it may bebetter from a purely export competitive point of view if it comes in amonth rather than over six months. On the other hand, [a sharp move]is very demoralizing to financial flows and financial markets andpolitically as well, because it doesn't look as if there's muchcooperation left in the system. I think there are tradeoffs on that,Chuck. There are a lot of people who will feel that a rapidlyplunging dollar shows mismanagement by the Administration, and to somedegree by the Federal Reserve, and is an indication that things arenot right in the United States. There is that view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker presents different perspectives and trade-offs regarding the impact of a declining dollar on American industry, financial markets, and the perception of the United States. The passage suggests that there are contrasting opinions on how to manage the situation.


Passage number 47.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there's something we ought to do ifwe get that kind of fluctuation in either direction in my opinion, butwe're not going to solve that this morning. Do you have arecommendation for us, Mr. Cross.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not mention any opposing viewpoints or disagreements. It simply mentions that the issue mentioned will not be solved at that moment and asks for a recommendation.


Passage number 48.
MR. CROSS. [Recommendation--see Appendix.]SPEAKER(.). So, the proposal is to give us enough room toaccommodate the interest receipts for about the next six months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply provides information about a proposal to accommodate interest receipts for the next six months.


Passage number 49.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you're close to the German mark limit,how close are you to the overall limit of $4-1/4 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a factual statement discussing the relationship between the German mark limit and the overall limit of $4-1/4 billion.


Passage number 50.
MR. SIEGMAN. Let me see. We have $3.4 billion in totalholdings at current market value.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This passage simply presents a statement of fact about the total holdings value.


Passage number 51.
MR. CROSS. We're way below.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement of fact or observation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 52.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I raise the question: Why do we have toincrease that limit. I understand the German mark limit, but withthat much leeway in the total, one doesn't follow the other, does it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker raises a question regarding the need to increase the limit, indicating a possible disagreement or lack of understanding.


Passage number 53.
MR. CROSS. The figure of $4.25 billion is made up of $1billion in yen, $2.75 billion in DM, and $500 million in othercurrencies. I assume it would be legal, I'm not sure, to modify themakeup of that in some way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a figure and expressing uncertainty about the legality of modifying it.


Passage number 54.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we don't increase the total, we'reimplicitly reducing the yen limit or the other currencies limit. Isthat what you're saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification or confirmation about a statement made by the other person.


Passage number 55.
MR. CROSS. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage only contains the statement "MR. CROSS. Right" which indicates agreement or confirmation, but not contention or disagreement.


Passage number 56.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't remember the details. Isn'tthere a distinction between the rigidity of the overall ceiling and8/18/81the informal ones. The informal limits are somewhat less legally[binding].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a lack of memory about the details, followed by a question and a statement about a potential distinction between the rigidity of the overall ceiling and the informal limits. There is no conflicting opinion or disagreement presented.


Passage number 57.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As I understand it, all we're talkingabout are the informal limits and this doesn't require any vote. Theformal limit is actually $8 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their understanding of the topic without expressing any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 58.
MR. CROSS. That's correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of agreement.


Passage number 59.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Which we're far from.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Which we're far from" does not indicate any conflict of ideas, but rather a statement of distance or lack of attainment.


Passage number 60.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 61.
 The Commiteee had established [informal] limitsfor each of the currencies, so there is an implicit--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we kept the others the same, then theoverall limit would follow [the increase for German marks]. I don'tthink it would make much difference. Unless we're going to sell somecurrencies, we have to increase the [informal] mark limit anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply presenting a statement and an opinion about potential currency limits.


Passage number 62.
MS. TEETERS. Do you [need] a formal vote on it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Teeters is simply asking if a formal vote is necessary, without expressing any disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 63.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, but I think we need an understanding.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement suggests a need for understanding, indicating a desire for cohesion rather than conflict.


Passage number 64.
MR. WALLICH. Did we ever make clear that this means at bookvalue and not at market value.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply asks if a clarification was made regarding the meaning of "this." It does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 65.
MS. TEETERS. They're recorded at cost.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage because there are no conflicting viewpoints or opposing statements. The statement is a straightforward statement of fact.


Passage number 66.
MR. WALLICH. At cost, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states that something is done at a cost.


Passage number 67.
 If we didn't [use cost], wewouldn't have to raise the D-mark limit, but we might at some timehave to raise it without--MR. CROSS. I assume this is not anything that getsannounced; it's just an informal [understanding].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a hypothetical situation and making an assumption about it not being announced.


Passage number 68.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's right. All we have to dois confirm that there's an informal understanding that we'll increasethese limits by $1/4 billion in order to allow for interest payments.If that's acceptable, we will assume that that is done. There aren'tany transactions to be ratified because there weren't anytransactions. I'm reminded that we forgot to approve the minutes ofthe last meeting at the beginning of this meeting. Could I have amotion to approve them.SPEAKER(.). So moved.SPEAKER(.). Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speakers are discussing the process of confirming and approving certain actions and there is no indication of any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 69.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there's no objection, we'll approve theminutes. We have approved informally that increase in the limits [onour foreign currency holdings]. Mr. Sternlight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement expressing a proposal and an agreement.


Passage number 70.
MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage because the passage does not present any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments. It appears to be a statement made by Mr. Sternlight.


Passage number 71.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments or questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the following passage without actually reading the passage. Please provide the passage for further analysis.


Passage number 72.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There is a significant point orobservation--at least it seems to me significant--that even though it8/18/81was grudging, the fed funds rate did come down somewhat while at thesame time the whole spectrum of [other] short-term interest rates wentin the opposite direction. We don't seem to have as much directinfluence over short-term rates as we did before. There was amovement of the fed funds rate. It's not clear what is causing thissituation except I suppose some of the factors that Peter mentioned.Not all of them apply at this particular point. But I guess the heavyvolume of Treasury borrowing is probably the biggest single factor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents an observation and a possible explanation for a situation.


Passage number 73.
MR. WALLICH. I'd be inclined to welcome that, wouldn't you.If the funds rate were more detached from other rates, the immediateimpact of [a move] in the funds rate resulting from tighter monetarycontrol wouldn't communicate itself so fast and so strongly to therest of the market. It happens that in this case the rest of themarket went in a very expensive direction for the Treasury, and that'snot good. But I think there's no damage in looseness.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 74.
MS. TEETERS. But [now] they're really coming back together.I think other rates anticipated a drop [in the funds rate], whichdidn't occur. And now the federal funds rate and the other short-termrates are coming together again. The other rates were an aberrationfor a period of about four weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that there was a temporary anomaly in other rates, but now they are returning to normal and coming back together with the federal funds rate.


Passage number 75.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But aren't the other short-term ratesstill on the high side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is not indicating any disagreement or contention. It is questioning whether the other short-term rates are still high.


Passage number 76.
MS. TEETERS. They're back to the relationship they normallyhave. The federal funds rate has come back and [other rates] havecome up, so they're together again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states a fact about the current state of the federal funds rate and other rates coming back together.


Passage number 77.
MR. MORRIS. Well, I'd like to put a [question] to Peter: Ifyou're following a nonborrowed path that requires a substantial amountof borrowing at the window, and if the surcharge on the discount rateis 18 percent, why should you expect the federal funds rate to fallbelow 18 percent. It seems to me that it has to stay above.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris is simply posing a question to Peter.


Passage number 78.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think it depends on what that amountof borrowing is, President Morris. If borrowing were up toward that$2 billion level, as it was at the beginning of July, then I wouldthink that 18 percent is very much a solid floor that would be hard topenetrate. As borrowing gets down more toward $1 or $1-1/4 billion,somewhere around that area, there's enough borrowing done by banksthat don't encounter the surcharge that there could be penetration[below] the surcharge rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement that presents different scenarios based on the amount of borrowing.


Passage number 79.
MR. AXILROD. Some econometric work we've done recentlysuggests that the basic rate in some sense is 3/4 of the surcharge and1/4 of the basic rate, in terms of weight. So the basic rate, if wedidn't have a surcharge, was more like, say, 17 [unintelligible] not18 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply presenting some econometric work and suggesting that the basic rate without a surcharge is around 17 percent.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 80.
MR. GRAMLEY. Governor Wallich, I'm not sure at all that oneought to accept the view that a looser relationship between the fedfunds rate and other rates of interest is desirable. If one couldargue that what we're trying to do in the short run is make reservedemand and reserve supply come into balance and one can do that withthe federal funds rate alone, then I would perceive the wisdom of yourargument. But I doubt that that's the case, because very-6-8/18/81fundamentally the demand for reserves depends on the demand fordeposits. And the demand for deposits will depend on a whole spectrumof short-term interest rates other than just the federal funds rate.So, I'm a little concerned about our ability to get where we want togo, not just in the longer term but even in the shorter run, in regardto control of the monetary aggregates if the relationship gets tooloose.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Gramley expresses doubt and disagreement with Governor Wallich's view on the looser relationship between the fed funds rate and other interest rates.


Passage number 81.
MR. WALLICH. Yes, I'm aware of that point. If there were nomovement of other short-term rates in response to the funds rate, itwould be more difficult to control the aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states that controlling the aggregates would be more difficult if other short-term rates did not move in response to the funds rate.


Passage number 82.
MR. PARTEE. Well, it was a very brief period and an awfullot was going on. I don't know that there has been any great change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is reflecting on a brief period of time and acknowledges that a lot was happening without making any contradictory claims.


Passage number 83.
MR. STERNLIGHT. If I could comment just a little further onthat: I think Governor Teeters put her finger on a very importantpart of the reason. By that late June/early July period the shortmarket and the long market, too, to some degree, had gotten ahead ofthemselves, anticipating declines in the funds rate that didn't comeabout. To an important degree it was the disappointment in not seeingthat develop that permitted this apparent anomaly of the funds rategiving some grudging ground but short rates moving up because themarket had expected more of a decline in the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Sternlight, is expanding on a point made by Governor Teeters and explaining the reason behind the apparent anomaly in the funds rate and short rates. There is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 84.
MR. SCHULTZ. I asked for an analysis of 1974 not too longago and just got it this morning. In looking at it, it indicates thatin periods of volatility such as that the relationship among thevarious interest rates changes considerably and very rapidly. So, Ithink Governor Partee's point is accurate. It really hasn't happenedfor very long and it's the kind of thing we probably should expect,particularly at these very high rates with all the volatility goingon. I'm not sure one can read that much into it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Schultz, agrees with Governor Partee's point about the relationship among interest rates changing during periods of volatility and high rates.


Passage number 85.
MR. PARTEE. Peter, you mentioned that the premium for agencyissues, particularly those of FNMA and the Home Loan Banks, has beengoing up. Has it gone notably higher in the last six weeks or so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is asking a clarifying question based on Peter's earlier statement.


Passage number 86.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Most of the widening had already occurred bysix weeks ago, but there was some further widening, maybe another 1/4percentage point or so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 87.
MR. PARTEE. There has been some further widening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a simple statement providing information about some widening that has occurred, without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 88.
MR. STERNLIGHT. We just had a long FNMA issue that soldabout 140 to 150 basis points above the [comparable] Treasury issue.I think six weeks earlier their premium might have been more in thearea of a little over 100 basis points. A more normal [spread], goingback six or nine months ago, might have been more in the area of 1/4to 1/2 percentage point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information about the spread of the FNMA issue over the comparable Treasury issue over time. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 89.
MR. PARTEE. So it's very much more than it has beentraditionally.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee about something being more than it has been traditionally.


Passage number 90.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage provided.


Passage number 91.
MR. PARTEE. And it also has gone up some [more recently].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement is a simple affirmation that something has gone up recently without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 92.
8/18/81MS. TEETERS. Would you explain why you're counting thethrift extended borrowing as nonborrowed reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. The statement is a request for an explanation regarding why the thrift extended borrowing is being counted as nonborrowed reserves.


Passage number 93.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think we are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given statement is incomplete and does not provide any clear indication of contention or disagreement. Without further context or information, it is not possible to determine if there is disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 94.
MS. TEETERS. Yes, but why.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "MS. TEETERS. Yes, but why?" does not express any contention or disagreement. It seems like a continuation or response to a prior statement, rather than an opposing viewpoint.


Passage number 95.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, it is borrowing that's not reallysubject to the pressure on discount window usage that is associatedwith adjustment borrowing. And it's a source of reserves to thebanking system just as though it came out of float or from an additionto Fed holdings of securities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 96.
MS. TEETERS. So, if we get a large volume of extendedborrowing, you'll take that into account as you mark out yournonborrowed reserve path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It is stating a hypothetical situation and discussing how it will be taken into account for marking out nonborrowed reserve path.


Passage number 97.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about contention or disagreement between Mr. Sternlight and any other person or group. It only states that Mr. Sternlight replied with a "Yes," but it does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 98.
MR. BLACK. This is just the way you treated FirstPennsylvania.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests some form of mistreatment or wrongdoing towards FirstPennsylvania, which is likely to prompt disagreement or contention.


Passage number 99.
MR. STERNLIGHT. That is right, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 100.
MR. BALLES. Peter, one question I'm curious about: As welook around the country--certainly in our District and I believenationwide--there's virtually no bank paying the surcharge, as youknow. What I can't quite figure out is why the federal funds rate canget much above 18 percent. As it goes to 19, 20 percent, it's rathercurious, isn't it, that a few more banks wouldn't step in and incurthe surcharge.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 101.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think there's an attitude amongbanks that there's something rather shameful about having to pay thesurcharge. It's like being caught with your hands in the cookie jaror something. So, it's true that there hasn't been very much. Therewas one week or two when there was a fair amount of such surchargeborrowing. But banks making an effort to avoid that is what tends tokeep the funds rate around the surcharge level. And when they aretrying hard to avoid it, as banks seem to have been doing yesterday,for example, they're willing to pay 19 and 20 percent just to stayaway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is describing the attitude and actions of banks towards the surcharge, but there is no direct contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 102.
MR. BALLES. The money desk managers get brownie points fornot incurring the surcharge, but they're not given demerits for payinga point or two above the surcharge. That's a rather curious world.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply highlighting a curious aspect of the money desk managers' incentives.


Passage number 103.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the given passage, there is no contention or disagreement. The response from Mr. Sternlight affirms the statement made before him.


Passage number 104.
MR. CORRIGAN. I think that's why Frank Morris is right,though, when he suggests that even at fairly moderate levels ofborrowing the surcharge rate becomes a de facto floor in terms of thefederal funds rate. The other thing that I think is going on here,and I at least don't fully understand it, is the way that these bankscontinue to manage their reserve positions. If you look at the dailyfederal funds rate over the past three months, we get almost a perfect10-day cycle. It just repeats itself as if it's drawn with a machine.Obviously, that has something to do with the way they're playing the8/18/81game in terms of either letting their deficiency build up or avoidingthe window or something. But the pattern is just incredible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Corrigan, is expressing his agreement with Frank Morris's suggestion and also admits that he doesn't fully understand the banks' management of their reserve positions. There is no indication of any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 105.
MS. TEETERS. 10 working days, Jerry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states the number of working days as being 10.


Passage number 106.
MR. CORRIGAN. These are business days, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Corrigan is simply confirming that the days being referred to are business days.


Passage number 107.
MS. TEETERS. So it's a two-week cycle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a fact about a two-week cycle.


Passage number 108.
MR. CORRIGAN. That's a perfect two-week cycle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only contains a statement without any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 109.
MR. GRAMLEY. How long has it been going on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for the duration of something without expressing any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 110.
MR. CORRIGAN. I just took it back to May.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by Mr. Corrigan is a simple statement without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 111.
MR. BLACK. Is it two weeks or ten days.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 112.
MR. CORRIGAN. Well, the way I have it plotted is tenbusiness days.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 113.
MR. BLACK. Ten business days.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement or response given by Mr. Black without any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 114.
MR. CORRIGAN. But it's a two-week cycle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the length of a cycle.


Passage number 115.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What we appear to get, for whateverreason, is a low federal funds rate, and banks underborrow one weekand then get trapped at the end of the week and that sets up a higherrate. So they say "Oops, the funds rate is higher," so theyoverborrow for a while.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not display any contention or disagreement. It simply describes a situation where the federal funds rate fluctuates and banks alternately underborrow and overborrow to adjust to these changes.


Passage number 116.
MR. GRAMLEY. Even the corn-hog cycle is supposed to bedamped.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the corn-hog cycle being supposed to be damped.


Passage number 117.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] the explosive corn-hogcycle. But this one is neither damped nor otherwise on the chart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is discussing a topic related to the "explosive corn-hogcycle," but there is no clear contention or disagreement present in the passage. However, the clarity of the statement is hindered due to the phrase "Unintelligible" at the beginning.


Passage number 118.
MR. WALLICH. Peter, without implying anything untoward inthe future, what is the part of your portfolio that is reasonablysaleable without great loss or without market disturbance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question being asked by Mr. Wallich.


Passage number 119.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Out of a total portfolio of about $130billion, $49 billion is in Treasury bills, most of them short-termbills. Another sizable amount--I don't have the number at hand--wouldbe short-term coupon issues due within a year. But I would think we'dlook mostly to the bill area if there were a need, for example, toallow for a substantial amount of extended credit borrowing bythrifts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a statement regarding the allocation of funds in a portfolio.


Passage number 120.
MR. WALLICH. That seems to imply [unintelligible] that issomething on the order of 1/2 of the portfolio.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The person speaking is simply stating their understanding of something.


Passage number 121.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The coupons that are under one year, as Iremember, amount to about $12 billion or something like that, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 122.
MR. AXILROD. Something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not contain any statement or indication of disagreement or contention. It is simply an example sentence, and there is no contention present in it.


Passage number 123.
MR. STERNLIGHT. That sounds about right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a simple statement of agreement.


Passage number 124.
8/18/81MR. WALLICH. Well, that would get us about there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact or observation.


Passage number 125.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Coupons are not too easy to get rid of.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement saying that coupons are not easy to get rid of.


Passage number 126.
MR. PARTEE. The Federal Reserve does not have the authorityto borrow, is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of fact.


Passage number 127.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Borrow from whom.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Borrow from whom" is a request for clarification or information.


Passage number 128.
MR. PARTEE. From the public. Issue its notes in the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the entity, referred to as "it," will issue notes in the market.


Passage number 129.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions Chairman Volcker without providing any details or context that would suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 130.
 No, but we can do--MR. AXILROD. We only sell with an agreement to buy back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact or condition for the sale of a product, without any indication of disagreement or argument.


Passage number 131.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" simply mentions a person's title or position without providing any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 132.
 We can do reverse RPs with the other--MR. BLACK. We'd have to call them something other thanFederal Reserve notes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 133.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I didn't mean that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a straightforward statement.


Passage number 134.
MR. BLACK. Commercial paper.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or statements that indicate contention or disagreement. It simply mentions "commercial paper."


Passage number 135.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comment or questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 136.
MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, just as a point of interest:Have we established a rate on the thrift borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple question and does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 137.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, we have not; we'll discuss that atlunch. We have to ratify the transactions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that a discussion is pending and they need to ratify the transactions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 138.
MS. TEETERS. So moved.SPEAKER(.). Seconded.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the statement "So moved" by Ms. Teeters, which suggests that she is proposing or supporting something. The response from Speaker, indicated by the interruption where they say "seconded," suggests that they are opposing or disagreeing with Ms. Teeters.


Passage number 139.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, that is ratified.SPEAKER(.). It should be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "without objection" suggests that there is unanimous agreement or consent, leading to ratification.


Passage number 140.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Zeisel.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage only mentions Mr. Zeisel without providing any information or opinions that could lead to contention or disagreement.


Passage number 141.
MR. ZEISEL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Zeisel is thanking the Chairman, which is a polite and agreeable gesture.


Passage number 142.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe you can go ahead, Mr. Axilrod, andthen we'll discuss the two reports together.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In the given passage, the speaker is suggesting that Mr. Axilrod can proceed with something, and afterwards, they can have a discussion about two reports. There is no explicit or implicit indication of disagreement or contention in this statement.


Passage number 143.
MR. AXILROD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude by thanking the chairman.


Passage number 144.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments. Mr. Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any form of contention or disagreement. The provided text, "Comments. Mr. Roos," is most likely just the heading or title for a section where someone named Mr. Roos provided comments or opinions.


Passage number 145.
MR. ROOS. Steve, in setting both M-1B and M2 targets, whichapparently currently increases [our exposure to] certain incompatiblesituations, aren't we putting ourselves in an almost impossibleposition. Let me phrase it differently. Listening to you, I thoughtyou made a strong case that even though M-1B has some imperfections,8/18/81its imperfections are not overwhelming and that even if we wanted tocontrol M2, certain parts of M2 are beyond our control. What wouldhappen if we just abandoned M2 and told the world why we wereabandoning it and concentrated on M-1B, even though it has someproblems.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement reflecting a conversation where one person is seeking clarification and making suggestions.


Passage number 146.
MR. AXILROD. Well, I'm afraid we're not in a position tocome to that conclusion, President Roos, in my view in any event,because we know that M-1B is not really measuring transactionsbalances--and that's what we're seeking--and we know that M2 ismeasuring a lot more. We don't have an institutional structure thatwould enable us to sharply distinguish transactions accounts fromother accounts. In that environment, I'm afraid there's probablylittle choice but to continue to make judgments about each of theaggregates as we view them and as time goes on--in my view, stillpaying somewhat more attention to M-1B, after making proper allowancefor how one thinks the public is economizing [its holdings oftransactions accounts], but not ignoring the others because we knowthere are shifts occurring between transactions accounts out of M-1Binto nontransactions accounts in M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their own viewpoint and explaining the limitations of the current institutional structure. They are explaining that while there may not be a definitive conclusion, they believe that attention should still be given to M-1B while also considering other factors.


Passage number 147.
MR. ROOS. Hasn't the NOW account phenomenon pretty wellwashed itself out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question about the current status of the NOW account phenomenon.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 148.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, but what I had much more in mind weremoney market funds and overnight RPs; all those sorts of things dohave a transactions account element. One can run a zero balancedemand deposit through these other items. One might even run itthrough things other than what we're measuring. That's one of theproblems. It's very difficult, of course, to distinguish theinvestment element of those very short-term [instruments] from thetransactions element, but they have both.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod is expressing his opinion that it is difficult to distinguish between the investment element and the transactions element in short-term instruments like money market funds and overnight RPs. This suggests that there may be differing perspectives or disagreement about how to categorize and measure these financial instruments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 149.
MR. SCHULTZ. I would tend to argue the other way, Larry,that if we were to target very precisely on just one aggregate, itwould put us even more in a box. The object of trying to target onany aggregate is that it's a proxy for GNP. But the problem isclearly that those relationships are not very tight any more; they aregetting looser and looser. It seems to me that the events that aretaking place argue for looking at a broader range of aggregates andfor having wider target ranges for the aggregates that we look at.Now, that may give us some difficulty in terms of the precision ofmonetary control on a day-to-day or week-to-week basis, but it seemsto me that we'd get into a bigger box if we tried to target on anysingle aggregate and tried to be very precise about it because theserelationships are changing. We could easily get into a situation suchas the British got themselves into by targeting on sterling M3;suddenly they were just way outside of the target ranges and they hadvery serious problems. I, for one, would argue for looking at moreaggregates with broader ranges than for looking at a single aggregateor a very narrow range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker argues against targeting a single aggregate and advocates for looking at a broader range of aggregates with wider target ranges.


Passage number 150.
MR. ROOS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual passage or more context provided. Please provide the actual passage or more information for a more accurate analysis.


Passage number 151.
 I was under the impression, Fred, that theresearch studies that have been done indicate that there is a closerrelationship between M-1B and real output than there is between--MR. SCHULTZ. That's right. But that relationship seems tobe getting looser all the time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not mentioning any disagreement or contention. It is simply discussing the changing relationship between M-1B and real output over time.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 152.
-11-8/18/81MR. ROOS. What bothers me--and I may see it totallyincorrectly--is that a couple of our targets seem somewhatincompatible, just as years ago our interest rate targets werefrequently incompatible with the aggregates targets. One can't steerwith two compasses if those compasses aren't reconcilable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses concern that some targets are incompatible, comparing it to past situations where interest rate targets were incompatible with aggregate targets. This suggests that there is disagreement on how to approach steering with these conflicting targets.


Passage number 153.
MR. WALLICH.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There isn't enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 154.
 But then one would really have to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Still, [would we] be better off with onebad compass. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is posed as a question and does not present any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 155.
MR. PARTEE. I don't want to interrupt this ideologicaldiscussion because I don't want to participate in it except to saythat the work I have seen doesn't indicate that much additionalinformation is gained as we move from M1, or in this case M-1B, to M2.So, I'm inclined to be sympathetic with Larry's point of view. TheCommittee has had very good political reasons for not wanting to betied to one aggregate, and that's another element that would have tobe discussed if we were to go just to M-1B. But I am concerned aboutM2, and particularly the Committee's decision last time to make it aconstraint, because I think there is very substantial exposure here tomissing by a fairly large margin even what the staff now says the M2prospects may be. It's true that we didn't get the wild card[certificate], although we may. I don't know how long it will beuntil there's another court test of that. We did get the small savercertificate, and the early information is that it's selling quitewell. Now, not every dollar of that money has come from other bankdeposits. It just can't be so. It's a good instrument--a 2-1/2-yearterm yielding a high rate of return--and will tend, without anyeconomic meaning, to raise M2 somewhat. But much more important nowis the all saver certificate, which will be sold for three full months[at the end] of this year, October, November, and December. We hadsome off-the-wall staff estimates that I saw that assumed sales of ahundred billion dollars of those certificates. I would think most ofthose would be sold early in the period because of the tax exemptionfeature; one would want to have the full tax exemption period. Sowe're exposed to the possibility of one [M2] element going up likegangbusters in the fourth quarter. True, quite a bit of it will comefrom passbook savings, quite a bit will come from MMCs, and some maycome from money market funds. But, again, I would argue that not allof it will. And that will be another factor tending to raise thenontransactions component of M2 in the remainder of this year. Myconcern last time, and even more so this time, is that if we have aconstraint of that kind, we may find that it is running the ball gamebecause it's going up at 13, 14, 15 percent in the latter part of theyear, yet it doesn't really mean anything in terms of the economy. Weused to cite both aggregates and give more or less equal weight toboth aggregates, and I think that was the better position for theCommittee to be in. That's sort of a policy comment, and I'm sorryabout that, but I was responding directly to the content of Steve'stalk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee is expressing his concerns and opinions about the use of different monetary aggregates, but he does not engage in a debate or argument with anyone else.


Passage number 156.
MR. BLACK. Well, as a practical matter, does the Humphrey-Hawkins legislation really give us the right to abandon one of themcompletely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 157.
MR. PARTEE. I think we could abandon it and explain it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is because the speaker, Mr. Partee, is expressing his own opinion and suggesting a possible course of action. There is no opposition or argument presented.


Passage number 158.
-12-8/18/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage "-12-8/18/81 Governor Gramley" as it does not provide any context or information about any disagreements or conflicts. The passage appears to be a date and a mention of Governor Gramley, without any further details or context.


Passage number 159.
MR. GRAMLEY. I'd like to ask a question of either Steve orJerry, or both, relating to what interest rates are implied by theforecast not just for the next few months but on into 1982. How dothey relate to the interest rates assumed a month ago, particularly ifwe're looking at a situation in which our projections of real interestrates are continuing to get higher and higher and higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a question about the relationship between current and projected interest rates.


Passage number 160.
MR. ZEISEL. Well, we have the expert here, Mike Prell. Ourinterest rate assumptions are for relatively little change from thecurrent rates but Mike can elaborate on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply introduces Mike Prell as an expert who can provide more information on interest rate assumptions.


Passage number 161.
MR. PRELL. Well, there isn't really much more to be saidthan that. We have essentially the same interest rate assumptions inour forecast as we did the last time. In essence, for the currentyear we had some offsetting developments of greater weakness in thesecond quarter than we thought, which lowered GNP for the year in ourforecast, and a lower money stock for this year in light of theCommittee's decision to shoot for the lower end of the M-1B range.And those effects were largely offsetting. We do have on the long-term side some small decline but nothing very meaningful in terms ofreal interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting information about interest rate assumptions and acknowledging some slight changes in the forecast, but they are not expressing any disagreement or debate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 162.
MR. AXILROD. I should add, Governor Gramley, that this againassumes that the Committee wouldn't be rigid in relation to M2. Butif the Committee made M2 the predominant target, let's say, we're notcertain that we could hit even the low end of the M-1B range. Andunder that assumption, I think interest rates would be higher in theshort run and nominal GNP lower in the long run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Axilrod acknowledges that if the Committee made M2 the predominant target, there is uncertainty if they could hit the low end of the M-1B range. This suggests disagreement on the preferred target and its potential impact on interest rates and nominal GNP.


Passage number 163.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  


Passage number 164.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think Lyle is getting at theheart of the issue. If we should get some change in inflationaryexpectations and lower rates, we could see a much lower rate of growthin M2 than we're projecting, although I'm a little fearful that whatChuck suggested might really happen. But it is dependent upon aninterest rate assumption that probably will not hold. If we convincethe public [unintelligible] that we're really serious, I think some ofthose rates will come down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and concerns about potential changes in inflationary expectations and interest rates.


Passage number 165.
MR. PARTEE. Why would lower market rates bring a reductionin M2 growth when it has so many interest-sensitive components.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is a question posed by Mr. Partee seeking clarification on the relationship between lower market rates and a reduction in M2 growth.


Passage number 166.
MR. BLACK. Well, if the rates were lower, I don't thinkpeople would be quite as anxious to go into [M2 deposits].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Black simply states his belief that people would be less anxious to go into M2 deposits if the rates were lower.


Passage number 167.
 They wouldjust as soon--MR. PARTEE. They would spend instead of save.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a viewpoint without any opposition or contradiction.


Passage number 168.
MR. BLACK. Yes, or they'd hold money.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a brief statement without any indication of opposition or conflicting views.


Passage number 169.
 There wouldn't be asmuch incentive to--MR. PARTEE. I see. There'd be more M1 relative to M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It seems to be a statement of understanding or clarification.


Passage number 170.
MR. BLACK. That's what I was thinking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It only shows agreement or similarity in thinking between Mr. Black and the speaker.


Passage number 171.
-13-8/18/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Smoot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage consists of a date and a name, which do not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 172.
MR. SMOOT. Steve, a question: In the directive language,can you define a little more precisely for me what "around the upperlimit" of the M2 range means.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification or a more specific definition.


Passage number 173.
 Is 11-1/2 percent M2 growth, forexample, consistent--MR. AXILROD. That's a policy decision on M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It is simply asking for clarification on whether a certain growth rate is consistent with a policy decision on M2.


Passage number 174.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's getting a little premature.We'll worry about that when we get to the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion but there is no opposition or conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 175.
MR. SMOOT. Well, let me raise a second question if I could.From the standpoint of looking at the federal funds rate, what do youthink the likelihood is under these alternatives of seeing the lowerends of these interest rate ranges--15, 16 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a straightforward question being asked by Mr. Smoot.


Passage number 176.
MR. AXILROD. Well, assuming that the economy doesn't justfall on its face, a very low likelihood.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a hypothetical scenario ("assuming that the economy doesn't just fall on its face") with a very low chance of happening.


Passage number 177.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but you have not provided the passage in question. Could you please provide the passage so that I can analyze it for contention or disagreement?


Passage number 178.
MR. BALLES. In a recent update of some of our staff work, weseem to get the results that M-1B is a better predictor of prices andthat real M2 is a better predictor of real economic growth. It seemsin a way that we have the best of all worlds: undershooting M-1B andovershooting M2. I'm trying to inject some optimism in here. Buthaving said that, I'm really very suspicious of those results. Numberone, I would associate myself with Chuck's comments in that I think wewent a step too far last time in making M2 a constraint on M-1B, and Iwould like to revert to at least the equal weighting that we used touse. I'd also like to ask Steve if the time may be close at hand whenwe should be going back to the drawing board trying to put some fleshon the skeleton that you mentioned on the point that we really oughtto be aiming at a transactions account. I couldn't agree with thatmore. In principle, that's clearly what we ought to do. Has enoughtime elapsed in your opinion, Steve, to be thinking about redefiningthe content of these aggregates, as awful as that proposal may sound.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their suspicion of the results and suggesting some changes or considerations, but there is no explicit disagreement among the individuals mentioned.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 179.
MR. AXILROD. Without going into any detail, PresidentBalles, I think developments in the institutional structure of thedepository system in the country are such as to make that almostimpossible at the moment. I don't want to sound pessimistic, but it'salmost impossible because we don't have a way of separating outtransactions accounts from other accounts. For example, if we forbadeanything to be issued anywhere that was under 14 days in maturity,then we might begin to separate out transactions accounts from otheraccounts. If it was under 14 days, it would be a demand deposit andhave a reserve requirement--to give an extreme example of how we couldmake a separation. But the way things are going now, it's verydifficult to make the separation. We don't even have reserverequirements on money market funds transactions use; that would giveus some automatic separation. But now if money starts flowing out ofmoney market funds, I wouldn't be tempted to think that was demanddeposits flowing out; I would be more tempted to think it wasinvestment money going out. But I wouldn't know. So, we just don'thave any basis for doing that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Axilrod is expressing his view that it is almost impossible to separate transactions accounts from other accounts in the institutional structure of the depository system. He argues that there is currently no way to distinguish between different types of accounts, such as demand deposits and investment accounts. His disagreement is evident in his statement that the current system makes it very difficult to make this separation.


Passage number 180.
-14-8/18/81MR. BALLES. Well, if the Chairman's suggestions on how totreat money market funds were adopted, would that at least helpalleviate the problems of--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the potential effects of adopting a certain suggestion.


Passage number 181.
MR. AXILROD. If they behave as it seems likely they would;that is, if they separate accounts that are primarily transactions andsubject to reserve requirements from those that are primarilyinvestment and are not, then we would have a basis for putting thoseseparated accounts into M1, very clearly. That would be aninstitutional change that would help.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, is simply discussing a potential institutional change that could help in classifying different types of accounts.


Passage number 182.
MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, is there any prospect of thatgetting adopted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply asks a question about the likelihood of a certain outcome.


Passage number 183.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I don't think so. Just to amplify andemphasize Mr. Axilrod's point, we got a proposal for establishing amoney market fund which would be marketed by VISA but conducted by allthe bank members of VISA, which is about--I don't know if I canremember--6,000 banks or more. They would all be able to run thismoney market fund, if they wanted to, on an in-and-out, automatic,daily basis. People could hold their demand deposit at zero or anyother arbitrary figure; there would be no fluctuation in the demandaccount and all the ups and downs would go into the money market fundin half, or much more than half, of the banking system.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply amplifying and emphasizing Mr. Axilrod's point about a proposed money market fund.


Passage number 184.
MR. BRADFIELD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 185.
 Plus VISA would place the resultinginvestments back with the originating bank--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I guess it would be in M3; it wouldn'teven be in M2. It would go right from a transactions account into M3,as presently defined. I can cite you the example of my famous bankerin Tennessee whom I happened to be sitting beside at a dinner somemonths ago--this is a $500 million bank--and he said: "Do you countrepurchase agreements in transactions accounts." I said: "No, butit's a narrow question." And he said they had only begun this twoyears ago in his bank but they have quite a few corporate accounts andthose corporate accounts are swept every day at noon. If they have abalance over the suggested amount, the excess is put into an RPovernight. In two years the RPs were up to 30 percent of their demanddeposits. This was some months ago; the figure is undoubtedly biggernow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and examples without expressing any disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 186.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even though it's very crude, suppose,based on a sample survey, we were to make an estimate periodically ofthe percentage of money market funds that really representstransactions balances. And we'd do it for all these other newinstruments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the hypothetical scenario of making periodic estimates of the percentage of money market funds that represent transactions balances.


Passage number 187.
 Even though it obviously would be only a rough estimate,adding that by either folding it into M-1B or putting it out as aseparate line--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We made an estimate of this sort for moneymarket funds, not on a short-term basis, but looking at the wholefirst half of the year. We made some arbitrary assumptions--well, notentirely arbitrary, but based upon whatever evidence there was fromsurveys, etcetera--as to how much of that could be said to be usedstraightforwardly as transactions accounts, meaning that checks werewritten on them. And the velocity assumptions were such as to makethem, say, comparable to a NOW account. Then we tried to make some-15-8/18/81calculation of how much that affected M-1B and we got 0.9.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining a process of making estimates and calculations.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 188.
 I forgetwhether that is an annual rate or the actual--MR. AXILROD. An annual rate for the first half of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage shows a disagreement or uncertainty about whether the mentioned rate is an annual rate or the actual rate for the first half of the year. This is evident from the statement "I forget whether that is an annual rate or the actual" and the response "An annual rate for the first half of the year."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 189.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But that made no allowance at all for thedegree to which the holding of a money market fund enabled people toeconomize on a transactions account merely by the fact that they heldthe money fund and had that reserve available for instantaneoustransfer. So, undoubtedly, it's an underestimate in terms of itssubstitution effect for transactions balances. That was an arbitrarything which gave us a general order of magnitude perhaps. But wenever get at that second kind of influence. What is a transactionsbalance. I don't know; one can't define it that clearly. But thisdirect substitution effect is even harder to get at than the directtransfer effect, so to speak. So what do we know. It was enough sothat it brought M-1B roughly to the lower end of the target in thefirst half; that just allowed for the increase in money market fundsfrom December through June or the 6-month period in the first half ofthe year. I don't know whether it's quarterly or monthly at thispoint. We can make estimates of that sort, but what confidence do wehave in them and what does it tell us in the end. We have a figurethat's increasingly an artificial construct to start with, even whenwe just take the numbers; and then we begin making these adjustments.The adjustment for NOW account transfers is becoming increasinglyproblematical. I think it was appropriate during the initial stage ofbig transfers; it gave us a much better feel for what was going on.But after six months these transfers have diminished substantially,and I don't know what it means anymore to make this adjustment becauseI'm sure we're now getting transfers out of NOW accounts into moneymarket funds or something as well as transfers in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains disagreement or contention. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and skepticism about the accuracy and meaningfulness of certain adjustments and estimates related to transactions balances and the impact of money market funds on them. They express doubt about the usefulness and validity of these adjustments and question the importance of making them.


Passage number 190.
MR. BALLES. On that score, Paul, even in the most extremecase--if all our sample surveys were off and it turned out that inpractice 100 percent of NOW accounts were coming from demand deposits--the actual M-1B is almost smack in the middle of our range for theshift adjusted M-1B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting a hypothetical scenario but agrees with the data presented.


Passage number 191.
MR. PARTEE. For the shift adjusted M-1B..
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not mention or imply any form of disagreement or contention. It simply mentions a shift adjustment for M-1B without any conflicting positions or arguments.


Passage number 192.
MR. BALLES. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without any further context or information about the passage, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in this sentence alone.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 193.
MR. BLACK. That's what our small bankers think is happening.At every one of our board meetings the two small bankers say peopleare fooling themselves if they think it's coming partly out ofsavings; it's all out of demand. Of course, that's based on their ownexperience and nothing else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that there is disagreement among the small bankers at the board meetings. Two of them believe that the money is all out of demand, while others may have different opinions or experiences.


Passage number 194.
MR. BALLES. My point is that even if that were true, we'renot in bad shape.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 195.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 196.
MS. TEETERS. I just wanted to point out that as I look atthe shifts and the money issues, the things that we can controldirectly are either interest rates or reserves. And we really oughtto turn back to looking more directly at reserves and seeing how theystand out for all these new instruments that are developing and not-16-8/18/81try to get back to actual transactions accounts. That would take alot of research and a lot of education on our part to find out justwhat we would want to do in terms of reserves. We're targeting now,hopefully, on M-1B. Because we don't control M2 directly, it doesn'tseem to me wise to [target M2]. If we get to control M2, we only doit through M-1B, so to make that our major target simply submerges thedecision on M-1B rather than doing it directly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing a point of view and suggesting a different approach to controlling reserves and targeting M-1B instead of M2.


Passage number 197.
 The other thing Iwanted to point out to you is--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Are you saying we should target totalreserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is merely pointing out something to the listener and asking for clarification or confirmation.


Passage number 198.
MS. TEETERS. I think I'm moving slowly in that direction,frankly, simply because I don't know how to cope with all these otherthings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. TEETERS is expressing her uncertainty and lack of knowledge about how to deal with the multitude of other things.


Passage number 199.
 That is the one thing that we do have some [control]--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, with all respect--I don't want toprolong this discussion--I don't understand the point analyticallybecause the reserves are simply a reflection of currency and M-1B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their lack of understanding and seeking clarification on a certain point, but there is no argument or disagreement present in the statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 200.
MS. TEETERS. I realize that. On the other hand, it alsogets us out of having to judge between what we're going to target on.But, with all due respect, may I point out that in February the [long-run] targets for M-1B and M2 were not consistent and they've becomeeven more inconsistent. Relative to the midpoint of M-1B, [theCommittee] put the M2 midpoint too low. It's not at all surprisingthat one is at the bottom and one is at the top. It's just that theyare more at the bottom and more at the top than we anticipated theywere going to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker points out inconsistencies and discrepancies in the long-run targets for M-1B and M2, suggesting that there was an error in judgment or calculation.


Passage number 201.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 202.
MR. WALLICH. Well, I think there is some way of looking atM-1B and trying to find out how much it is misleading us. Theadjustments one can make by adding the money market mutual funds insome degree and overnight RPs and Eurodollars are pretty arbitrary,but they give us some guide. But more than that, if we assume thatvelocity is moving at a reasonable rate with respect to what M-1Breally is effectively--that is, after adjustments--by holding velocityon a constant trend, allowing for interest rate changes, then we wouldfind out what M-1B would be if there weren't these shifts; and therest I think logically should be ascribed to a demand shift. Stevehas described that something like this may well be going on. It seemsvery characteristic that when M2 is very high and M1 very low, thereobviously is something happening to one of the two; normally they moveclosely together. Something could be distorting both, but it does notseem implausible that it's M-1B that is being distorted by a rapidvelocity change, a reduction in demand due to the substitution ofother assets, and that, therefore, we have to treat M-1B verycautiously.Another check of the same question is to look at interestrates. If interest rates were behaving in a totally outlandish way,one would assume that they were being pulled away by the aggregates.But that doesn't seem to be happening; they're very high, but not allthat out of line with projections. So, whatever is distorted aboutthe aggregates is probably a distortion of the aggregates and not areal effect, if I may put it that way. Now, the rates we have-17-8/18/81evidently are too high for some sectors of the economy and are notvery restraining on others. That is what leads me to think thatthey're not outlandish and may be regarded as about normal for thislevel of inflation. Lyle makes the point that at falling rates ofinflation these same nominal rates are becoming heavier in real terms;and that's certainly true if inflation is coming down. Against that Iwould look at the expectations seemingly embodied in rising bondyields; the buyers and also the sellers of those bonds don't seem tohave much confidence that inflation is coming down, so they'reprepared to tie themselves to what seem to be very high real rates,possibly on the expectation of rising inflation. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It is primarily a discussion of different factors that may be distorting the measurement of M-1B and how interest rates are behaving. The speaker presents different viewpoints and considerations, but there is no direct disagreement.


Passage number 203.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've had no comments on the businesssituation, which I would suggest we have to look at a bit in order toresolve these imponderables about which direction we want to go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It suggests the need to look at the business situation in order to resolve uncertainties and determine the direction to take.


Passage number 204.
MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, we have been sitting around waitingfor a recession to happen now for a good many years, and I couldn'thelp but notice driving down yesterday that Lordstown, which is one ofthe large GM operations, had probably the fullest parking lot I'veseen in the last five or six years in terms of employees' cars.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply making an observation about the full parking lot at Lordstown, a GM operation.


Passage number 205.
MR. PARTEE. The employees having the new ones.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about disagreement or contention among the employees. It simply mentions that they have new ones, without indicating any conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 206.
MR. WINN. That's right. This may just be a temporary build-up, which could be shut off quickly when the cars don't sell, but Iwas interested in the obvious employment there. Secondly, I amsurprised in talking with my business friends how few of themappreciate that the corporate tax benefits are effective in 1981, not1982. They were effective on January 1, 1981 and we may have somerealizations on that score that give rise to some activity in thefall. On the other hand, when the realization hits of the size of thedeficit inherent in the present tax and spending programs, we may getsome reactions the other way based upon the amount of budget cuts thatstill have to be made, if they are going to be anywhere close to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 207.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We had no comment on the budgetary deficitin the presentation, as I recall. You might say a word about that,Mr. Zeisel.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they did not comment on the budgetary deficit in the presentation, but suggests that Mr. Zeisel may want to mention it.


Passage number 208.
MR. ZEISEL. The budgetary deficit is not one of all joy.The Administration has moved to adjust upward its estimate of thefiscal '82 budget [deficit] to about $60 billion from what had earlierbeen $40 plus billion. Our estimate is a deficit of about $88 billionfor that period. The major differences are the assumptions, or shallwe say conclusions, regarding the state of the economy and itsimplications for spending and receipts, and we have some higherassumptions for interest rates as well. On an NIA basis, as we moveto the second half of '82 calendar year, we really begin to see theeffect of the second stage of the tax cut--that is, the 10 percentphase that comes in on July 1 of '82. And we have a deficit that runsabout $150 billion on an NIA basis for the second half of '82. That'sa very substantial shift in those terms and in high employment termsas well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 209.
MR. CORRIGAN. You have total borrowings, including theagencies, next year at what: $108 billion or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 210.
-18-8/18/81MR. ZEISEL. $106 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 211.
MR. GRAMLEY. It's $106 billion. That's fiscal year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a statement of fact, stating the amount of $106 billion for a specific fiscal year. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the statement.


Passage number 212.
MR. ZEISEL. That's fiscal year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 213.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to definitively determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 214.
MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, you invited some comments aboutthe economy and I just asked a question earlier. I would like to saya few things about where the economy is going. Basically, the staffhas the right handle on the immediate future. I'm not so sure aboutthe longer-term future, but then I really don't see how the kinds ofreal interest rates we're projecting can be tolerated for that long aperiod of time. But quite clearly, there is not a recession underway. We have an economy that is quite flat, with a lot of mixedsignals coming in from different sectors and a lot of geographicaldiversity. I see evidence of substantial improvement on the inflationfront, a good deal more than I had expected over the course of thispast year. I don't think we can say anymore that we don't have anysigns of improvement in the underlying rate. We are seeingsignificant signs of wage moderation. I'm going to reserve judgmentuntil I see the employment cost index for the second quarter before Idecide how much, but there is quite clearly improvement under way.And I think expectations about inflation are changing; I just don'tthink one can look at what has been happening or talk to the businesscommunity and say that they aren't changing. I don't get the sameimpression from talking to businessmen now that I did six months ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is sharing their own perspective and observations about the economy, but there is no indication of disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 215.
And when you put those--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You talk to different businessmen than Ido.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 216.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, that may be. I put this evidencetogether and I don't come to the conclusion that Governor Wallichdoes: That because bond rates got high, we shouldn't worry too muchabout that because that means expectations of inflation are stillstrong. If expectations of inflation are improving and our operationsare keeping short-term rates at historic peaks, then one has to expectthat long-term rates will stay there too, until such time as short-term interest rates begin to come down. So I think we ought to belooking more carefully now at what is happening to interest rates thanperhaps we have needed to up to this point because the behavior of themoney aggregates is becoming increasingly difficult to interpret. Andwhen we have difficulty interpreting the aggregates, I think it'sincumbent upon us to see what signals interest rates suggest about theimpact of monetary policy on the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is offering their own analysis and interpretation of the situation, but it is not in direct opposition to Governor Wallich's view.


Passage number 217.
MR. SCHULTZ. How do we do anything about interest rates whencredit demands are the way they are. What did you estimate that theTreasury has to [raise] in the fourth quarter, counting sponsoredagencies--$41 billion. These credit demands are very disturbing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no specific contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing concern about credit demands and their potential impact on interest rates, but they are not directly disagreeing with anyone or presenting a conflicting viewpoint.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 218.
 Idon't know how in the world we make--MR. GRAMLEY. I bet our staff's estimates of total creditflows for the last half of this year as a proportion of GNP arenowhere near the peaks that we have seen in past years. Isn't thatright. These numbers look big because we have a huge deficit in the-19-8/18/81federal budget. And one of the major reasons, though not the onlyreason, we have a huge deficit in the federal budget is because theeconomy has been very sluggish and revenue growth has been slow. Ican recall the same sort of argumentation going on in the first partof 1975 when people said it was impossible to bring interest ratesdown because the federal deficit was so big. The federal deficit isnot the only factor that affects the interest rate. It's one of them.But a major reason why interest rates are high is because we have hada monetary policy that has been very, very tight in the context of aneconomy that has been relatively strong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker and Mr. Gramley have different views on the main factors causing the high interest rates. The speaker suggests that the tight monetary policy is a major reason, while Mr. Gramley argues that the federal deficit is also a significant factor.


Passage number 219.
 But it's an economy that isshowing a lot more signs of weakness, an economy that is looking--MR. SCHULTZ. That's the point, though: Unless the economyslows or the deficit comes down, how do we get the credit demandsdown.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 220.
 I don't see how there is much--MR. GRAMLEY. Well, you work on the supply side; that's theanswer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker does not see how there is much and is followed by a statement from Mr. Gramley that agrees with the previous statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 221.
MR. PARTEE. The funds raised by nonfinancial sectors in thethird quarter are estimated at 12 percent of GNP. That was 15-1/2percent in the fourth quarter of last year and it was 18 percent in1979; it's really quite a low number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker presents decreasing numbers over time to indicate that the funds raised by nonfinancial sectors are low.


Passage number 222.
MR. WALLICH. It doesn't seem to correlate very well withinterest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Wallich, is simply expressing his observation that there is not a strong correlation between the subject being discussed (presumably something related to interest rates) and interest rates themselves. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 223.
MR. SCHULTZ. But, Governor Gramley, would you not agree thenthat if the Fed were to be seen as pumping out reserves at a rapidrate, it would have a severe expectational impact and would, in fact,put upward pressure on interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: There is disagreement in the passage. While Mr. Schultz suggests that pumping out reserves at a rapid rate would have a severe expectational impact and put upward pressure on interest rates, the response of Governor Gramley is not mentioned. Thus, there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 224.
MR. GRAMLEY. I don't agree with that. What I believe hashappened in the past that has led people to that thought is that whenwe've had very, very large increases in the stock of money, it hasprimarily come from the demand side. And the markets have reckonedwith the fact that they know we are going to lean hard against thatand, therefore, that interest rates will begin to move up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. This is indicated by the phrase "I don't agree with that" which suggests that Mr. Gramley has a differing opinion or perspective on the topic being discussed.


Passage number 225.
MR. WALLICH. There is one factor in the level of interestrates that we seem to overlook sometimes. At the time we set thesetargets [for the aggregates], we looked at GNP projections. We firstmade these decisions in July of 1980. The projections were under [theactual outcome] for the first half of '81 by about $170 billion, ofwhich $50 billion was due to a revision in the numbers. The other$120 billion or thereabouts was the result of a stronger economy inthe fall of '80 and early '81. So, the economy is much bigger [thanwe projected]. And the money supply also has slipped because we usedthe base drift at the end of 1980 to start from a higher base than wecould have anticipated when we set those targets. Nevertheless, theeconomy has moved well beyond the targets as we thought of them whenwe set the ranges in July 1980, so that has probably introduced somecontinuing interest rate pressure. I say that just as a comment onwhy the rates are so high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing an explanation for why interest rates are high. They mention factors such as the larger-than-expected economy and a slip in the money supply, which may have contributed to the high interest rates.


Passage number 226.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only provides information about a person named Mr. Corrigan, without any conflicting opinions or ideas being expressed.


Passage number 227.
-20-8/18/81MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, I'll just make a couple ofcomments on inflation and the business situation. On inflation, Iwould align myself with Governor Gramley; if anything, I think we havebeen guilty perhaps of underselling even where we are, much less wherewe might be. In that regard, I would point to food and energy priceswhere there is a tendency to pass them off as transitory technicalfactors; but even in those areas monetary policy and high interestrates have had a bearing and have reinforced the underlying marketforces that have been working. So, I do feel better on that score.Looking [ahead] on the inflation situation, I get the clear sense fromboth my own staff and from some of the people in the District that thefood prices, while they will show some acceleration, may not show thekind of acceleration that the staff is suggesting over the balance ofthe year. Certainly, I can't find anybody who agrees with the latestAgricultural Department estimates of food prices over the balance ofthe year. So we may have a little more good fortune going our way inthat respect than some are suggesting. There is another aspect of thestaff's analysis of prices that I just can't reconcile, and that isthe data that they are still finding on home prices. Nothing that Irun into of an anecdotal nature supports anything like the 8-1/2 or 9percent increases in home prices that your raw statistics are stillpointing to. So there, too, things may be a little better.A couple of other developments have come to my attention. Iam beginning to see a lot of scrambling in state and local governmentsas they begin to assess the implications of this change in budgetpolicy on their problems in the near term, both in terms of taxationand their own spending policies. I would also say that the hightechnology firms in the Minneapolis area report to me that there hasbeen a very, very sharp increase in defense activity, even over thelast month. None of that has yet gotten to the point of contractsigning, but there is a tremendous increase in the amount ofdiscussion and negotiation on what seem to them to be majorcommitments in the defense area. On this deficit question, I wouldjust add that while we can all dance on the head of a pin here as towhat it means and what percent it is and all the rest, to me it is amajor overhang both in the markets and in the perceptions of businesspeople and consumers in the public at large in terms of what is goingto happen to the economy and interest rates over the next 6 to 12months. Notwithstanding whether the economics and the theory of itare quite right, that clearly is the impression I get, no matter whomI talk to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a series of comments and observations made by Mr. Corrigan.


Passage number 228.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Zeisel, we have gotten some retailtrade figures recently and some inventory figures since the GNPfigures came out. Do you have assumptions regarding that. When dothe new GNP figures come out--next week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply presents a series of statements and requests for information, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 229.
MR. ZEISEL. Yes, it should be next week. Well, GNP comesout on the 19th, which is tomorrow. The retail sales figures came outwith a 1.3 percent increase, but a very substantial amount of thatgain was a rebound in car sales from the very low post-rebate level ofactivity. The sales rate in any realistic sense is still very weak.It is sufficiently weak to result in producers adjusting down theirassembly rates significantly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information about the retail sales figures and the impact of car sales on the overall increase. They also mention that the sales rate is still weak, leading producers to adjust their assembly rates down. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented in this passage.


Passage number 230.
 Excluding automobiles and householdrepair kinds of expenditures, retail sales were about unchanged incurrent dollar terms between---21-8/18/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The numbers were higher than what the BEAstaff thought when they made the [first] GNP estimates. I'm justasking a technical question: Are they likely to revise the GNP numberup or down or sideways.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents information and asks a technical question about the potential revision of the GNP number.


Passage number 231.
MR. ZEISEL. It looks as if there is about a balance as faras the GNP figures are concerned. There were some upward revisions inretail sales, and some downward revisions in housing are likely; ingeneral it appears as though it might well be a wash and end up closeto what we have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply presents the speaker's observation and assessment of the situation.


Passage number 232.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or statements that suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 233.
MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, as we look around our Districtand talk to directors and other business people about businessactivity, we see a very mixed picture. It's pretty clear that theeconomy in the Sixth District is softening, as I suppose it is in mostother parts of the country, but it's not entirely clear that that istrue throughout every sector of economic activity. For example, totalemployment and retail sales have been fairly buoyant in the veryrecent past. Nobody I have talked to expects any kind of majorrecession at all and, in fact, there is some feeling that businessactivity is going to pick up in the fourth quarter and certainly inthe first and second quarters of next year. Part of this reflects asense of optimism now on the part of business people and bankers as aresult of the President's tax cut victories in Congress.On the inflation front, we certainly have made a lot ofprogress and people do tend to recognize that progress, but I thinkinflationary psychology and expectations are still very much in theforefront of people's minds. And to a large extent they are taking await-and-see attitude toward what the Federal Reserve is going to do.On that score, just looking ahead a little to the policy decision, onthe basis of my conversations with people, I think any interpretationby business people and the markets that we are easing either on M-1Bor M2 is going to continue to fuel inflationary expectations. I thinkour credibility is very much on the line at this particular point.One of the things that really troubles people in our area ofthe country, and I suppose other places too, is the plight of thethrift institutions. There is a good deal of concern, particularly onthe part of bankers, that there is going to be a spillover effect ifeven smaller institutions get into trouble. The S&Ls themselves inthe Sixth District are in a little better position, I believe, thanthose in other parts of the nation. But even so, it's a matter oftime; they are looking down the barrel of the rifle, as they put it.So, that is a source of real concern in our area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing their observations and opinions about the economy and expressing concerns about certain issues.


Passage number 234.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are approaching 11:30 a.m. I haveabout four people on the list at this point: Governor Partee,Governor Rice, Mr. Winn, and Mr. Balles. Do you have short statementsor long statements.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information about the list of people they have and asking a question about the length of statements.


Passage number 235.
MR. PARTEE. I don't have it written down. I don't know howlong it will be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that Mr. Partee does not have something written down and does not know how long it will be. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 236.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're next on the list, so you ought tomake up your mind right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: The use of the phrase "You ought to make up your mind right now" suggests a sense of urgency and assertiveness, which can potentially lead to contention or disagreement if the person being addressed has a different opinion or wants more time to decide.


Passage number 237.
-22-8/18/81MR. PARTEE. Well, I just wanted to agree with Lyle, in thatI don't think there's evidence of a cumulative decline in business nowsetting in. It's very difficult to tell whether we are in a recessionor not because we have had zero growth for ages, and we have itprojected for ages to come. Of course, that is made up of strongersectors and weaker sectors; if you happen to be in a weaker sector yousurely think there's a recession. But the fact is that I don't see acumulative decline taking place, barring a financial catastrophe ofthe kind Bob Forrestal mentioned. That is, assuming we can hold thefinancial system together, I don't think there's a major recession athand. The big thing is this fiscal change, which I just want toemphasize again. There's a tremendous amount of fiscal stimulus inprospect; it starts right now and grows and grows and grows over time.And people will come to recognize that, as Willis says, and will takeit into account in their spending plans. So, what we get is adifference in the fiscal/monetary policy mix, as we used to refer toit, which is quite a bit wider than anything I can recall. I think itmeans that the areas that are affected by monetary policy are going tobe in a permanent depression and the areas that benefit by tax cuts--and they are a little harder to tell than just the specific spendingthings--will be supported by that. But I think the staff's view ofabout a zero rate of gain in real activity for some considerable whilein the future is a pretty good basis for the Committee to operate onin deciding its policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing their own views on the current state of the economy and future prospects, without mentioning or contradicting any other specific viewpoints.


Passage number 238.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we better quit for a short coffeebreak.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement simply suggests that it would be a good idea to take a short coffee break. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 239.
[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement mentioned in the passage. It simply mentions that Governor Rice is taking a coffee break.


Passage number 240.
MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, most of what I'd planned to say hasalready been said, so I can be very brief. I agree with earliercomments that the staff's projection seems to be the most probableoutcome. The only area where I could imagine some possible deviationis in the consumer spending projection. It seems to me possible that,based on expectational and improved confidence factors, there could behigher growth in consumer spending than is forecast. Despite therecent data on employment, retail sales, and industrial production, itappears that there is still considerable slack in the economy, evensluggishness. At the same time, as has already been pointed out,there is no evidence of any marked tendency toward deterioration orfurther weakening or of cumulative weakness. With the unemploymentrate stable at the present time and perhaps even declining mostrecently and with inflation easing as it certainly appears to be, theeconomy would seem to be behaving pretty much as I think one wouldlike. The trick seems to be how to keep it behaving this way. And inmy judgment we wouldn't keep it behaving this way by furtherrestraining growth in the aggregates, nor would we keep it behavingthis way if we try to force interest rates down. Now, that doesn'tmean that I would not like to see interest rates come down; I would.But I don't think they should come down as a result of changing ourshort-run or even longer-run monetary objectives. Rather, I wouldprefer to see them come down as a result of developments in theeconomy. I think the best chance of keeping things delicatelybalanced, as I believe it was described, is to stay with the monetary-23-8/18/81objectives we've stated in the targets and try to maintain FederalReserve credibility to the extent possible.Obviously, at the present time we don't think we can keepboth M1 and M2 within our target ranges. I would favor, at this timeat least, giving at least equal weight to M-1B [and M2] and not havingM2 as a constraint. If we tried to constrain the growth of M2, thatwould further restrict our monetary growth objectives and would ofcourse run the risk of significantly higher interest rates--higherinterest rates that we do not need at the present time. So, I wouldfor the moment try to stick with the objectives that we adopted at thelast meeting. I would not restrict them further. That has the effectof pushing M-1B closer to the lower bounds of the target range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Rice agrees with earlier comments and mostly agrees with the staff's projection. The only area of possible deviation is in the consumer spending projection. However, there is no explicit disagreement or contention presented.


Passage number 241.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I need more information in order to provide an accurate answer. Could you please provide the passage or context?


Passage number 242.
MR. WINN. Just one comment, Mr. Chairman: I'm not sure Iunderstand completely the economic implications of the redistributionof the retail sales figures, in which the upper end of the price rangeis the big factor in supporting sales and the lower end is having areal struggle. When you add on to that the implications of the taxbill, I think we're seeing a rather widespread shift in thedistribution of income and I'm not sure I understand all the economicimplications of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing his own uncertainty and lack of understanding about the economic implications of certain situations.


Passage number 243.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, with that confession of ignorance--widely shared, I'm sure--we'll go to Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement acknowledging a lack of knowledge and transitioning to the next topic.


Passage number 244.
MR. BALLES. You asked for some comments on businessconditions. Just to give you a thumbnail sketch as far as the WestCoast is concerned--Governor Gramley really put his finger on it alittle while ago for the whole country--we have big geographicaldifferences and big industry differences. I would underscore that bysaying that the crosscurrents that exist on the West Coast are justabout as strong as I have ever seen. Our lumber and forest productsconcerns are in very poor shape, obviously, and they are justscreaming for some kind of relief. The auto industry, of course, isin very bad shape as it is around the rest of the country. In prettygood shape are companies that are active in defense work, energycompanies, and commercial construction in some of our bigger cities.Electronics firms are going strong and the aerospace business is instable condition right now, neither going uphill nor downhill. InCalifornia, agriculture, the biggest single industry--about a $14billion industry--is under an extremely serious threat from theMediterranean fruit fly. It has us all pretty darn concerned, withthe recent action of Japan, for example, of putting an embargo on ourexports of fruits and vegetables. California supplies about half ofall the fruits and vegetables in the country. The rest of you mightfind prices going up a little if we don't get this problem undercontrol. It's a very serious problem. I don't know if it's going toget licked or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply giving a description of different industries and their current conditions on the West Coast.


Passage number 245.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 246.
MR. KEEHN. To add a very negative note, but certainly oneyou've heard with some consistency from the Middle West, our basicindustries continue to be very, very hard hit and are reallydeteriorating further. I'll just comment on a few. On the automotive-24-8/18/81side, which we've talked about at some length, I think any improvementthat has occurred in auto sales really is a result of rebates. I'mtold that the rebate structures that now exist and will be put inplace in the near future cannot be afforded by the industry but theysimply have to use them. On the capital goods side, machine tools arevery, very soft; farm equipment is down again, of course;construction equipment is grim and I'm told that among some of thesmaller companies in that industry bankruptcies are coming becauseenough has taken place that nothing can really turn them [around].Railroad equipment [manufacturing] isn't just slow, it has all butstopped. It's an industry that is in really deep trouble. On theagricultural side, though production is up, which ought to bode wellfor prices, interest rates are having a negative impact on the cost ofcarry for that industry as well. Net, with regard to the Middle West,there's a growing fragility, if you will, in the system. At somepoint I think we are going to see some bankruptcies erupt across someof the industries that are the most troubled, and the fabric will betorn in such a way that it's very possible we will not get the kind ofrecovery that we need for good sustained growth. So, the word fromthe Middle West is really one of a very somber outlook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents a negative outlook for various industries in the Middle West, suggesting that they are deteriorating and facing potential bankruptcies. This contrasts with a more positive outlook for production in the agricultural sector, which is offset by the negative impact of interest rates on the industry.


Passage number 247.
MR. SCHULTZ. What's the story on International Harvesterright now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a question asking for information about International Harvester. It does not show any signs of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 248.
MR. KEEHN. If you're asking about the credit, they have notcompleted the renegotiation of credit. Some banks are giving them avery difficult time on it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.
Explanation: The passage depicts disagreement as it mentions that some banks are giving the company a hard time in completing the renegotiation of credit.


Passage number 249.
MR. RICE. If things are so bad in the Middle West, whyhaven't they fired more people.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Rice is asking a question about the number of people being fired in the Midwest, but there is no opposing view or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 250.
MR. KEEHN. Well, employment is down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of fact stating that employment is down. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 251.
MR. RICE. Is it down substantially.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question and does not involve conflicting opinions or views.


Passage number 252.
MR. KEEHN. It's down 4 percent as compared to '79, and thatwould be substantially lower than the rest of the country.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any clear contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement about a percentage decrease in comparison to another year.


Passage number 253.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you see declining house prices inCalifornia, John.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 254.
MR. BALLES. Not absolute declines; we see a severe taperingoff of the rate of increase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a fact or observation.


Passage number 255.
MS. TEETERS. How about Chicago. Do you see house pricedeclines in Chicago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. TEETERS is simply asking a question about house price declines in Chicago.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 256.
MR. KEEHN. I can give you an anecdote: I just bought ahouse and there has been no decline in the prices. Seriously, I thinkthe rate of increase is clearly being tempered. Sales of houses,particularly in the middle price sector, are very, very slow and theprices are beginning to come down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that they recently bought a house and have not experienced a decline in prices. However, they also mention that sales of houses, particularly in the middle price sector, are very slow and prices are beginning to come down. This suggests a difference in opinion or perspective on the state of the housing market.


Passage number 257.
MS. TEETERS. What kind of financing is going on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not mention any specific financing method or discuss different opinions or arguments related to financing. It simply asks a question about the type of financing without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 258.
MR. KEEHN. 17 percent plus 3 points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a numerical value.


Passage number 259.
-25-8/18/81MR. BALLES. In California we had that court decision calledWellenkemp which precluded the enforcement of due-on-sale contracts.There is a lot of creative financing going on; it's the only thingthat's keeping things alive at all--[that and] the assumption of old,low rate mortgages.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 260.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the following passage without having access to the passage itself.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 261.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I've been a little puzzled by thesevarious statistics showing more strength than I [anticipated]. Itseems to me that both consumer and business pessimism is at a fairlyhigh level right now. I know it was particularly marked at ourdirectors meeting this last time; almost everybody there waspessimistic for some reason or other. And there was a very sombernote in the Redbook this time. Also, the point that Si just madeabout bankruptcies is part of the tip of the iceberg; there may besome repercussions when some of these begin to appear, as theyinevitably have to, with the small business situation and the highrates that people are paying. So, my guess is that the apparentstrength in employment and sales in July may be temporary. We've hada pretty sharp deceleration in the aggregates, and real interest ratesare pretty darn high, so I would expect the economy to weaken somewhatfurther in the third quarter. I think the staff's forecast of anessentially flat economy in the third quarter is about the best thatwe could expect and my guess is that it will be a little weaker thanthat. But looking at it out a little further, I think we might get alittle more rebound than they are projecting, too, particularly ifinflation continues to moderate. If this sluggishness in economicactivity that I think might happen does materialize, there ought to besome downward pressure on interest rates and that ought to help. Andif we can get any significant move toward deregulation, that's afurther factor. So, I guess I'm pessimistic in the short run butmaybe a little more optimistic in the long run than [the staff].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black expresses his disagreement with the various statistics showing more strength than he anticipated. He believes that both consumer and business pessimism is at a high level, which contradicts the apparent strength in employment and sales. He also disagrees with the staff's forecast of an essentially flat economy in the third quarter, stating that he expects it to be weaker. However, he also mentions that he might be more optimistic in the long run if inflation continues to moderate and if there is deregulation.


Passage number 262.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: In the given passage, there is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 263.
MR. BOYKIN. In the Eleventh District, we continue to enjoy alittle stronger economy than other parts of the country. In terms ofhousing, houses are still selling down our way. Of course, we havepeople coming in all the time. I've not seen anything that wouldresemble a price decline. Commercial construction has been verystrong, as you know. The interesting thing there is that for thefirst time I have heard a couple of fairly large developers say theyare beginning to wonder if there might be a bit of overbuilding inHouston and Dallas, and I haven't heard that kind of comment at all inthe last several years. Automobile sales are not all that strong butthey're probably not as weak as in other parts of the country. On theagricultural side, I have been told, particularly in regard to the[feed]lots, that the cattle going in are going to come out at losssituations now. On the big ticket items you talked about on retailsales, that's the business is in; he calls meabout once a month and he says nothing is slowing down. Their salesare really still going strong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information about the state of the economy in the Eleventh District and various sectors, without expressing any conflicting opinions or contradicting statements.


Passage number 264.
MR. SCHULTZ. What does say aboutcommercial construction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It simply states "MR. SCHULTZ. What does it say about commercial construction."


Passage number 265.
-26-8/18/81MR. BOYKIN. He is one of the ones who is thinking out loudthat we may be into an overbuilt situation for a year or two. I don'tthink it's interfering with what he is doing. He's completing aWe have 7 buildings underconstruction in downtown Dallas that are 40 stories and above. Twomore have been announced that are going to be 70 stories each plusabout a thousand room hotel along with it. Plaza of the Americas,which you're familiar with, has just announced that they're going tostart a new office tower next month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing information about the buildings under construction in downtown Dallas.


Passage number 266.
MR. BLACK. Well, action in going fromis probably significant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Black regarding the significance of taking action.


Passage number 267.
MR. BOYKIN. Yes, but then there's another 60-story buildingbeing built in Greenway Plaza by a competitor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states that there is another 60-story building being built by a competitor in Greenway Plaza.


Passage number 268.
MR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information in the provided passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 269.
 They're thinking in terms of 60 stories and not75; that is what I was--MR. BOYKIN. Well, the height is limited by FFA regulationsbecause they are in the flight path. The two 70-story buildings inDallas are across the street, so they are going to squeeze by.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing additional information and explaining the reason for the height limitation based on FFA regulations.


Passage number 270.
MS. TEETERS. Have you any idea what your in-migration is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question asked by Ms. Teeters.


Passage number 271.
MR. BOYKIN. No, Governor, I don't. I'm trying to recall thefigure for the new cars hitting the streets of Dallas every day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Boykin is simply stating that he does not know the figure for new cars hitting the streets of Dallas every day.


Passage number 272.
MR. BLACK. How many strange new accents do you hear inDallas.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any indication of contention or disagreement. It is simply a question asking about the number of accents heard in Dallas.


Passage number 273.
MR. BOYKIN. Well, there are very few people I can talk toanymore who can understand me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that they have difficulty finding people who can understand them.


Passage number 274.
MR. BLACK. That's a good indicator, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker's statement is presented as an opinion and does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 275.
MR. MORRIS. Before this gets out of perspective, I shouldpoint out that if you look at the Boston Globe's business page todayyou'll see that most of the states in New England have a lowerunemployment rate than Texas.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement about the unemployment rates in different regions.


Passage number 276.
MR. BOYKIN. We had an aberration for one month in that thestatistics showed 6-1/2 percent [unemployment]. We corrected thatvery, very quickly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Boykin, acknowledges that there was a mistake or anomaly (an aberration) in the statistics showing 6-1/2 percent unemployment, but then states that it was corrected very quickly. There is no indication of any disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 277.
MR. MORRIS. Since we export a large part of our manufacturedproducts, our people are very concerned about the big jump in thevalue of the dollar, which is hitting new orders very hard. Andthey'd love to see that free fall that Sam talked about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that the people are concerned about the increase in the value of the dollar and would like to see it decrease.


Passage number 278.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So would our hotel owners in New YorkCity. Tourism has dropped by about 25 percent; hotel occupancy is waydown.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It states a fact about the drop in tourism and hotel occupancy in New York City.


Passage number 279.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are you in the Eleventh District, Mr.Czerwinski.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply asks for the district in which Mr. Czerwinski is located and does not contain any form of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 280.
-27-8/18/81MR. CZERWINSKI. No sir, the Tenth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "No sir, the Tenth" is a response to a question or statement, indicating agreement or affirmation.


Passage number 281.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I was going to speak to the TenthDistrict, just having been there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the speaker's intention to speak to the Tenth District after having been there.


Passage number 282.
MR. CZERWINSKI. I'll let you have that privilege, sir.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Czerwinski is simply giving someone the privilege to do something.


Passage number 283.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Having observed Denver, if they are notbecoming overbuilt, something is the matter because they certainly arebuilding. I don't know what is going to happen when they complete itall. There are lots of beautiful people in Aspen who seem to have alot of money to spend and I'm sure that's characteristic of thecountry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their observation about Denver and Aspen, stating that Denver seems to be building and there are wealthy people in Aspen.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 284.
MR. PARTEE. Do you suppose things are ever bad in Aspen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The mention of "Do you suppose things are ever bad in Aspen" suggests that there may be disagreement or differing opinions about the situation in Aspen.


Passage number 285.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know. They'd be a little worse if[unintelligible]. If you want to make a real estate investment, youcan go to Aspen and get on the muddy side of the mountain and buy ahalf acre lot for $200,000.Well, I think we'd better get to our policy decision. Itisn't any great secret that we're in a difficult period here; weshouldn't have expected otherwise, I guess. The industry differencesthat have been alluded to seem to continue. I don't know what to makeout of the latest figures, but the economy surely doesn't seem to befalling apart, despite the Midwest and some other gloomy reports thatthere are enormous pressure on some sectors of the economy. Someconcern has been expressed here about a tearing of the financialfabric and bankruptcies and all the rest. I think those are very realand legitimate concerns. On the other hand, I guess one has toquestion whether we can get through this kind of period and deal withinflation without running into at least the threat, and maybe theactuality, of that. That is what we've been struggling with allalong, and I suppose past history is that we were never willing toface up to this. We're facing up to it already, more than I think wehave for many years, but we're going to remain in this extremelyuneasy position for some time.I wish there were some refuge in mechanics, of following onefigure or another assiduously and feeling that this was going to solveour problems for us. I have no confidence that we can take suchrefuge in mechanics against the palpable knowledge that any one ofthose figures is potentially, and probably actually, distorted. We'rein one of those periods for which we get paid--some of us better thanothers--for making a few judgments about what is going on. And Ithink those judgments do encompass what is going on in a most generalview of the financial world and the business world when we get mixedsignals from the more mechanical indicators of policy. We'reobviously high on some and low on others. And I don't find any veryconvincing stories, looking at the past and putting together what weknow of the distortions of those figures, that we can make much of achoice between relying on those that are high or those that are low.When we look at the business picture, there is a lot of talkabout recession. It's a political fact of life. We're going to get alot of talk about recession every time the economy deviates below azero growth pattern for a short period such as a quarter. Then people-28-8/18/81say, "Is the next quarter going to be below zero." and that makes arecession. We've been on an even trend, as a number of people havepointed out, for several years. If you're on an even trend, half thequarters, roughly, have to be below zero and presumably half above.I'm not sure it's a significant recession if you put together twoquarters in a row below zero; I'm not even sure it's entitled to becalled a recession if [the deviation below zero] is a very smallnumber. In that context, the business picture isn't very bright, Iguess we all agree. On the other hand, the latest data don't suggest,as many people have said and as I just said, that it's falling apart.On the inflation side, I don't fully share--maybe out ofnatural caution--some of the optimism that has been expressed aroundthe table. It's not that I'm unhappy to see the indications of lowerprices. I think prices certainly have been affected, even on thosethings that tend to be called accidentals such as food and energyprices, by monetary policy. But it seems to me that we're at a stagewhere monetary policy has squeezed in an obvious way the things thatcan be squeezed and has helped affect the price numbers. What I'm notat all confident of yet--and I say not confident of yet to express mystrongest optimism because I actually feel a little weaker than that--is whether lower price trends and lower price expectations have reallybeen built into behavior. In a way that has to be built into behaviorif the favorable price trends are going to continue when interestrates do come down and there's a sense of more monetary availability.I think what has happened so far is a reflection of the intensepressures on financial markets. If they were relaxed--if we waved ourhand and relaxed them in the next two months--that favorable priceimpact on commodity markets, on food, to the extent it has beeninfluenced, oil with a little greater lag, and that kind of thing,would dissipate very rapidly and we'd be back where we started.[Although] we see some glimmerings on the wage side, I think thatcould be reversed pretty quickly, too, if there were a sense of norestraint on the economy at this point. We have to play the game longenough so that we have a degree of confidence in the price outlookthat begins to be inbred in behavior, including wage negotiations; Idon't believe we're there yet. But there is a better chance than wehave had in a long, long time, I think, that we can get there in thefullness of time. How much time it will take is another matter.As for policy: I don't know how you measure it but in termsof the aggregates, the reserve aggregates in particular, the fact isthat, taking into account the very latest money numbers, we've gotteneasier again. I think there is some appreciation in the market thatwe've gotten easier. That will be reinforced by the announcement thatcomes out at the end of the week as to what our objectives were lasttime and people see whatever it was--9 percent growth in Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 286.
MR. AXILROD. 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states the percentage "7 percent" without any conflicting opinions or viewpoints being expressed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 287.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Growth of 7 percent, which is much biggerthan what it has been running. I don't know whether that will attractmuch attention or not. While we've been getting easier in thatquantitative sense, interest rates haven't reflected it. I take itthey're up again today. I guess there's a lesson in that: That weliterally don't know how to affect interest rates these days. Wedon't know all the things at least in the market that are affectinginterest rates. We don't know how that interacts with our policy to-29-8/18/81get any very reliable change in interest rates, assuming we want that.There certainly is an enormous desire on the part of the country tohave lower interest rates at this point. That pressure is buildingand it's going to build further. I'm sure the Congressmen are gettingan earful as they go around the country during their recess--unlessthey're all at Aspen, and I didn't see any there. And that backgroundis going to become more difficult.Looking at this problem, which is reflected I suppose in theprojections of the staff, right or wrong--and not many people havesaid they can make a better forecast this month, in contrast to lastmonth when everybody seemed to be more optimistic and saw interestrates down--it seems to me that this is not a period we're going to beout of in a hurry, if you take that as a benchmark. The staff isprojecting that with policies of anything like what we have thecurrent interest rate structure is going to continue indefinitelywithout killing the economy in any sense; [in the forecast] theeconomy stumbles along anyway at a level course, gradually building upif we go out enough quarters. It's not a very happy picture for us tobe in, looking ahead. Given that we are in the early stages, if I canput it that way, of any success in the anti-inflationary effort--giventhat kind of outlook and given the demonstrated apparent resilience ofthe economy in the face of very high interest rates despite thedistortions in the economy and the very different impacts on differentsectors--it seems to me that there is still a considerable danger, andmaybe an overriding danger, of underkill rather than overkill. [Ithink that's true] whether one looks at it in short-term economicterms or in terms of the longer-range problem we foresee over the nextyear, 18 months, or two years, with the fiscal stimulus that's comingalong and has been remarked upon here, the big government deficits,and the demonstrated resilience of the economy. It would be lovely tosteer those interest rates down if we knew how to steer them, which Idon't think we do. But if we did, what are the risks that in a fewmonths we will [witness] another rebound in the economy and HenryKaufman's [unintelligible] scenario will come true. Then we will bein an even more difficult period, losing time at the very least in thefundamental fight on inflation; and we will [face] a more awkwardmarket and I suppose a [worse] political situation not very manymonths down the road, with higher interest rates, more concern aboutfinancial institutions, bankruptcies, the outlook for the economy, andall the rest.When I add this together [I come out] with a posture that isnot overriding but is convenient at the least, and makes some sense atthe best. We are in a mid-quarter meeting; we set some objectivesafter some careful consideration at the beginning of the quarter andI'd say that unless there's a pretty strong reason for changing, let'sstay where we are in terms of the directive. Where we are in terms ofthe directive is not bad. If these recent M1 figures hold up--whilethey look big in the short run and that has some unfortunaterepercussions and shows the other side of our dilemma--it brings us atthe moment anyway about on track in terms of the M1 figures that weset forth in the directive last month, taking July and Augusttogether. The M2 figure was slightly lower in July than wasconsistent with the directive. It didn't bring any pressure on us totighten up. There is a fear and a concern, which is understandable,that the M2 figure will bulge at least in August because of somefigures we have for the first week or so in August. And with M1 going-30-8/18/81up more rapidly, that also tends to support M2. So there is somedanger, if danger is the right word, of overshooting in the narrowersense on M2 in August anyway. Part of that, but a fairly small partdepending upon how big the overshoot is, can simply be looked at asmaking up for a slightly low figure in July. So, while we are moreuncomfortable on M2, the discomfiture is not yet at least at an acutestage. And I have some question as to whether fine-tuning at a mid-quarter meeting--to do too much tinkering on the basis of short-termexpectations about M2--is worth it.In terms of the expectational and imagery question, we haveto maintain the policy course. We have not yet had whatever publicimpact there will be, if any, of the apparent raising of the M1target, depending upon how one interprets it. It obviously hasn'tbeen raised in the broader sense of the target for the year; indeed,it has been lowered by one interpretation. Regardless of that, Idon't know how people will interpret both a higher rate of increase inthe directive and a higher rate of increase that seems to be in storefor August nor what that's going to do to expectations. But Iwouldn't want to press our luck, if indeed we have luck on that score,of not being interpreted as having overtly eased policy by takinganother step now that for two months in a row would seem to push in anexpansionary direction, when nothing much has happened during thismonth to suggest that that's appropriate other than that people aresick and tired of high interest rates, which I well understand. Butthe business news, in fact, in this past month has been better thananything that was expected when we last met. I think almost everybusiness figure has been better than one would have anticipated atthat time. So, I would suggest to you that the most prudent course ofaction at this particular meeting is just to write a directive whichcontinues the wording we had the last time and in effect says theCommittee continues to seek what we sought a meeting ago, which isequivalent roughly to alternative A, the more liberal alternativegiven in the Bluebook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges the desire for lower interest rates but expresses doubt about the effectiveness of the current policies and the potential risks of lowering interest rates. They also mention the fear of overshooting M2 targets and caution against making changes based on short-term expectations.


Passage number 288.
MS. TEETERS. Are you going to leave the M2 part in it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a straightforward question.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 289.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Yes.] At this stage I have not discussedquestions of tactics and interpretation in a fine way, regarding justwhat we would do if one of these figures goes off. We've already hadsome discussion at this meeting, which the record will make clear,that we are aware that M2 may be distorted by these all savercertificates and the other kind of saver certificates. The differencebetween the all saver certificate and the small saver certificate is"SM" and I think this whole thing is somewhat of a sadomasochisticoperation, so maybe that's appropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that there has been discussion at the meeting and implies that there may be differing viewpoints on the topic of tactics and interpretation. They also express their personal opinion that the situation is somewhat sadomasochistic, suggesting a disagreement or dissatisfaction with the current approach.


Passage number 290.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If we hit the 14 percent increase forM2 for August that the Board and New York staff are projecting, thattakes growth up for the year to 9-1/2 percent. Or is it higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 291.
MR. AXILROD. I don't have in mind a QIV-to-August growthrate, but it would be somewhat above 9 percent. I don't have theexact number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they don't have a specific number in mind.


Passage number 292.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It might be worth getting that number whenwe get to tactics, because my sense is that it wouldn't carry us wayabove these targets and we could talk about generally being around the-31-8/18/81upper end of the range. But how far it carries us would come to thequestion of tactics and how September looks and all the rest. Thecurrent projection--and I put as little stock in these projections asanybody--shows a much slower growth in September after this bulge inAugust. If that [were to materialize], the bulge in August wouldn'tlook all that enormous.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own sense and opinion about the potential impact of a certain number on their targets and discussing different possibilities. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 293.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, whenever there is some stronggrowth, I'm told it means that weaker growth will always be projectedin the subsequent period as a smoothing of the path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement that suggests a common belief or understanding about the relationship between strong growth and weaker growth in subsequent periods.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 294.
 I don't think itmeans anything at all, but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends, I suppose, how much this earlyAugust growth is affected by these small saver certificates. I don'tknow whether [the staff] projection for August is right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "I don't think it means anything at all" suggests a disagreement with the idea being discussed. Additionally, the phrase "I don't know whether [the staff] projection for August is right" implies a lack of agreement or certainty about the accuracy of the prediction.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 295.
 They had abig jump in these small saver certificates; whether that's a one-weekphenomenon or whether it will continue--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Anyway, what you are saying I gatheris this: That if we got this kind of growth in August and we arerunning, say, 9-1/2 or 9-3/4 percent on M2, you wouldn't see any needto call for a consultation and a change in the signals. But if M2started exceeding what--10 percent--you would. What is your thinkinghere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about whether the jump in small saver certificates will continue or not. They are also discussing the conditions under which they would call for a consultation and a change in the signals, disagreeing on the threshold percentage at which action would be necessary (9-1/2 or 9-3/4 percent versus 10 percent).


Passage number 296.
MR. GRAMLEY. Alternative A has 10-1/2 percent for M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley simply mentions that "Alternative A has 10-1/2 percent for M2," without expressing any disagreement or opposing view.


Passage number 297.
MR. AXILROD. That's the growth from June to September.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Axilrod is simply stating a fact about the growth from June to September without any conflicting viewpoints or conflicting opinions being expressed.


Passage number 298.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm talking about the long-termtarget, fourth quarter '81 over fourth quarter '80.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is simply stating a specific time frame for the target without any conflicting or opposing views.


Passage number 299.
MR. GRAMLEY. But we wouldn't know whether what was happeningin August is going to make that much difference in the Q4-over-Q4increase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of uncertainty and speculation about the potential impact of August events on Q4-over-Q4 increase.


Passage number 300.
MR. AXILROD. Governor Gramley, we are calculating that ifAugust came out as we are projecting, while it would look strongrelative to the path the Committee adopted last time, relative to thelonger-run target the growth from, say, Q4 to August--the answer wewere working on--would be something like 9.2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting calculated numbers and discussing the potential growth rate.


Passage number 301.
 It's a tadabove 9 percent just because of the longer--MR. GRAMLEY. But we would presumably be looking at an M-1Bthat is equally below the lower end of its bound. Your projection forAugust is what--$424 or $424.5 billion or something like that forshift adjusted M-1B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing a projection for M-1B, there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 302.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, $424 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a figure of $424 billion without any conflicting information or opposing positions.


Passage number 303.
MR. GRAMLEY. That's still $4.5 billion below the lower end.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a straightforward statement without any conflicting views or opinions present.


Passage number 304.
MR. AXILROD. Oh yes, it's below the lower end for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Axilrod is simply agreeing with a statement or acknowledging its accuracy.


Passage number 305.
MR. GRAMLEY. If M2 crept up above or up to the upper bandfrom Q4 to August, I wouldn't think one would be unduly excited aboutthat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a hypothetical situation and stating their own opinion.


Passage number 306.
-32-8/18/81MR. PARTEE. The problem is interpreting that directive. Ithas an absolute proviso on M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that there is a problem with interpreting a directive.


Passage number 307.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, that's what I was trying to getfrom Paul. At what point does he feel that the caveat bites. Is itat 9-1/2, 9-3/4, or 10 percent. It may not be triggered at all. Hemay not have to face up to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating and questioning the possibility of Paul having to face a certain caveat, without presenting any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 308.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I can't give you a precise answer.You have to tell me what is happening in M1 at the same time and whatis happening otherwise. It obviously makes us more restrictive thanwe would otherwise be. It would have some influence if M2 were movingwell above its range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating that they cannot provide a precise answer without additional information.


Passage number 309.
 If it's moving slightly above--I don't knowwhat the exact--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It says "provided that growth in M2remains around the upper limit." We should have said, I think,"remains substantially around the upper limit," but I don't think wecan change it now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting a minor change in wording but acknowledges that it may not be possible at this time.


Passage number 310.
MR. MORRIS. [The Bluebook] is projecting 11-1/2 percent forthe next two months under alternative A. The proviso was in terms ofthe upper limit for the year as a whole, basically. There was achance that it would have an influence last month. I don't think itdid have an influence last month because M2 came in fairly low. If itappears to be coming in high and persisting, it has an influence.That's the purpose of the proviso.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: This passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is discussing the potential influence of the proviso on M2 and speculating on its possible impact.


Passage number 311.
MS. TEETERS. And then what would you do--call a conference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 312.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think I'd necessarily call aconference. It's in the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 313.
MR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions the name "Mr. Black" and does not provide any information or context that would suggest contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 314.
 And if we are wrong about rates--MR. PARTEE. That's the trouble. I think it's an automaticinstruction to the Manager. You could intervene and say we betterhave a conference. But it is an instruction. The Manager is toprovide nonborrowed reserves below the path he otherwise would if M2is at the point where the proviso takes hold.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The statement "That's the trouble" by Mr. Partee implies disagreement or concern about the assertion made before. Additionally, the suggestion to have a conference further highlights the contention or disagreement regarding the instruction given to the Manager.


Passage number 315.
MS. TEETERS. But it also depends on what is causing M2 to behigh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 316.
MR. PARTEE. Not in the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that there is no directive, indicating a lack of conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 317.
MS. TEETERS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage based solely on the given information, as there is no passage provided.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 318.
 That's why I think it would be better to talkabout why M2 is high rather than to automatically--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, as I say, I think that requires someinterpretation, which we would reflect in the discussion at the least.But there's nothing that's going to affect M2 that we didn't knowabout last month when we put this [proviso] in the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests a disagreement about whether to focus on discussing why M2 is high rather than automatically incorporating it into the directive.


Passage number 319.
MR. GRAMLEY. Except that last month we were looking at asituation in which we thought that nominal interest rates were goingto end up somewhat lower than they were at the time of the FOMCmeeting. In fact, they've ended up somewhat higher with the exception-33-8/18/81of the funds rate. That's something, it seems to me, that we ought totake into account in thinking about where we want to be. I agree withyour general prescription of what we ought to be aiming for. I don'tthink we know enough about the trends in the economy to make anysignificant change from what we wanted a month ago. But what wewanted a month ago was not higher nominal interest rates. And thatcolors my thinking. It seems to me that we ought to do something likeTony is suggesting and put in a "significantly" above the upper limitfor M2 to give us a little flexibility there, particularly in light ofthese developments regarding the small savers and all saverscertificates, which are going to have effects on M2 that are awfullyhard to predict.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley agrees with the general prescription and acknowledges that he doesn't have enough information about the trends in the economy to make any significant change from what they wanted a month ago. His main concern is that the nominal interest rates have ended up higher than expected, which colors his thinking. He suggests considering Tony's suggestion of putting in a "significantly" above the upper limit for M2 to provide flexibility. Overall, there is no clear disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 320.
MR. ROOS. Paul, I would agree totally with your analysis ofpolicy. One thing bothers me, though. It seems to me that what we doand how the world generally perceives what we do may be two totallydifferent things. With the sensitivity of the markets and with theenormous importance of what we want to achieve and how we are tryingto [affect] people's expectations, is it conceivable that thedirective, which is a pretty formal, cold, delayed statement of whatwe do, could be supplemented with a more foreceful explanation of whatwe are doing. Do these times call for something like that rather thanrelying to the extent we do on the directive. In the early segment ofyour remarks a little while ago, you said, for example, that thepolicy record that is going to come out at the end of this week mightbe interpreted as some easing in policy. Now, it seems to me that ifwe stick by our annual target, which we are doing, that nobody whoknows or who receives an explanation of what we're doing could implythat the Fed has all of a sudden eased in the sense of abandoning itsanti-inflationary policy of restraint. Is it possible under thesecircumstances, where everybody hangs on every little hint or signal ofwhat we are trying to do, to say occasionally in a white paper formthe sort of thing you just told us, which in effect says: "Look theFed hasn't eased up." Would that be in order. Are we so tied to thetradition of a central bank sending signals in a rather obscure waythrough directives that that's the best we can do in communicating.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 321.
MR. SCHULTZ. The Chairman is going on the MacNeil Lehrerprogram tomorrow night. There are some of us around here who hopevery strongly that he would be willing to go not only on MacNeilLehrer tomorrow night but that there will be a couple of otheropportunities for him to speak over the next month or two. Those ofus who feel that expectations are absolutely critical are trying topush him to do a couple more public appearances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a hope and a suggestion for the Chairman to make more public appearances.


Passage number 322.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have a little more modest view of mycapabilities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement by the speaker about their own viewpoint or opinion. There is no indication of any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 323.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would hope you wouldn't tell themthat we increased nonborrowed reserves at the annual rate of 23percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 324.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think this is the problem Larry:There's nothing we can tell people that is going to convince thembecause everybody will have different interpretations. I can assertthat [we haven't eased] but somebody can come back with a differentviewpoint and say that's a lot of baloney. I think it's right in ourterms; I'm not saying it's wrong. But somebody will say that he looks-34-8/18/81at reserves and at nonborrowed reserves--and that's what they do mostimmediately--and those measures have gone up at an annual rate of 20percent for two months. Or someone will say: "I look at the reservebase and the Fed had that under control for a while, but now at theend of August for two months in a row growth in the base has been 9 to10 percent. So, he's blowing a lot of smoke because those are theindicators I look at and they've eased [because] total reserves aregoing up by whatever." There's nothing we can say to convince aperson who looks at those indicators that we haven't eased. This isthe state of the confusion we have in the markets, even though in myterms it's a misinterpretation. There it is. And they are not goingto change their minds because we issue a white paper or anything else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage demonstrates disagreement or contention between individuals who have different interpretations of the data and indicators. Each person has their own viewpoint and argues against the others' interpretations.


Passage number 325.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The sustainable monetary policyshould have only half the country against you instead of everybody.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement suggests that a sustainable monetary policy should aim to have less opposition by only having half the country against it instead of everybody, implying that it would be more beneficial to have less opposition for the successful implementation of the policy.


Passage number 326.
MR. ROOS. I hope that the gentleman sitting at your left,Governor Schultz, will convince you to get on; I think you undersellthe impact of your ability.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses hope that Governor Schultz will convince the other person to take action and suggests that their abilities have a greater impact than they give credit for.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 327.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not saying I'm not going to get on.All I am saying is that I don't think that's going to solve in anycomplete sense the kind of problem that you suggest. We are stuckwith it in this peculiar period, when so many people operate ondifferent theories and they are all uncertain. There is no action tobe taken that everybody is going to interpret the same way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that they will get on, but disagrees with the idea that getting on will completely solve the problem being discussed. They also mention the uncertainty and differing theories held by different people, indicating further disagreement or contention.


Passage number 328.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I agree with that substantially.But the directive will be released on Friday and I would like us toauthorize you to explain that 7 percent when you go on MacNeil Lehrer--to point out that the 7 percent on the face of it looks higher, butit would only take us to the low point of the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In the passage, Mr. Black expresses agreement with the chairman's statement about a directive being released on Friday. He then suggests that the chairman should explain the 7 percent when appearing on MacNeil Lehrer. While there is a suggestion for clarification, there is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 329.
MR. PARTEE. It doesn't get us to the low point of the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 330.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it does, but by the end of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas. It is a partial statement that leaves the reader waiting for further information.


Passage number 331.
MR. BLACK. But it did from last month. Now we've got tohave 8-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply states a statement made by Mr. Black.


Passage number 332.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is consistent with getting to the lowpoint by the end of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a statement of fact and does not involve any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 333.
MR. PARTEE. By the end of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage provided doesn't contain any statements or discussions that suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 334.
MR. BLACK. By the end of the year. That's all I meant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It appears to be a straightforward statement.


Passage number 335.
MR. PARTEE. Let me remind you that the directive has abracketed phrase, which says "resulting in a quarterly average of lessthan 2 percent" or something like that. So, it's already there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing a reminder about a bracketed phrase in a directive.


Passage number 336.
MR. BLACK. That's right. But the 7 percent is what they aregoing to look at, Chuck.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black simply states a fact about what the people are going to look at.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 337.
 And if the Chairman can say the 7 percent isnot a ridiculous number--and in fact I would have preferred it to behigher than that myself and I'm usually quite tight--MR. GRAMLEY. The markets surely are going to remember thedecision to aim toward the lower end of the range for '81 and to-35-8/18/81revise down the figure and establish a target for '82 which was stilllower. It occurred at the same meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The Chairman and Mr. Gramley have differing opinions on the target percentage and the decision to aim for a lower end of the range for '81 and '82. The Chairman believes that the 7 percent is not a ridiculous number and would have preferred it to be higher, while Mr. Gramley suggests that the decision to revise down the figure and establish a lower target for '82 was not a wise move.


Passage number 338.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You know, the really sophisticated peoplewon't have this interpretation. But I would suggest that there isnothing much we can do. I am very sensitive to the fact that lastJuly I pronounced in all splendor that M1 was low, we weren'tuncomfortable about it being low, and we weren't going to force it up.And I think that's true; we did not in those terms "force it up." Butthe market remembers that we had a couple of months of big increasesand a lot of momentum and we ended up slightly overshooting thetarget. A lot of people will go look at that; I hope it's not thepredominant view, but I just can't project it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is the speaker expressing their own perspective and acknowledging that others may hold different opinions.


Passage number 339.
MS. TEETERS. But don't forget rates dropped very sharplybefore that happened. Rates haven't dropped this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 340.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Rates did not drop. They dropped before.At the time I made that statement they were at the bottom, as itturned out, and we had the great overshoot while rates were risingvery rapidly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker initially states that rates did not drop, implying a disagreement with a previous statement or belief that rates dropped. Later on, they mention that rates were at the bottom at the time they made the statement, suggesting that there was a differing understanding of the situation at that time.


Passage number 341.
MS. TEETERS. From a relatively low base.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 342.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not saying that it's going to repeatitself. All I am saying is that there are a lot of skeptics in themarket who are going to say that it's going to repeat itself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, there is an acknowledgement of the potential for contention or disagreement. The presence of skeptics implies differing beliefs or viewpoints regarding the possibility of a repetition.


Passage number 343.
MR. WALLICH. Well, I think there's some reason for thinkingthat because if the growth acquires any momentum, it will take moreeffort to break that momentum. If we now have 8 percent growth, let'ssay, for a month or two in order to get that down, interest rates willhave to go up. So, I think we have a choice possibly of being alittle tighter now or being a little less tight later on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 344.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think this makes a lot ofdifference, frankly, on what we talked about--the most you couldassume is that those of us who are more sensitive to interest ratesmight like to see them a point or a point and a half lower--becauseone can't have an impression that the Federal Reserve is sharplyeasing monetary policy. I don't think the real crunch is coming now.The real crunch is going to be next year when, basically, I think weare going to be blown out of the water. Unless we can show aninflation rate decline to 5 percent, when the Administration isdisappointed in all of its projections and we have a stagnant economyand the supply-siders are beginning to turn against us and everybodyelse is turning against us, it's quite clear that people will notunderstand why we are still continuing with such a high level ofinterest rates. And it's going to be very hard to explain unless wecan show an inflation rate of 5 to 6 percent and say "Yes, we have astagnant economy but look at what we achieved, and we achieved it inthe face of huge budgetary deficits." Aside from that kind ofdefense, I don't think we will be able to sustain this kind ofmonetary policy next year. I don't think we are at the crunch yet,and I think it's a very minor decision whether we do--. If we reallywant to get interest rates down a point to a point and a half, we haveto put in an initial borrowing assumption of about $1.2 billion ormaybe even a fraction lower. If we put it at $1.4 billion, then I-36-8/18/81think we will have to add--and we probably wouldn't want to add--a 1percent cut in the discount surcharge in order to get it down there.But then we would be giving a policy signal. We wouldn't appear to befollowing the market. So, I don't have any problem in a certain sensewith Paul's taking such a hard line as he is, but I just don't thinkthis [policy stance] is going to be sustainable well into next year ifwe continue running such a stable, stagnant economy with certainsectors getting into a crisis situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker believes that the current monetary policy stance will not be sustainable next year and argues for a lower interest rate. They also express concern that the administration's projections and budget deficits will be criticized if the inflation rate does not decrease. This differs from the stance of Paul, who the speaker mentions has a hard line and may not agree with their views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 345.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you're worried about next year, andthere's a certain legitimacy in that, surely your best defense is notto be easy prematurely this year. There will be some tradeoff betweenlower interest rates now and lower interest rates then. I don'tconsider my line a particularly hard one. It seems to me it's on theupper crust of the choices given us. But whatever that interpretationis, my general point is: What has happened between last month andnow, except better employment figures, better retail sales figures,and less concern about an immediate deterioration in the economy thatinduces us to change the directive in a way that will be interpretedas an easier mode.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: There is contention or disagreement in this passage because the author is presenting their opinion and defending it against potential counterarguments. They argue that the best defense against worrying about next year is not to be easy prematurely this year and acknowledge that there may be a tradeoff between lower interest rates now and in the future. They also suggest that their stance on the issue is on the upper crust of the choices, implying that there may be other opinions or interpretations.


Passage number 346.
MR. PARTEE. A one percentage point increase in interestrates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement that does not involve any conflicting ideas or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 347.
MR. RICE. Higher interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions "Higher interest rates" without providing any context or opposing views.


Passage number 348.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think the difference is this. Thisis the same point that Lyle has made, that Emmett has made, and thatChuck has made, I think. We assumed last month when we set thesetargets that short-term interest rates would ease--very, veryslightly, but somewhat. Instead, short-term interest rates are highereven though the fed funds rate has erratically come down. But eventhat is not down now; it has been running over 20 percent in the lastcouple of days, although the average is about 18-1/4 percent. So,basically, we miscalculated the interest rate effect of the targets weset last time. Now, I don't think we can set a target [that differsfrom] 7 percent, but we could--if we wanted to see some slight easingof interest rates--set an initial borrowing of about $1.2 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 349.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are assuming that the object of policysomehow is to try to manipulate the short-term interest rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the assumption being made is that the object of policy is to manipulate the short-term interest rate.


Passage number 350.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I keep one eye on it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that the person keeps one eye on something without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 351.
MR. PARTEE. It's a traditional New York view; I agree withit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage states that "Mr. Partee agrees with a traditional New York view." This indicates that there is no disagreement or contention, as Mr. Partee's agreement aligns with the viewpoint being discussed.


Passage number 352.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't object to keeping one eye on it,but it's a pretty old bird.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply expresses their opinion about a subject without any conflict or opposition.


Passage number 353.
MR. GRAMLEY. My concern is not so much that we adoptsomething by way of a directive that will assure a drop in interestrates. What I would like to see adopted is a directive that makessure that we don't have a rocketing upward of interest rates justbecause M2 is above the upper end of the range. If your concern isthat you don't want to change the wording of the directive now becauseof the signals that may send, that I can understand. If we can justhave an understanding among ourselves that we will tighten if M2 is-37-8/18/81significantly above its range--if that's in our minds--then, fine. Iwould be very reluctant to see a marked further increase in interestrates just because we have one month of big money supply numbers.This is a projection. You've said that many, many times yourself. Asyet we only have one week's data for August; we have some partial datafor the second week. We don't really know what is going to happen.We may have a sudden reversal. And I just don't think we ought tojump to hasty conclusions about the need for tightening just becausean M2 number happens to go above the upper end of the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Gramley is expressing his concerns and suggesting that the Federal Reserve should not overreact to a temporary increase in M2. He is suggesting that they should have an understanding among themselves to tighten monetary policy only if M2 significantly exceeds its range.


Passage number 354.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think anybody is jumping to hastyconclusions, from anything I know now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing the speaker's belief that nobody is forming quick conclusions based on the information currently known.


Passage number 355.
MS. TEETERS. The wording has been changed to that effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but there is not enough context provided in the passage for me to determine if there is contention or disagreement. Please provide more information or the specific content of the passage.


Passage number 356.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I know. We're operating on a directivethat now produces borrowings of $1.4 billion and produces an increasein reserves in August of what, Mr. Axilrod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of information.


Passage number 357.
MR. AXILROD. That's a projection, but total reserves inAugust could grow at around 10 percent and nonborrowed reserves couldgrow at around 18 percent or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting a projection or estimate of the growth of total reserves and nonborrowed reserves.


Passage number 358.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't see anything now that suggests weshould change that technical path that we are now on, which implies atthe moment $1.4 billion of borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses their opinion that there is no need to change the current technical path and borrowing amount.


Passage number 359.
MR. SCHULTZ. It's not quite $1.4 billion, is it, Steve.What is the target, $1.37 billion. I understand that's pretty close.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply acknowledging that the target amount is close to $1.37 billion.


Passage number 360.
MR. AXILROD. That's this week, and for the three-weekaverage we have about $1.285 billion or so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not include any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a numerical value.


Passage number 361.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's 1-1/2 basis points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a numerical value without presenting any conflicting opinions or viewpoints.


Passage number 362.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage as the name "Mr.  Morris" is provided without any additional context or dialogue.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 363.
MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I think you are right: We oughtto keep the same directive for the reasons you suggested. On thisissue of M-1B and M2 and their divergent behavior, I think there'snothing in economic theory that suggests to us which one of these weought to be pursuing. Therefore, not having a theory, we are thrownback on common sense and I am beginning to think common sense suggeststhat we shouldn't be trying to control either one of those. Butthat's a subject for the future, it seems to me. If we are going tobe governed by common sense, we ought to start looking at the state ofthe economy and the state of real interest rates. And it's clear thatthe economy is flattening and that real interest rates, if we knew howto measure them, are at the highest level since the 1920s.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris disagrees with a particular directive and suggests that common sense and the state of the economy should be considered instead.


Passage number 364.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's not true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the statement "That's not true." It is a simple denial or contradiction of a previous statement.


Passage number 365.
MR. MORRIS. That's not true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris simply states that the previous statement is not true.


Passage number 366.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions CHAIRMAN VOLCKER without providing any context or information about his actions or opinions. Therefore, it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 367.
 [No,] having made a little study of itrecently--MR. MORRIS. When were they higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply mentions that they made a study recently and Mr. Morris asks for clarification on when the mentioned event occurred.


Passage number 368.
-38-8/18/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. First of all, heaven knows what realinterest rates are. After taxes, they're half what they appear to be.And if you cut them in half, they're not even up to the inflationrate. Now that [assessment] is legitimate for some people and it'snot legitimate for other people. But it's a very mixed up picture.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents some observations about real interest rates, their impact after taxes, and their relation to inflation, without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments. The statement about its legitimacy for different people also does not imply any disagreement within the passage.


Passage number 369.
MR. PARTEE. After taxes they are more than they were a monthago because the tax bill reduced the tax rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states a fact that after taxes, the individuals have more money than they had a month ago due to a reduction in the tax rate. There is no contention or disagreement presented in the statement.


Passage number 370.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is fair. I think this tax reductionwill have some impact on this. Somebody put together for me theexisting studies on real interest rates. And the one that was mostimpressive--it went back to 1791 and covered just the United Statesbecause the picture is very erratic if you look abroad--shows noconsistency of real interest rates at all. And I thought theconcluding comment from this study was rather interesting. It said,in effect: "If there is a law of economics that the real interestrate must be maintained at a positive 2 or 3 percent or something likethat, it is a law that Moses must have brought down from Mt. Sinaiabout 1950 and retreated back up on Mt. Sinai a few years ago" becausethere is no evidence for it at all before 1950. The rate goes allover the place. Forgetting about the tax issues--and that makes a bigdifference because we never had these kinds of income taxes earlier inhistory--there are quite a few periods, which look short on a long-term chart but were periods of a year or two, of high interest ratesthat were [at current levels or higher]. What is unusual about thisperiod, and quite unusual, is that those periods of high real interestrates in the past typically accompanied a period of declining prices.We had enormously high real interest rates from 1929 to 1933 and insimilar periods of recession. You can't find, I think, withoutexamining these charts more carefully, any time when real interestrates, forgetting about taxes, were so high during a period ofinflation. Typically, the opposite happened: Real interest ratesbecame negative during inflationary periods as was true in the '70s upuntil fairly recently. It's all consistent with an explanation ofwhat we've had, maybe for the first time in history during peacetime,which is an expectation of a continuing peacetime inflation. That wasnever built into expectations before. Before when we've hadinflation--including in the postwar period--people thought that priceswould subside, so real interest rates went negative duringinflationary periods, as they began to do in the '70s. But we've hada heck of a difference in the interest rate structure since '79, inthose terms, which one can interpret as the American people giving upon the idea that we were ever going to return to price stability. Idon't think we get a lot of wisdom from looking at real interestrates, even though I don't object to the theory that there ought to besome tendency to go toward a low real positive rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contentious or disagreeing statements. It primarily discusses historical trends and observations on real interest rates.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 371.
MR. MORRIS. Well, if you look at nominal rates, I would havethe same conclusion, because we have a flat economy and we havenominal interest rates at historic highs. It seems to me thatalternative B would suggest a deliberate policy of needing stillhigher interest rates, which to me is a policy that is pretty hard tosustain at the present time. So, I think alternative A with the samedirective, which you are proposing, is correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris expresses disagreement with alternative B and instead supports alternative A as the correct choice.


Passage number 372.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But can we talk about the initialborrowing assumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presented as a question and does not express any disagreement.


Passage number 373.
-39-8/18/81MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I would like to [correct myearlier comment]. Borrowing is not $1.370 billion; it is $1.409billion this week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply correcting a previous statement, providing updated information about the amount of borrowing.


Passage number 374.
MS. TEETERS. That's for this week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a simple statement of gratitude or acknowledgement.


Passage number 375.
MR. SCHULTZ. That changes the whole situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by Mr. Schultz seems to be a straightforward observation or acknowledgement that something has changed the situation.


Passage number 376.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 377.
MR. CORRIGAN. I, too, am fairly comfortable with "A," but Imay look at this a bit differently than [implied by] a lot of thecomments that have been made so far. I do think that M-1B growth in areal sense is artificially low and that the equivalent of what itshould be is probably growth at a rate of more than the 0.9 percentagepoint measured rate that we can attribute to the direct effect ofmoney market shares. I also still think that in some sense interestrates are either artificially high or technically poised to come down,partly because of the view that I happen to take regarding what thatsurcharge rate is doing to behavior. So to me it is still conceivablethat we could get some give, particularly in short-term interestrates, under either of the scenarios that are being talked about here,particularly if we could find a time slot within which that surchargerate could be changed. But that's not easy to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their personal perspective on the topic, but there is no direct contradiction or opposing viewpoint.


Passage number 378.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought everybody wanted a penaltydiscount rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their own belief or assumption about what everybody wants, but there is no opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 379.
MR. CORRIGAN. At the surcharge rate, which now could belower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of a fact or situation.


Passage number 380.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not put it at a penalty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The provided passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 381.
MR. CORRIGAN. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage consists of a statement made by Mr. Corrigan. There is no indication of disagreement or contention within the passage.


Passage number 382.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What do you mean by "everybody".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply seeking clarification or further explanation of the term "everybody."


Passage number 383.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That was a generalization.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given sentence is merely stating that something is a generalization. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 384.
MR. CORRIGAN. The other thing is that there is some upsidedanger here in terms of these money growth rates. We're looking attwo months where we'll have pretty steep growth with a clear needlater for such growth to come back down. That's where this tradeoffbetween interest rates and the problems we have now has to be viewedin the context of similar problems later on. So, while I think youare right in suggesting that we would be ill advised in the currentcircumstances to change the directive, I for one am sensitive to thepotential for an overshoot now in terms of money growth and otherthings. And, as I suggested, I think we may at least in the short runbe able to have the best of both worlds. If we can, I wouldn't mindthat at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their agreement with the suggestion to not change the directive in the current circumstances, but they also acknowledge the potential for an overshoot in terms of money growth. Overall, they express a willingness to have the "best of both worlds" if possible.


Passage number 385.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What's the best of both worlds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "What's the best of both worlds" is a simple question inquiring about a favorable combination or compromise.


Passage number 386.
MR. CORRIGAN. The best of all worlds in the short run wouldbe to get some give in short-term interest rates while having moneygrowth rates that are perhaps not as steep as those associated withalternative A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a preference for a particular scenario and suggesting that a certain combination of factors would be the best in the short run.


Passage number 387.
-40-8/18/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know what is going to happento M1. I don't think it's inconceivable, looking at the July patternwhich is the most recent we have, that we could get a decline in thesecond half of August that would bring M1 below the growth patternimplied here and would be consistent, then, with some easing in theborrowing level. But I don't know whether that's going to happen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about the future and stating that they do not know what will happen to M1. They are considering the possibility of a decline in the second half of August but are not taking a firm stance or arguing against any particular viewpoint.


Passage number 388.
MR. CORRIGAN. Neither do I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply agrees with the previous statement.


Passage number 389.
MR. PARTEE. For M-1B we only have the first part of August.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact about the availability of information for M-1B.


Passage number 390.
What is given for the whole quarter is--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And we know that that has some funny moneyin it from this merger business, which should be out by the followingweek, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 391.
MS. TEETERS. But it might be into M2 by that time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement about a timing possibility.


Passage number 392.
MR. WALLICH. When it does, they're [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 393.
MR. BLACK. To some extent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. "MR. BLACK" is simply an address or reference to someone.


Passage number 394.
MS. TEETERS. [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to provide an accurate analysis as the passage provided is unintelligible.


Passage number 395.
]MR. CORRIGAN. Back to Europe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement about going back to Europe.


Passage number 396.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know if there'd be much in M2;there'd be [some] in M3 at least. What would be in M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The individual is expressing uncertainty about the content of M2 and suggests that there would likely be some content in M3.


Passage number 397.
MS. TEETERS. They might park it temporarily in money marketmutual funds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement without any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 398.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided in the passage to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 399.
 I don't think Dupont--MR. AXILROD. But we can't identify the money that thestockholders got. We're identifying the money that Dupont andSeagrams were keeping for making payments. When that disappears, itought to go into M3 or other type assets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and providing an explanation of their viewpoint.


Passage number 400.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Stockholders' money could go into M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 401.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, I thought that's what you were talkingabout. You're talking about the other side of the transaction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MR. PARTEE simply clarifies his understanding of what the other person is discussing.


Passage number 402.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think that is another caveat onthe M2 numbers, if we had some sense that this merger was affectingit. It's swelling up both sides of the balance sheet and I wouldsuggest some caution on M2. I think all of these concerns ought to bereflected in the record somewhere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's perspective and concerns.


Passage number 403.
MR. SCHULTZ. Well, there's a lull in the conversation, andit's a good time for me to comment. I continue to think that we mustnot lose sight of what we're trying to do long term. We just have toget inflation down this time. If we don't, I'm afraid that we willhave an awful period ahead of us lasting a great many years. We'remaking some real progress. I get concerned, as Tony does, aboutgetting blown out of the water next year. I get concerned about itmaybe even from a little different point of view. I get concerned-41-8/18/81that if this economy continues to hold up and doesn't break--and it'sremarkably resilient--and if the Administration doesn't do somethingto stretch out defense expenditures or hold down spending in some wayor find some way to cut the budget further, these interest rates aregoing to stay very high. Next year is an election year, and I thinkwe could easily get blown out of the water because I think theAdministration could well come under enough pressure at some pointearly next year either to go for credit controls or to cut and run onsupporting a firm monetary policy. So, I think we have a tough, toughperiod to go through here.What we're trying to do is to walk a rather fine line. Itstrikes me that we do have some restraint on the economy at this pointin time. These interest rates do seem to be high enough to bite, butthey don't seem to be high enough to bite as badly as everybody thinksthey ought to. I continue to be amazed at how well small businessesare holding up, at how well they continue to be able to be viableentities. They're learning how to price; everybody is learning how toadapt. I would not like to see further restraint on the economy, butI certainly would be afraid to start letting up. I don't know aboutthe rest of you, but I look at those retail sales and I hear my wifetalk, and we haven't changed any consumer's ideas about [inflation];they all still talk the same way. They say: "I better buy it nowbecause it's going to cost more next year." We haven't changed manyof those perceptions in the marketplace. All those marketparticipants are still [behaving] the same way. They've been burnedand burned; it took us 15 years to change their expectations and wearen't going to change them back very fast. It's going to be a slowprocess. So, it seems to me that we ought to continue to move on thecourse we're on. Things might clear up a little after Labor Day.Governor Gramley, as you say, things do tend to get a little clearerin the economy after that time. But they're murky enough right nowthat I think that we ought to continue with the course we're on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a reflection on the current state of the economy and the potential challenges ahead.


Passage number 404.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just remind you of something that Ithink is true. I don't know what to do about it, but it isn't goingto make life any more comfortable. If the expectations that FredSchultz is talking about do change, it's going to have some impact onthe economy. What is holding up house prices. The expectation thathouse prices are going to rise. What's holding up farm land prices.The expectation that farm land prices are going to rise. What'sholding up retail sales. To some extent, I assume it is theassumption that prices are going to be higher next year. If we couldsnap our fingers and have that perfect world in which nobody expectedprices to rise next year, I think the inevitable implication is thathouse prices would decline, farm land prices would decline, there'd beless construction activity in the short run, and retail sales mighttake a short-term nose dive. I don't know how to avoid that. That'sassuming our policy was a great success in terms of inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a hypothetical scenario and discussing the potential impacts of changing expectations on the economy. There is no clear contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 405.
MR. PARTEE. That, of course, is a reason for trying tofollow a middle course, Paul. I continue to be impressed by thepotential for monetary growth to fall below our specified ranges. AndI think that could be very harmful, particularly if in the course ofthis the economy begins to weaken.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is expressing his concern about the potential negative impact of monetary growth falling below specified ranges.


Passage number 406.
-42-8/18/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure there is a middle course.That's my concern. I don't think there is. I don't see any way tofine-tune this situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 407.
MR. SCHULTZ. Scylla and Charybdis have overlapped.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicts. It simply states that Scylla and Charybdis have overlapped, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 408.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I would need more context or information to accurately determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage involving Governor Wallich.


Passage number 409.
MR. WALLICH. Well, I have no desire to raise interest ratesat this time. I think they're high enough now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states the speaker's opinion that interest rates are currently high enough and there is no desire to raise them at the moment.


Passage number 410.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Certainly, we've achieved something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage states that "Certainly, we've achieved something" without providing any further information or context that suggests disagreement or contention. It simply presents a statement without indicating any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 411.
MR. WALLICH. I'd like to qualify that [by adding] "butbarely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is adding a qualification to a statement, suggesting that the statement is true but only just.


Passage number 412.
"MR. BOYKIN. After tax.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only states the name "Mr. Boykin" and the phrase "after tax," without any additional information or context to indicate contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 413.
MR. WALLICH. They're high enough, but barely, because theeconomy is bearing up very well under these interest rates. There isone sector that is very badly damaged and it is bearing up poorly.But the rest are curiously unaffected and on the whole the economy isstanding up remarkably well. So, I can see no grounds for going downon interest rates. I can see the danger of a great boom as these taxcuts take hold later in '82, and I think we'd be a lot better off ifbefore then the economy had been slow rather than beginning to move,because it will get enough or more than enough movement out of thattax stimulation. So, keeping [economic growth] at zero seems to meabout right. One can't positively look for a reduction and feel goodabout it, but we certainly ought not [foster] any stimulation at thistime. We just have to sit with the high interest rates, painful asthat is.Now, I am concerned about a repetition, on a small scale, oflast year: namely, that we start below the lower end of the M-1B bandand shoot through the band. It would be the third time that we'vedone that. It doesn't seem likely at this time, but it has happenedtwice before. And that makes me concerned about anything that lookslike a rapid growth of M-1B, suspect as that variable is. I'm alsoconcerned, if we imparted to it any degree of momentum, about how wewould bring [that pickup] to a halt once growth has gotten more orless back on track. At that time we'd have to have higher interestrates. And that's something we had better avoid. So, I lean toward alow growth rate for M-1B, as described in alternative B. One couldmitigate the interest rate consequences of that by being cautiousabout setting the borrowing requirement. In any case, I think thesetting of the borrowing requirement is a much more powerfulinstrument than the change of the path by 1 percentage point up ordown. That would get me to alternative B, possibly rephrased as it isin the second version of the directive [shown in the Bluebook] wherethe possibility of accelerating M-1B is allowed. I'm really not happyabout the acceleration. I just don't want to put too much of a burdenon M2 because of the doubts that are attached to it at this time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses concern about a rapid growth of M-1B and advocates for a low growth rate for M-1B. They also mention the possibility of a rapid growth of M-1B and the need for higher interest rates to bring that growth to a halt, which they want to avoid. These statements suggest disagreement or conflict about the appropriate path for M-1B and the potential consequences of its growth.


Passage number 414.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'd like to clarify something withSteve. My understanding of the wording of the M2 constraint inalternative II is that it's completely different than the meaning ofthe M2 constraint in alternative I. As I read alternative II, it says-43-8/18/81"Provided that growth of M2 remains around the upper limit of, ormoves within, its range for the year, growth of M-1B at an annual ratesomewhat higher than the _ percent specified above would beacceptable..." In other words, it permits an easier monetary policyon M-1B. It does not say, though, the way alternative I does, whichtracks what we did last month, that it's a cap. Is that deliberate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification and explaining their understanding of the M2 constraint.


Passage number 415.
MR. AXILROD. Well, alternative II was written only toprovide an alternative in case the Committee did not want to continuespecifying the third-quarter growth rate it adopted at the lastmeeting for M-1B. That is, if the Committee wanted to adopt a lowerrate, this is written so you could have a lower growth rate that isconsistent with alternative A, what you adopted last time, but permitsit to rise in case M2 happened to come in all right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply explains the purpose of alternative II as a contingency plan.


Passage number 416.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 417.
MR. AXILROD. It's just written to start off with a lowerM-1B growth rate, should the Committee wish to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a fact about a potential option for the Committee to consider.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 418.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I understand that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.


Passage number 419.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context about Mr. Forrestal, his actions, or any potential disagreement or contention.


Passage number 420.
MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I just want to say very brieflythat I wouldn't have any trouble with maintaining the status quopolicy. But, as you indicated earlier, I think we've already had someeasing in terms of the increases in total reserves and the monetarybase. As I look at alternative A, and even alternative B, I thinkthey could be interpreted as being somewhat stimulative, particularlywith respect to M2. The concern that I'd like to express is: Willthe market interpret an action such as you've indicated as beingstimulative with respect to M2 [since there is no provision for]bringing the growth of that aggregate down and thus question the willof the Fed to tackle that particular aggregate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing a concern and seeking clarification on the interpretation of certain actions.


Passage number 421.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll find out on Friday, I guess, when itis published.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about the outcome and suggests waiting until Friday to find out the information.


Passage number 422.
MR. FORRESTAL. Well, the question is: Would that actionexcite the market to the extent that interest rates could go up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question posed by Mr. Forrestal without expressing any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 423.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know. In answer to that question,I don't feel so confident that it won't [excite the market] that Iwould want to take another action here that a month from now is goingto be interpreted as further easing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is expressing uncertainty and personal hesitation about taking further action, but there is no clear contention or disagreement present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 424.
MR. FORRESTAL. What I was coming to is suggesting thatperhaps at some point the Committee ought to look at an alternativethat would be even more restrictive than alternative B with thepurpose of bringing M2 growth down further into the range and notleave it above the range set by the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is potential contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Forrestal, is suggesting that the committee should consider an alternative that is more restrictive than alternative B. This implies a disagreement or difference of opinion within the committee about the level of restriction needed to control M2 growth.


Passage number 425.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have had a variety of opinionsexpressed. But I detect, with some prejudice, a willingness to livewith last month's directive, though with some concern about how it'sgoing to be implemented. I don't find entirely answerable those-44-8/18/81questions because [they require] too many assumptions about what isgoing on. In the immediate sense, [an unchanged directive] doesn'timply anything but staying on the path that we're now on. Thatinvolves borrowings of around $1.4 billion, as I understand it, and inthe first instance borrowings would be reduced if M-1B comes in weakerthan now projected for the month. Presumably, they would tend to gohigher if M-1B came in higher than projected for the month. But thosejudgments would be shaded by what is happening to M2, particularly.If after several weeks M2 appeared to have a lot of momentum and wascontinuing high into September, we would shade the decisions on thetighter side. And if the reverse happened, we would not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their observations and opinions regarding a directive and its implementation.


Passage number 426.
MR. GRAMLEY. What is the projection for M-1B for August. Isit the same as in the Bluebook, 11 percent. Is that what we'retalking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for confirmation about a specific piece of information.


Passage number 427.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, alternative A is essentially theprojection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod is simply stating a fact about alternative A being the projection.


Passage number 428.
MR. GRAMLEY. It is a current projection as well as a target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement made by Mr. Gramley is presenting information without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 429.
MR. AXILROD. Well, that's right. It works out, of course,that alternative A, August to September, is consistent with that 7percent [for the quarter], so that September growth would have to comedown.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement of fact or explanation.


Passage number 430.
MS. TEETERS. Does that mean in alternative I, in the wordingthat relates to M2 remaining around the upper limit of its range foryear, that you're going to take out the words "or moves within".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply asking for clarification or confirmation about the removal of certain words in the wording related to M2 remaining around the upper limit of its range for a year.


Passage number 431.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I would not, but we can do that. Iwouldn't just because everybody reads these things with an electronmicroscope and will say: "Why did they do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion but acknowledges that others may have a different perspective.


Passage number 432.
"MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I'm with you one hundred percent onthis but I wonder if it wouldn't make some sense--this is the point Iwas trying to develop awhile ago--if we added a sentence in the draftdirective right after that sentence at the top of page 12 in theBluebook that said something like "In view of the shortfall in M-1B inJuly, this would imply growth in M-1B at an annual rate of 8-1/2percent between July and September.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is expressing agreement with the Chairman and suggesting an addition to the draft directive.


Passage number 433.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why do you want to say that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question asking for the reason behind someone's desire to say something.


Passage number 434.
MR. BLACK. Well, I think we ought to tell the public moreabout what we're doing. If they see 8-1/2 percent growth coming in,they're going to interpret that as easing unless they understandthat's what it takes to get to the low point of the range by the endof the year. It's the same reason I suggested awhile ago that we askyou to say on the McNeil-Lehrer program that we adopted a 7 percentrate [for the third quarter] but people must not think that that is aneasing of policy because all that would do, if it's achieved, is getus to the lower limits of the long-run range we indicated in thetestimony in July.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Black is expressing his opinion and suggesting strategies for the public to better understand the intentions behind certain policies.


Passage number 435.
MR. WALLICH. We seem to get very little credit for ourearlier shortfalls. All the public sees is the rapid rise in thatparticular month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is stating a fact about the lack of credit received for earlier shortfalls and how the public's perception focuses mainly on the rapid rise in a particular month.


Passage number 436.
-45-8/18/81MR. BLACK. I think that's partly because we have never saidas clearly as we should what this implies month by month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express disagreement or contention. It is a statement by Mr. Black reflecting on the lack of clarity in expressing certain implications month by month.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 437.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I respectfully disagree. I can'tthink of anything worse than starting to use numbers on publictelevision aside from the year-over-year number. If we start talkingabout intermeeting numbers of 7-1/2 or 8-1/2 percent, or whatever itis, I just don't think people would understand that. I think it'smuch more convincing if we talk in somewhat more generalnonquantitative terms.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage states "I respectfully disagree" indicating that there is disagreement present. The speaker disagrees with the idea of using numbers on public television, arguing that people would not understand them and that it is more convincing to use nonquantitative terms.


Passage number 438.
MR. BLACK. I think they will understand it a whale of a lotbetter than if we get 8-1/2 percent growth [over August and September]and we haven't put that in the proper perspective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is simply expressing his opinion about the understanding of the information.


Passage number 439.
MR. PARTEE. Well, we may get 11 percent right here inAugust. What do we do with that. That will come out before thepolicy record is [made public].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact and asking for suggestions on how to proceed.


Passage number 440.
MR. BLACK. Unless we've said something about what thosenumbers are ahead of time, I think we'll scare people to death.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 441.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But you're assuming that we're goingto get it. Suppose Paul says it's 7 percent or 8-1/2 percent and thenwe get something completely different, lower or higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing skepticism or doubt about the possibility of accurately predicting an outcome.


Passage number 442.
MR. BLACK. What I'm saying is that I don't want someone tothink that in choosing 7 percent last month we made a move towardease. I don't think we did.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is simply stating his opinion that choosing 7 percent last month did not indicate a move towards ease.


Passage number 443.
MR. PARTEE. No, I think we tightened.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 444.
MR. BLACK. I think we tightened, too; I would rather it hadbeen above 7 percent. But when the market sees 7 percent, unless wesay why it is 7 percent, they are going to oversimplify things andlook at that one number. I'm trying to say we should tell them how welook at those numbers so that they'll interpret them right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no overall contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black expresses a preference but does not disagree with anyone else's opinion or viewpoint.


Passage number 445.
MR. SCHULTZ. I hate to tell you, Mr. Black, but I reallydon't believe there are very many people out there who understand thedifference between these kinds of numbers you're talking about. Iwould hope the Chairman would not speak in these specific terms butwould give, in effect, a broad overview of what is going on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Schultz is expressing his personal belief about the understanding of certain numbers, and he is expressing a hope for the Chairman's speech. However, there is no direct contention or disagreement between the individuals mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 446.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think we have to worry rightnow about what I'm going to say on McNeil-Lehrer tomorrow. We have toresolve this directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion that they do not think there is a need to worry about what they will say on a specific show, instead emphasizing the need to resolve a directive.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 447.
MR. BLACK. I agree they don't understand, Fred, but that'swhy I think we ought to be trying to explain it to them. And that'swhere we differ. I think this will help a sensible person understandit whereas [now] they misunderstand it in every possible way, as theChairman indicated awhile ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Black, indicates that he disagrees with Fred on the matter of explaining something to others. Fred may believe that explaining it will not make a difference, but Mr. Black thinks that it will help sensible people understand the matter better.


Passage number 448.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me make a slightly differentsuggestion. I think we can say something along the lines of whatyou're saying in the policy record someplace. I don't know that wehave to put it in the directive just after it says that it implies 7-46-8/18/81percent for the quarter as a whole. That sounds awfully fine-tuned tosay it implies 8-1/2 percent for two months out of the quarter. We'reprobably not going to come anywhere near the figure anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 449.
MR. BLACK. Paul, are you going to stick that number in thefirst part. No, I guess not; in this version we have 7 percent.Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black is simply asking Paul a question and Paul responds with his decision.


Passage number 450.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The problem revolves around the M2 issueand I don't think I can fully resolve it. There should be somediscussion in the policy record about the problems, of which we haveseveral. What was the last one. Oh, this takeover thing. We havethe takeover, the new institutional thing, and that was all in mystatement. Well, the takeover was not, but my statement in Julymentioned the other things. And we did not say it was going to makeus terribly happy with a big overshoot in M2 only three weeks earlier.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 451.
MR. PARTEE. And then in the fourth quarter we have the taxexempt certificates, which could blow this aggregate out of the water.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not suggest any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee is simply referring to the potential impact of tax-exempt certificates on the aggregate.


Passage number 452.
MR. AXILROD. Well, there is evidence of somewhat moreinterest in the small savers certificates than had been expected.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is a straightforward observation about an increase in interest in small savers certificates. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 453.
MR. SCHULTZ. New technical differences.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any direct statements that suggest contention or disagreement. It simply mentions "new technical differences," which does not indicate any conflict.


Passage number 454.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I have no problem with reflecting inthe policy record that these things may have unexpected results thatwe can't anticipate and that they would have to be taken into accountin judging M2. I would prefer to keep it out of the directive just inthe interest of continuity. But if we made any change in thedirective, I'd make it in that next artificial sentence, which is putin there routinely, that says shifts in the NOW accounts will distortmeasured growth. We could say other things will distort measuredgrowth in M1 or M2 and we will take account of those distortions. ButI think we could say the same thing in the discussion within the bodyof the policy record text. That's what I would prefer, just in theinterest of not complicating this further.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own preference and suggesting an alternative approach, but they do not disagree with or challenge any previous statement or opinion.


Passage number 455.
MR. GRAMLEY. It's okay with me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they are okay with something, indicating agreement or acceptance.


Passage number 456.
 I think there's a broadagreement with this sort of formulation so long as we have someunderstanding that the mere fact that M2 is starting above the upperend doesn't lead to an unusual--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not saying that because M2 isprojected high at the moment for August we would do anything butremain on the path that we're now on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their agreement with a certain formulation and clarifying that the high projection of M2 for August will not change their current course of action.


Passage number 457.
MS. TEETERS. So it's not going to automatically trigger anyreaction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact without expressing any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 458.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the statement "Not right now." It simply indicates that something is not currently happening or not at this moment.


Passage number 459.
MS. TEETERS. Not right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the person referred to as Ms. Teeters is not available at the moment.


Passage number 460.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. Things will change and M1 will behigher or lower or M2 will be higher or lower; and we just have tolook at it as time passes. I don't know what other answer I can giveyou. If the growth in M2 is high but that in M1 is low, it obviously-47-8/18/81has a different implication than if they are both running high. If M1is right on the bottom and M2 is beginning to run still higher than weproject now and it begins to look [high] in September, then I think itdoes have some implications.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that the levels of M1 and M2 will change over time and the implications of those changes will vary depending on their specific levels. There is no disagreement or contention expressed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 461.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think that's all we can expect.SPEAKER(.). Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage because the speaker states "I think that's all we can expect," implying that there may be others who think differently or have higher expectations.


Passage number 462.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess we're ready to vote. I would makeone change in the directive. I would say "In the short run theCommittee continues to seek..." just to emphasize that we're notchanging anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their opinion and making a suggestion for a minor change in the directive, but there is no indication of any conflict or disagreement among the parties involved.


Passage number 463.
MS. TEETERS. This implies initial borrowing of $1.4 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a factual claim about the initial borrowing amount of $1.4 billion.


Passage number 464.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Or "In the short run, as decided at thelast meeting, the Committee will seek..." I'd use one of those two.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present contention or disagreement. It simply refers to a decision made in a previous meeting.


Passage number 465.
MR. CORRIGAN. There's no thought here that we would beimplicitly tolerant of short-run money growth of a little less thanperhaps these 8-1/2 and 11-1/2 percent numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Corrigan.


Passage number 466.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think it's consistent with what Ijust said. If we have a significant drop in the second half of Augustbeyond what is anticipated now and the M2 figures are just what weanticipate now, that would have at least a modest effect of reducingthe borrowings. If M2 were coming in high at the same time--by high Imean higher than now projected--we'd probably shade that judgment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing potential scenarios and their potential effects, without expressing any disagreement with others or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 467.
MR. CORRIGAN. I have some predisposition or a mild prejudicein the direction of money growth being a little slower, if it turnsout that way, simply because I still think it's in our better long-runinterest to have it work that way than the other way. But I amcomfortable with the overall formulation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Corrigan, expresses a personal opinion or preference in a calm and comfortable manner, without indicating any disagreement or opposition towards others' views.


Passage number 468.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And consistent with not changing anything,we just repeat the current federal funds range of 15 to 21 percent.Am I right. We're somewhere in the middle of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage. The speaker is simply restating the current federal funds range without any opposition or contrasting views.


Passage number 469.
MS. TEETERS. And add this language in the sentence thatstarts "It is recognized that shifts...".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any language that suggests contention or disagreement. It is a statement about adding specific language to a sentence without any contrasting opinions or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 470.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I was not going to add that. I'd putthat in the text, in the discussion about adopting the same [short-runobjectives].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their decision not to add something to the text and explaining their reasoning for it.


Passage number 471.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You mean in the policy record, notthe directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply clarifying the correct term to be used.


Passage number 472.
MR. PARTEE. Well, we're getting awfully close to having acooked directive. It doesn't really mean that [in] the directive.That's a bothersome fact, Paul.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is expressing concern or frustration regarding the lack of clarity in the directive.


Passage number 473.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only states the position or title held by Chairman Volcker without providing any information about any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 474.
 Well, I don't know that I---48-8/18/81MR. PARTEE. Well, if you read the directive it says onething, but there's some side agreement that we'll do it a differentway. I just think that's a very bad procedure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker is expressing disagreement with a different way of doing things, stating it is a bad procedure.


Passage number 475.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's your interpretation, notmine. The directive says "provided that M2 growth remains around theupper limit." The current projection, as I understand it, meets [thedescription] "around the upper limit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their own interpretation and understanding of the directive.


Passage number 476.
"MR. AXILROD. I ought to correct what I said: Thecalculations with the hand computer came to 9.4 percent for August.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of information corrected by Mr. Axilrod.


Passage number 477.
MR. PARTEE. And what's the upper limit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply asks a question about the upper limit without expressing any disagreement or conflicting views.


Passage number 478.
MS. TEETERS. 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement "MS. TEETERS. 9 percent" lacks context and does not indicate any form of disagreement or contention. It appears to be an isolated fragment of information.


Passage number 479.
MR. AXILROD. But I don't know whether it's 9.3 or 9.4.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement reflecting uncertainty or lack of knowledge about a specific measurement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 480.
MR. PARTEE. It says "remains around or moves within." Youwant to leave that phrase in there. Now, I suggest that 9.4 percentis certainly right on the very border of violating, if it doesn'talready violate, the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. MR. PARTEE suggests leaving the phrase "remains around or moves within" while also stating that 9.4 percent is on the border of violating the directive.


Passage number 481.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I think 9.4 percent is "around theupper limit." That 9.4 percent is for August.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their belief that 9.4 percent is close to the upper limit for something in August.


Passage number 482.
MR. AXILROD. From Q4 1980 [to August].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but without the actual passage, I cannot determine if there is contention or disagreement. Please provide the passage for further analysis.


Passage number 483.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And in September on the current projectionM2 growth would come down. I think that is around the upper limit. Idon't disagree with that, but I don't think it's beyond it; that's allI'm saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with the current projection of M2 growth coming down in September, but simply states that they don't believe it will go beyond the upper limit.


Passage number 484.
MR. BLACK. We're leaving the "or moves within" in there, Mr.Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation:
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that they are keeping the phrase "or moves within" in the sentence, without any opposing opinions or conflicting views being expressed.


Passage number 485.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd just leave it in on the basis that itmay well move within, though I don't know, by the time we get toSeptember. Why change it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion or suggestion about leaving something as it is, without indicating any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 486.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, if we leave it out, a lot of theFed watchers are going to think that that's a significant easing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact about the potential reaction of Fed watchers if something is left out.


Passage number 487.
 AndI don't know--MR. CORRIGAN. Then they will think we've eased.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing uncertainty and lack of knowledge.


Passage number 488.
MS. TEETERS. But in reality, we're not going to follow this.That's Chuck's point, that it's a violation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Ms. Teeters about not following something, with Chuck's point being that it is a violation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 489.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think that's right.Obviously, it's a question of interpretation. But "around the upperlimit" does not mean the upper limit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The phrase "Well, I don't think that's right" indicates disagreement or opposition to something that was previously stated or discussed. The subsequent statement "Obviously, it's a question of interpretation" suggests that there is a difference in understanding or perspective.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 490.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes. I'm almost surprised, Chuck,that you say that. If we're talking about something like 9.3, 9.4percent, isn't that around the upper limit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The use of the phrase "I'm almost surprised" suggests that the speaker disagrees with Chuck's statement.


Passage number 491.
-49-8/18/81MR. PARTEE. Well, I had the impression that one would readthe whole phrase, "moves within or remains around the upper limit."And I think that gives less tolerance to being above the upper limitthan it does being below.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 492.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, there's no question about that. Ithink it gives less tolerance for above than below.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. The speaker confidently states their opinion that there is no question about something and then expresses their belief about a particular matter.


Passage number 493.
MR. PARTEE. It's difficult. There has been over the years atendency for the Committee to want to have things [in the decision]that we don't say in the directive. I think that needs to be resistedbecause the directive is our only record of what we've done.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage indicates that there may have been a tendency for the Committee to include additional information in the decision that is not mentioned in the directive. The speaker, Mr. Partee, suggests that this should be resisted and that the directive should be the only record of what they have done. However, there is no indication of disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 494.
 We don'thave minutes of the meeting that go through all this discussion and--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I proposed this on the basis that we'renot changing anything from last time. We knew about the special[small] savers certificates and we knew about the all saverscertificates. We didn't know maybe quite so much about the takeovers.What we didn't know was that we'd have a bulge in the beginning ofAugust. But presumably that's what we were forewarning ourselvesagainst.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information about what was known and discussed at a previous meeting, without expressing any conflicting opinions or conflicting views.


Passage number 495.
MR. PARTEE. Just to clarify, we didn't know that the allsavers certificates would become law.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply stating a clarification without expressing any opposing views or conflicting information.


Passage number 496.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. [On] October 1st.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I cannot answer this question as there is no passage provided.


Passage number 497.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that is true. We did not know.We were only 99-1/2 percent sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with a statement and adding that they were almost completely sure about it.


Passage number 498.
MR. PARTEE. I just wanted to repeat that position so thatyou can change it next time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Partee, simply states his desire for the position to be repeated for potential future modifications.


Passage number 499.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 


Passage number 500.
 Well, when we hit the two-yearanniversary of October 6th or 8th or whenever--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Actually, the all savers certificate isprobably reducing M2 at the moment because the savings banks are alloffering RPs in the anticipation of the all savers certificates.Instead of putting money in a money market certificate people areusing RPs, which are not in M2 and the money market certificate is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It is discussing the impact of the all savers certificate on the M2 money supply and how people are choosing to invest their money. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument present.


Passage number 501.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I know the passbook savings at least aregoing up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is making a statement about the increase in passbook savings.


Passage number 502.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So, we may be getting an artificially lowM2 at the moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that there may be an artificially low M2 at the moment, without expressing any opposing views or conflicting information.


Passage number 503.
MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I'd just like to raise animportant technical question. In this material that was passed outcalled the general paragraphs, in the operational paragraph on page 3line 57, I hope the language there is a mistake. It says "providedthat growth of M2 remains at the upper limit.""about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Balles is simply raising a technical question about the language used in the material.


Passage number 504.
"MR. AXILROD. Yes, that was a mistake.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The statement is simply acknowledging a mistake.


Passage number 505.
 That should say-50-8/18/81MR. BALLES. Okay, if it's still "about," then there's someleeway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply involves a request for clarification.


Passage number 506.
MR. AXILROD. That was a mistake. It's a transcriptionerror. [The intended wording] should be exactly as it was in theBluebook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, acknowledges that there was a mistake in the transcription and clarifies the correct wording.


Passage number 507.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Around" is the right word.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states that "around" is the correct word.


Passage number 508.
MR. BALLES.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The given passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 509.
 Okay, otherwise we would be taking--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm just wondering. This part is not thepart where we can put in some sentences about the possible artificialfactors affecting M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply expressing a thought or curiosity about a certain topic.


Passage number 510.
MR. BALLES. That might be a good idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It simply presents Mr. Balles suggesting that something might be a good idea without any specific context or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 511.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Artificial factors affect M-1B too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention regarding the statement that artificial factors affect M-1B. It simply presents the statement as a fact.


Passage number 512.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but that's mentioned. I think it'salluded to, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Yes, but that's mentioned. I think it's alluded to, yes" seems to be confirming or agreeing with a previous point rather than expressing disagreement.


Passage number 513.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If we come in at the end of the yearwithin the target range on M-1B, we may not want to stress theartificial factors that much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests that if they achieve their goal for M-1B at the end of the year, they might not want to emphasize artificial factors too much.


Passage number 514.
MR. CORRIGAN. Then we can say we're really in the middle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing a neutral position.


Passage number 515.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. I agree. I wouldn'tsuggest to you any more emphasis. This says "...the shortfall in M-1Bgrowth in the first half of the year partly reflected a shift inpublic preferences"--that's good Federal Reserve language--"towardother highly liquid assets." It adds that growth in the broaderaggregates has been running somewhat above the upper end of the rangesfor 1981, but "in light of its desire to maintain moderate growth inmoney over the balance of the year the Committee expected that growthin M-1B for the year would be near the lower end of its range." Isthere any reason why we can't insert a phrase there. We could add "atthe same time, growth in the broader aggregates might be high in theirranges, an expectation reinforced by..." Or let's put in anothersentence. "It was recognized that changes in the institutionalsetting might have an effect on M2 and M3 in the second half of theyear" or some such language. Is this language sacred. Do we have torepeat exactly what we had the last time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and suggesting possible additions or modifications to the language.


Passage number 516.
MS. TEETERS. Well, it was [sacred] two minutes ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 517.
MR. PARTEE. No, we're not talking about that part. We'retalking about the longer run. It's page 2, around lines numbered 39to 40. Is that where you are, Paul.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply indicating a specific location within a document that the speaker wants to discuss.


Passage number 518.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Well, I'm on line 44. I just don'tknow if that's a more convenient place to insert it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing uncertainty about the convenience of inserting something at line 44.


Passage number 519.
MR. BALLES.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 520.
 Paul, as an alternative to putting it at line44---51-8/18/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement about someone named Paul and a suggestion to put something at a different line.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 521.
 The trouble is that this says what we didlast time, which doesn't--MR. BALLES. I was going to suggest, Mr. Chairman, that if wewant to add an extra sentence that would call attention to artificialdistorting factors in M2, we might slip it into the sentence that nowbegins on line 58. "It was recognized that shifts in NOW accountswould continue to distort measured growth in M-1B and...
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker is arguing against the idea of adding an extra sentence, while another speaker is suggesting to add the sentence.


Passage number 522.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what I was suggesting before, butthat gets into the operational part of the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging that their previous suggestion addressed the operational part of the directive.


Passage number 523.
 It could be putthere, but--MR. BALLES. Just add a phrase there that M2 may be similarlydistorted by recent developments in new savings instruments. Insert aphrase that we would then follow an operational reserve path to bedeveloped in light of evaluations of those distortions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting the addition of a phrase to clarify a point, which does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 524.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is the place we can put it if we wantto change the operational paragraph. If we don't put it there, Iguess the best place to put it, if we put it in the directive at all,is in line 25. That discusses what happened in July. Growth in M2accelerated; the level wasn't very high. The level of M2 was slightlybelow the upper end of the range. "It is recognized that duringAugust and potentially in October the introduction of new certificatesmay...
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing potential options for where to put something in a directive.


Passage number 525.
"MR. AXILROD. Well, we once had a sentence in there which wetook out because it included the early estimates for the week ofAugust 12th. But we could easily say: "Available data for earlyAugust suggest acceleration in growth of M-1B and M2, in the case ofM2 reflecting..." It depends on some of our preliminary estimates,but that would be a reasonable sentence to put in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting an alternative sentence and stating that it would be reasonable to include it.


Passage number 526.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we can put it in there and thenput in the body of the [policy record] discussion again our concernabout this factor. Let's assume we will do that and let's vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and suggesting a course of action, but there is no indication of any disagreement or conflicting views.


Passage number 527.
MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, I hate to do this, but I have oneother small technical point on line 6, where it says the increase inretail sales reflected some recovery in sales of new cars. It'sprobably more used cars than new. I would suggest it say "somerecovery in sales at automotive dealers," which is more likely to bethe case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting a revision to the wording of a statement for accuracy.


Passage number 528.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that will be accepted. Well, withall that, I would propose just sticking in the word "continues" online 52: "In the short run the Committee continues to seek..." Arewe ready to vote. Vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It consists of a statement of opinion and a proposed suggestion, followed by a question about readiness to vote.


Passage number 529.
MR. ALTMANN.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Boykin YesPresident Corrigan YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Keehn Yes-52-8/18/81Governor Partee Well, I have to vote againstit again since I voted against it the last time and it is exactly thesame as it was before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The first six individuals all express agreement or support for something. Governor Partee expresses opposition but does not engage in any argument or disagreement with the others.


Passage number 530.
MR. WALLICH. You could have changed your mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich is simply expressing the possibility that someone could change their mind about something.


Passage number 531.
MR. PARTEE. No, I haven't changed my mind. I think morethan I did the last time that it's the wrong thing to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their opinion that it is still wrong to do something.


Passage number 532.
MR. ALTMANN.Governor Rice YesGovernor Schultz YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich YesPresident Black YesEleven to one, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Eleven to one, Mr. Chairman" simply indicates that there are eleven individuals who agreed with the previous statements made by Governor Rice, Governor Schultz, Governor Teeters, Governor Wallich, and President Black.


