Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeApril 22, 1980A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, April 22, 1980, at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT:Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. GuffeyMr. MorrisMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. RoosMr. SchultzMr. SolomonMrs. TeetersMr. WallichMr. WinnMessrs. Baughman, Eastburn, Mayo, and Willes,Alternative Members of the Federal OpenMarket CommitteeMessrs. Balles and Black, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of San Franciscoand Richmond, respectivelyAltmann, SecretaryBernard, Assistant SecretaryPetersen, General CounselOltman, Deputy General CounselMannion, Assistant General CounselAxilrod, EconomistMessrs. Balbach, J. Davis, R. Davis, T.Davis,Eisenmenger, Ettin, Henry, Keir, Kichline,Truman, and Zeisel, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account4/22/80Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Prell, Associate Director, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Associate Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Beck, Senior Economist, Banking Section,Division of Research and Statistics,Board of GovernorsMs. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secretariat,Board of GovernorsMrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open MarketSecretariat, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Boehne, Brandt, Burns, Corrigan, Keran,and Scheld, Senior Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of Philadelphia, Atlanta,Dallas, New York, San Francisco, and Chicago,respectivelyMessrs. Broaddus and Danforth, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond andMinneapolis, respectivelyMr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a list of attendees at a meeting. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 2.
 Ozog, Manager, Securities Department,Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofApril 22, 1980CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Can we come to order, ladies andgentlemen. I am delighted to say that our Vice Chairman, Mr. Solomon,who was duly elected in absentia last time, is with us today. Welcometo your first meeting. I am sure you'll find out about the wonderfulways of the Open Market Committee very quickly. First, we have theminutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply introduces Mr. Solomon as the new Vice Chairman and welcomes him to his first meeting.


Passage number 3.
MR. GUFFEY. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no mention or indication of any disagreement or contention in this passage. The phrase "So moved" simply suggests that someone (presumably Mr. Guffey) has made a motion.


Passage number 4.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we will approve theminutes. Mr. Pardee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 5.
MR. PARDEE. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 6.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments or questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 7.
MR. BLACK. Scott, how would you rate the relative importanceof the declining rates and prospective declines in rates vis-a-vis theIranian situation, so far as weakness in the dollar is concerned.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a question asking for Scott's opinion on the relative importance of declining rates and the Iranian situation in relation to the weakness of the dollar.


Passage number 8.
MR. PARDEE. Much more important are the interest rates. Onthe Iranian situation, when you talk to different people they'll giveyou different interpretations even on the same day. For the momentinterest rates are the dominant factor in peoples' minds in theexchange markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating that interest rates are more important than the Iranian situation and that different people have different interpretations of the situation. However, there is no explicit disagreement or contention presented here.


Passage number 9.
MR. BLACK. But if we kept the aggregates under controlsuccessfully for the next several months, would interest rates andprospective interest rate movements mean as much as they do now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a hypothetical scenario and asking a question.


Passage number 10.
MR. PARDEE. In a couple of months the exchange traders mightbe thinking about something else. The [focus of their] attentiontends to shift from time to time. Currently, given that there is afeeling that we're in a period where interest rates are topping offand people are uncertain as to how far interest rates are likely to godown or whether they will stabilize, rates are the dominant factor.The exchange market people look a little at the aggregates. I was abit surprised and rather pleased that the decline in the aggregatesreported on Friday did not lead to a sharp sell-off of the dollar,given the sensitivity the market is showing toward monetary questionsin the United States at this point. But they look mainly at interestrates and less at the aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply describing the current focus and behavior of exchange market traders.


Passage number 11.
MR. BLACK. Has that mix changed any. I know that has beentrue for a long time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and providing information about the topic.


Passage number 12.
MR. PARDEE. It depends in some banks on whether they havemonetarist economists that they have to listen to; but they work withinterest rates. And I'm afraid, with this 1.4 [number released] thismorning, that we're hearing again from the market that there has notbeen any improvement on inflation in terms of the CPI.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 13.
MR. WALLICH. Following up President Black's question: Themarket knows the projections are for falling interest rates. Theseforecasts are also derivable from Treasury bill futures and the like.4/22/80Do you think the exchange rate discounts these future declines ininterest rates so that if they materialized there would be no furtherexchange rate effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply posing a question and seeking the opinion of others.


Passage number 14.
MR. PARDEE. It's a question of [timing]. We surveyedcorporate treasurers yesterday to find out what they were thinking atthis moment. Several of them related practically the same view: Theyexpect that sooner or later interest rates may decline in the UnitedStates--that it's necessary--as we move into a recession. But as Iindicated in my report, if interest rates come down faster--beforethere is a demonstrable improvement on inflation and internationallyon the trade [and] current account balances--then we're heading fortrouble. So there is some expectation that interest rates may recede,and certainly plenty of hope that they will at some point, from thisparticular group of people. But the traders and corporate treasurersare telling us that it's a matter of timing in terms of when theinterest rates come down and when these other things start improving.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker mentions that there is some expectation and hope that interest rates will decrease, but emphasizes that the timing is crucial and that other factors need improvement before this happens.


Passage number 15.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The consumer price index isn't going tocome down for three months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 16.
MS. TEETERS. What are the price indexes doing in othercountries.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information or indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 17.
MR. PARDEE. They are beginning to level off, I'm afraid,certainly in Germany and Switzerland where they are running around 6percent or 5 percent. Wholesale and producer price indexes are stillvery high in many of these countries. Japan is still reporting veryhigh increases, but they are beginning to level off, too, as the oilshock gets filtered into their price mechanism. But the consumerprice indexes are behaving better in some of these countries.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage describes the current situation of inflation in different countries without any clear disagreement or contention. It simply provides an analysis of the inflation rates and consumer price indexes in various countries.


Passage number 18.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are German interest rates doing. Arethey off their peak or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is simply asking a question about the current state of German interest rates. It does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 19.
MR. PARDEE. Today they're off a little. The Euro-mark isabout 9-1/4 percent and the three-month rate on interbank [loans] isdown below 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states the current rates of the Euro-mark and interbank loans without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 20.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What were they at the peak.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 21.
MR. PARDEE. Euro-marks as against Eurodollars were around 17percent as against 9 percent. We're still at a differential of about7 to 8 percentage points, depending on which measure we use.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is providing information about the difference in interest rates between Euro-marks and Eurodollars. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage.


Passage number 22.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's close to the peak.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 23.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not appreciably off the peak.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "It's not appreciably off the peak" suggests that something is close to its peak level and there is no dispute or conflicting viewpoints about it.


Passage number 24.
MR. PARDEE. Well, it was at about 10 percentage pointsbefore, close to 10-1/2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is a statement made by Mr. Pardee, without any opposing view or conflicting information provided.


Passage number 25.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the phrase "Any other questions". It is a neutral statement inviting the audience to ask additional questions but does not express any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 26.
MR. EASTBURN. A question, I guess to Ted Truman: In thesummary of the Greenbook, the staff concluded with a paragraph aboutthe outlook for the dollar, which as nearly as I can remember has saidabout the same thing for the last year or two, whereas the dollar has4/22/80had some ups and downs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 27.
 I wonder if this is because that is the bestyou can do or [Laughter]--MR. TRUMAN. Well, the dollar has had some ups and downs.However, for the last 18 months, or in fact since shortly after theNovember 1st program, the dollar on average has not moved. It hasmoved in a band of about 5 percentage points on average and ourprojections have been more or less within that same range. As far asyour second question is concerned, about whether that's the best wecan do, my feeling and the staff's feeling is that there are a numberof conflicting forces at the moment. On the one hand, we have theprospect of interest rates coming down; that's something that themarket looks at very closely, in part because that's the cost ofmoney. That's a different phenomenon than the monetary aggregatetargets, which are a function of what is going to happen to inflationand the economy over a longer term. I would differ with Scott in thatI think the market believes and has appreciated the fact that ourtrade and current account positions are relatively good and willcontinue to be relatively good, partly because of what our domesticprojection is, and that should tend to give some strength to thedollar. So, it's really those two conflicting forces that lead us insome sense to a projection that the dollar will remain in the range ithas been for the last year or so. As far as the technical side of theprojection is concerned, we did in fact raise it from 88.5 to 90, butthat's a relatively small difference. It's in the same range where ithas been for the last 18 months or more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of the speaker sharing their thoughts and the staff's perspective on the fluctuation of the dollar and the factors that influence it.


Passage number 28.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage states "Mr. Winn," which alone does not provide enough information to indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 29.
MR. WINN. We hear a good bit of publicity about domesticcredit problems. The Chrysler story is in the paper this morning, andso forth. I hear no mention of international credit problems, andthat seems to me to be an exposure that gets overlooked in theassessment. I don't know whether you have any feel for this or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Winn is simply stating a concern and asking for the speaker's opinion or insight on international credit problems.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 30.
MR. PARDEE. There are several people who might be able toanswer that. In terms of the non-oil-[producing] less developedcountries, there is a lot of discussion about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be seen in the phrase "there is a lot of discussion about that". The use of the phrase indicates that there is disagreement or differing opinions among people regarding the topic.


Passage number 31.
MR. WINN. That's the sort of thing I mean. It seems to methat's a problem that is ahead of us in spades.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion about a problem that they foresee.


Passage number 32.
MR. PARDEE. I think both the Board staff and our staff, aswell as other staffs, are looking at this very carefully. We'removing into another period where the whole discussion of recycling isvery important. Since the 1974-75 period scared so many people,perhaps we're in a little better shape coming into this one. Peopletalk about Brazil and a few other countries that will have bigproblems, but of course the [unintelligible] decided not to talk tothe IMF. I don't know, Ted; you might want to comment on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the importance of recycling and expressing a hopeful perspective. The mention of Brazil and the decision not to talk to the IMF does not result in contention or disagreement within the passage.


Passage number 33.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, as we said in the presentation to theCommittee in February, it's not clear how the international creditproblems will impact on the dollar per se or on the U.S. economy.There is a feedback between the policies that are adopted by othermajor oil importing countries in this framework [in terms of theireffect] on the dollar and the international credit situation. So, ifJapan and Germany and the United States, for example, decide that they4/22/80do not want to sustain the kinds of current account deficits thateverybody seems to be projecting at least for this year and next year,then we could have problems. It's not clear how it would impact onthe dollar, but the impact on banks and the financial system could bequite severe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 34.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The difficulty of the non-oil-[producing] LDCs in borrowing sufficiently and the need to draw downreserves will probably lessen the pressures for diversification out ofthe dollar. On the other hand, the probable failure of thesubstitution account negotiations may increase diversificationpressures by the OPEC countries. My own view is that right now thebest estimate is probably that we'll be nip and tuck with the Germanson the external current account deficit. The picture is not asoptimistic as it was when we thought a couple of months ago that ourdeficit would be significantly lower than the German and Japanesedeficits. I agree completely with Scott that in the short run,meaning in the next month or two, there is likely to be pressure onthe dollar if the decline in interest rates moves very precipitously.But I think the outlook in the longer run, a few months from now orlater in the year, is sufficiently reasonable that we're unlikely tohave any major dollar pressure of the kind that we saw in October1978. But in the period immediately ahead of us, as these interestrates move very sharply--if they do--I think that will cause usproblems.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is primarily discussing different factors that may affect the value of the dollar and the potential pressure on it. The author then shares their own view on the situation.


Passage number 35.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the capital conversion situationnow. Have the Germans stopped that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question about the current status of the capital conversion situation and whether the Germans have ceased their actions.


Passage number 36.
MR. PARDEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 37.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But we're not getting any now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply indicates a lack of progress or advancement.


Passage number 38.
MR. PARDEE. On the capital conversion. No, they haven't hadmany issues lately.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that there haven't been many issues lately, indicating that there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 39.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If they had them, presumably we would getthem. But they just haven't had any.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage presents a hypothetical situation (if they had them) and states a fact (they just haven't had any). There is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 40.
MR. PARDEE. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage consists of a quote from a person identified as Mr. Pardee. The quote does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement.


Passage number 41.
MR. PARTEE. I wonder whether it wouldn't be desirable tohave some downward pressure on the dollar, with the economy movinginto what could prove to be a pretty sizable recession. Wouldn't itbe nice to have a little better export market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents a question or a suggestion from Mr. Partee regarding the potential benefits of having some downward pressure on the dollar during a recession.


Passage number 42.
MR. PARDEE. There are considerable lags. You're talkingabout effects in 1981-1982, not now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Pardee simply states that there are lags in the effects being discussed.


Passage number 43.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, I know. But we don't know how long therecession is going to last either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply stating that they do not know the duration of the recession.


Passage number 44.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. On the other hand though, Chuck,until the inflation rate does begin to go down, the reasonably stabledollar is one of the few things we have going for us. It isconsidered an anti-inflationary influence to a modest degree, so I4/22/80think we would be well advised to try to make sure, as best we can,that any decline in the dollar is a reasonably gradual one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The author presents a viewpoint that the stable dollar is beneficial in combating inflation. They suggest that any decline in the dollar should be gradual to minimize negative impacts.


Passage number 45.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I agree with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker states that they agree with the previous statement, suggesting that there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 46.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Not to resist a decline, but [toensure] that it is a gradual one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement suggests taking action to ensure that a decline happens gradually, rather than resisting it altogether. It does not present any conflicting views or opposing ideas.


Passage number 47.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The trouble with declines in the dollar isthat they get a certain momentum of their own.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is presenting a fact or observation about declines in the dollar, without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 48.
MR. PARTEE. And, of course, the thing that would bring theinflation rate down the quickest in the short run would be lowerinterest rates because the CPI is being affected so greatly [by]mortgage costs and other indirect costs of higher interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MR. PARTEE is simply stating a fact that lower interest rates would bring down inflation rate in the short run due to the impact of mortgage costs and other indirect costs.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 49.
MR. WALLICH. These all strike me as rather unorthodox waysof coping with our problems: Depreciate the dollar, bring downinterest rates, and fight inflation. Now, I don't think you reallymeant this seriously, but it sounded a little ominous because thereare people who do believe that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich expresses his disagreement with the ideas of depreciating the dollar, bringing down interest rates, and fighting inflation, considering them unorthodox.


Passage number 50.
MR. WINN. One more question. The freezing of the Iranianassets [added] one aspect to the diversification desires of othernations. Did the suggestion in the latest of the President'sproposals that we seize them--not only freeze them but seize them--tomeet various expenditures, etc. have any further repercussions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The passage is simply asking whether the suggestion to seize the frozen Iranian assets in order to meet various expenses has any further repercussions.


Passage number 51.
MR. PARDEE. Well, the whole package, as I indicated, is thatas long as the United States is exposed, whatever we do to actunilaterally in Iran is seen as bad for the dollar. The indicationsout of the European ministries meeting today are that perhaps theywill help us, and that is giving the dollar a little lift. But, asfor individual items within the package we put together, it's hard toisolate what the effect on the dollar has been.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not have any clear contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the potential effects on the dollar based on the actions taken by the United States in Iran. There is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 52.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need a motion to ratify thetransactions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. A motion to ratify the transactions is being requested, indicating a need for official approval or confirmation.


Passage number 53.
MR. WINN. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The sentence "So moved" suggests that there is agreement or consensus among the individuals involved.


Passage number 54.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. As for recommendationswith respect to operations, we took an action last month regardingthese forwards with the Bundesbank, which we would turn over to theTreasury. I would hope that we could still do that. I take it thatthe Bundesbank is taking the position that if we have any swapsoutstanding, we have to use [the proceeds] first for that. I don'tknow if you can arrange to get the swap repaid before then, Mr.Pardee. If not, let's negotiate vigorously so that the Treasury gets[the funds].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and expressing a hope, and there is no indication of disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 55.
MR. PARTEE. Gets to realize its losses.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 56.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Sternlight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 57.
MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only includes a statement without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 58.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unfortunately, the passage you provided is incomplete. Please provide the full passage so I can accurately determine if there is contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 59.
4/22/80MR. BALLES. Peter, I'm very curious about what happened tothe expected April bulge. As you know, the Committee was concernedthat it not be allowed to happen. I'm not quite sure we were lookingforward to a negative bulge. Do you have any insights into what wasgoing on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing curiosity and seeking insights into the situation.


Passage number 60.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, the aggregates have proved once againtheir lack of short-run predictability. We thought we had a surething going with April because [the money supply in] April has bulgedevery year for the past 4 or 5 years it seems.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of disagreement or contention. It simply states a fact about the lack of short-run predictability in aggregates and expresses a belief that there was a sure thing based on past trends.


Passage number 61.
MR. BALLES. You can't believe in anything anymore, can you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is making a statement or observation rather than engaging in a debate or argument.


Passage number 62.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I'm not sure that I can pinpoint any specialfactor. I don't know if Steve wants to add anything. In New York ourfaces are even redder than those of the Board staff because we wereanticipating an even greater bulge.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. Mr. Sternlight is expressing uncertainty and seeking input from Steve, but there is no direct disagreement present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 63.
MR. AXILROD. Well, the growth rate [of Ml] in April of 1976was 6.6 percent; in 1977, 9.2 percent; in 1978, 12.6 percent; and in1979, 14.7 percent. My memory is that there is genuine weakness inthe unadjusted deposits. If one compared year over year and appliedthe seasonal factor of 1976--that is abstracting from all theadjustments we've made--the increase would be something like the 6.6percent recorded in 1976. I assume there is some possibility thatwe've over-adjusted because in the process there is a certain amountof coincidence of random factors. It's a conflict of terms, butsomething like that may have happened. And we may see [some rebound]in May and June. I'll have some comments on that in my own briefing.But other than that, we have no special explanation; there are nospecial factors that we could think of, unless income really is beingdestroyed at a very rapid rate here. But we don't have anysubstantial evidence of that yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod suggests that there may have been over-adjustment in the growth rate calculations for Ml, and that there may be a rebound in May and June. This is in contrast to the lack of special explanation provided and the absence of substantial evidence of rapid income destruction.


Passage number 64.
MR. BALLES. I heard Chuck mutter under his breath that itmight have something to do with the weakness in the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement as it simply reports that Mr. Balles heard Chuck mutter under his breath about a possible connection between something and the weakness in the economy.


Passage number 65.
MR. PARTEE. Do we know what happened in April 1975.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply presents a question about whether or not someone knows what happened in April 1975.


Passage number 66.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, [M1 growth in] April 1975 was -3 percent.In fact, one has to go back to 1970, 1971, and 1972 to have highAprils again. They were between 7 and 8 percent in those threesuccessive years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing factual information about the percentage of M1 growth in April in different years, without any contradictory statements or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 67.
MR. PARTEE. I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the given passage, there is no contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Partee sees something.


Passage number 68.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In April 1975 we were just coming out ofrecession.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 69.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual content of the passage being provided.


Passage number 70.
 Well, in terms of money demand--MR. AXILROD. I might say, Governor Partee, that the -3percent of April 1975 was followed by a May of 13 percent and a Juneof 16 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 71.
MR. SCHULTZ. So much for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by Mr. Schultz is simply concluding or summarizing the topic that was previously discussed.


Passage number 72.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Baughman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the provided passage as it only consists of a person's name, "Mr. Baughman."


Passage number 73.
4/22/80MR. BAUGHMAN. Well, I was going to raise a question as towhether the seasonal adjustment might not have been a factor. But Iwould also like to ask Peter whether he could comment on hisconfidence or lack thereof in the projected rather strong money growthfor May and June shown in the report which I believe was put out inNew York.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 74.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I don't really want to claim anypaternity for the money projections that are made in New York. I lookat all those projections with great skepticism. In projecting afairly strong May and June, basically I think our people felt thatthey did not see a reason at this point to change the quarterly growthpatterns, which they tend to feel a little more confident in than themonth-to-month gyrations. And to have the quarterly growth come in asthey had seen it before, having had a weak March and April, one isdriven to project a rebound in May and June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own skepticism about money projections in New York, but there is no conflicting viewpoint or argument being presented.


Passage number 75.
MR. BAUGHMAN. But they use, do they not, somethingapproximating the Greenbook outlook for the general economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking a question for clarification.


Passage number 76.
MR. STERNLIGHT. They would be basing it on their own[forecast], but that is not a very different outlook in this case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that the forecast being used as a basis is not significantly different in this particular case.


Passage number 77.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 78.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I can think of one small technicalfactor that might have affected [money growth]: The delay in mailingout the [tax] refunds might have made the money hit balances a coupleof days later, but probably no more than that. If we figured itcorrectly, that would account for maybe $800 million or something likethat but the estimates for the week of the 16th were revised down toabout $4-1/2 billion. However, one thing we wondered about waswhether or not the high interest rates and the greater availability ofmoney substitutes such as the money market mutual funds may have ledpeople not to build up their balances in anticipation of the tax datequite as [early] as they have in the past. How to measure that, Idon't know. But we also were wondering about this great weakness, andthat's all we could come up with as a possible explanation for it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker presents a potential technical factor that may have affected money growth and acknowledges uncertainty about how to measure the impact of other factors.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 79.
MR. AXILROD. The delay does have an effect. Our estimate isslightly higher than yours through the week of the 16th. We have someslightly counterbalancing upward effect in the week of the 23rd; weassume it will be washed out by the 30th and probably have a trivialeffect on the month on average. But we are assuming that M1 for theweek of the 23rd, the week we're in, rises by something like $3-1/2billion from the week of the 16th, in part because of this delay. Ofcourse, if that doesn't develop, the negative for April will be muchbigger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod's statement about the delay having a slight effect and his assumption that the negative effect for April will be small contradicts the previous statement or estimate provided by someone else.


Passage number 80.
MR. SCHULTZ. What about people paying off debts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply presents a question about people paying off debts without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements.


Passage number 81.
MR. AXILROD. Well, they can pay off debts out of almost anyasset. They may be paying them off out of cash or they may be lettingother assets run down. I just have no way of knowing until we get thequarterly flow of funds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker does not have enough information to determine how debts are being paid off until quarterly flow of funds is received.


Passage number 82.
MS. TEETERS. But, Steve, didn't you say yesterday that thereis no evidence that people are moving into other types of money.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 83.
4/22/80 -8-MR. AXILROD. Yes, so far. I'll have some of that in my ownbriefing. But that's right; thus far we don't have evidence of moneymoving into higher order Ms. We don't have data yet for Treasurybills or complete data on debt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact and acknowledging a lack of evidence or data.


Passage number 84.
MR. BLACK. I gather that there wasn't anything more than theavailability of more data that led to these downward revisions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Black, is stating a fact about the downward revisions, not expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 85.
MR. AXILROD. In the money supply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a statement about the money supply.


Passage number 86.
MR. BLACK. Yes, for the week of the 16th.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only states that Mr. Black agrees with something without mentioning any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 87.
MR. AXILROD. No, we don't have anything more than wenormally have as the weeks go by.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that they do not have anything more than what they typically have over the weeks.


Passage number 88.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as there is no specific statement or claim made.


Passage number 89.
MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, before we feel that our inability toforecast monthly behavior of the aggregates reflects some sort ofweakness in what we're doing, I think we should keep in mind the factthat even the most ardent monetarists have never believed it ispossible to control money or to avoid fluctuations on a month-to-monthbasis. If we see an undershoot or an overshoot in the short term,even though it might seem desirable to lean against that deviationthrough the operations of the Desk, I really don't think we should.Nor should we feel that because the aggregates are unpredictable on amonth-to-month basis it in any way detracts from the wisdom of how weare conducting our business.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and stating that even monetarists agree that it is not possible to control money or avoid monthly fluctuations. They also mention that deviations in the short term should not be leaned against and do not detract from the wisdom of conducting business a certain way.


Passage number 90.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there are no other comments, we have toratify the transactions.SPEAKER(.). So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 91.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, they are ratified.Let's turn to the staff report on the economic situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "Without objection, they are ratified" suggests agreement or consensus among the people involved. The mention of the staff report on the economic situation does not hint at any disagreement either.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 92.
MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 93.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Since we've identified with such accuracypast financial relationships, I think we ought to have our economistdiscuss prospective financial relationships.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting that an economist should discuss future financial relationships based on the accurate identification of past financial relationships.


Passage number 94.
MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 95.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can have some general comments aboutthe economic situation and policy implications and we'll return to amore precise discussion after an initial go-around. Mr. Winn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that there will be some general comments about the economic situation and policy implications, followed by a more precise discussion later. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 96.
MR. WINN. I had a question I wanted to raise, which may bemore on the technical side than the general side, Paul. Do you wantto hold that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Winn, raises a question which suggests a difference in opinion or perspective compared to Paul.


Passage number 97.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's fair to ask questions at thistime, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states an opinion about the appropriateness of asking questions at the present moment.


Passage number 98.
MR. WINN. Okay. Steve, you have made an income analysis formoney demand in the period ahead. If one looks back at many previous4/22/80credit crunches, one sees that after the economy turns down, we get abulge in credit demand. The margins start to narrow; sales are offand inventories are up and there is continued price pressure for morecarry. So, first, there's the seasonal adjustment [problem] thatmakes me quite nervous about May and June. Now, this may or may nothappen, but there is also the possibility, it seems to me--withinterest rates turning a bit and attitudes changing a little--of arather substantial increase in borrowing in the May-June period aswell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing concerns and possibilities, but there is no argument or disagreement with another person.


Passage number 99.
MR. AXILROD. We actually have projected a rather sharp dropin borrowing in the second quarter, largely because we assume a verysubstantial liquidation of liquid assets built up by corporations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It presents a statement made by Mr. Axilrod regarding projected borrowing in the second quarter.


Passage number 100.
MR. WINN. But that runs out eventually.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Winn without any conflicting opinions or arguments presented.


Passage number 101.
MR. AXILROD. That's right. So the sharp drop levels off,but with borrowings at a lower level. And, of course, we have someweakening in the consumer demand area. So, we don't have anysubstantial build-up in borrowing demand ahead of us. Over the longrun, of course, we could probably foresee some business desire torestructure balance sheets, but that's a shifting of the borrowingpatterns. We simply don't see any bulge, really, in credit demands.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and stating their observation without contradicting any other viewpoints.


Passage number 102.
MR. WINN. But if you talk to some of these businessmen, theydon't have [unintelligible] they can hold out without having to comeback in. They are out now. Rates have scared them off and they areusing up what they have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any elements of contention or disagreement. It simply presents the opinion of some businessmen who are not able to hold out without having to come back in due to high rates that have scared them off.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 103.
MR. AXILROD. That's right. There is pressure; they're notgenerating internal funds to any substantial degree. It's true thatwe have them running down their liquid assets. There is some built-inpressure generated against expanding their spending to a great degree.We don't have a vast expansion in spending; and to the degree thatpressure is on them, it might constrain their spending actually atcurrent rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that there is pressure and disagreement regarding the expansion of spending at current rates. Mr. Axilrod mentions that there is pressure against expanding spending to a great degree, indicating a constraint on current spending levels.


Passage number 104.
MR. PARTEE. Don't you think, Willis, that they followed adifferent inventory policy this time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 105.
MR. WINN. They kept inventories pretty tight; but if salesdrop off, they still are faced with having to carry [inventories].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact about inventory management.


Passage number 106.
MR. PARTEE. They seemed to cut production very fast, too. Idon't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing a personal observation or opinion.


Passage number 107.
MR. WINN. The adjustment is not quite as easy as we like tothink of it sometimes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 108.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me say in connection with all of theseconfusing money figures and related numbers, that we took some actionsin March that were unusual, to say the least, on consumer credit, onthe voluntary program, on the money market funds, and all the rest.And we had interest rates at levels nobody ever saw before. I suspectthis has led to some uncertainty and adjustments of a magnitude wecan't quantify very well. We may have had a lot of "money" held inthe form of Treasury bills for instance; we just don't know. It's notin our M2 and M3 figures. I suspect there may be something to what4/22/80Fred said--and we will not find out until later--in that a lot ofpeople may be scared about consumer credit, and they may now be takingsome money out of the bank and repaying their charge cards orsomething else. It's just a very uncertain period, too uncertain toreach conclusive judgments about anything. Unfortunately, we onlyfind out about these things later when we get more numbers and getsome more perspective as to whether we are getting a rebound or not.We just don't know at this stage. Mr. Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing uncertainty and acknowledging that there are many unknown factors and variables at play.


Passage number 109.
MR. ROOS. I'd like to pursue, if I may, the reasoning thatSteve expressed. It's my understanding that back in October weadopted a policy of letting interest rates flow freely. Indeed,interest rates did move up rather dramatically and we did not act toimpede that upward movement; we let them move. Now, Steve, if Iunderstood you correctly, you expressed concern that if we permittedinterest rates to decline dramatically, there could be adversereactions from markets and other sources in terms of inflationaryexpectations--that they may misread that in spite of the fact that theChairman has repeated frequently the possibility that interest ratesmight decline and that it would not be a signal of any easing of ourdetermination to deal with inflation. I have two questions. Onequestion is: Isn't it illogical to let rates move one way and thenget "antsy," if I may use a bad phrase, when they move the other way.Secondly--and I might pose this question to the Chairman--if we permitinterest rates to drop, can't we in our published records, or throughcomments by the Chairman and others, explain that this is in no wayany retreat from our primary concern with inflation. In other words,one of the things that I think causes the concern that you expressedis that in the past we have acted with a degree of mystery and secrecyand let the markets draw their own conclusions. Can't we comfort themand explain the rationale behind what we are doing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a conversation where Mr. Roos is seeking clarification and proposing possible solutions related to interest rates.


Passage number 110.
MR. AXILROD. In answer to the first question, PresidentRoos, I was trying to bring before the Committee the various concernsthat the market would see and also the economic analysis. I was notexpressing my own judgment, particularly, on one or the other aspectsof this. The only thing I can say is that, empirically, in recentperiods when interest rates have gone down, we have had a great hueand cry in the market that may or may not have been rational. It hasprobably had effects on the thinking of those who spend and those whoinvest; and it has brought forth the view that perhaps inflation isn'tgoing to be conquered. That just seems to be a market event and Iwanted to bring it before the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining their intention in presenting certain concerns and economic analysis to the Committee. They state that they are not expressing their own judgment on the matters discussed.


Passage number 111.
 On your second question,since it was addressed to the Chairman--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You don't want to express any judgmentabout the persuasive powers of the Chairman, Mr. Axilrod. [Laughter]They are limited I would say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making a lighthearted comment about the persuasive powers of the Chairman, which is received with laughter.


Passage number 112.
MR. ROOS. Are they limited, Paul, by the tradition of ourtaking an action and letting people decide what caused us to do whatwe did or are they limited for other reasons. I think your persuasivepotential--and it isn't salary-setting time, so I'm not polishing theapple--is enormous. [Laughter] But I think the Fed has traditionallynot used that potential in past years because we thought we shouldjust take actions and let the people out there decide why we did.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's opinion and acknowledging the potential persuasive power of the person being addressed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 113.
4/22/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only answer I could give you is thatwe would get a mixed reaction. Some people will believe it. Peopleof monetarist persuasion will believe it more than others. Somepeople don't believe the underlying theory, so they have no reason tobelieve it. And there will be people in between. But I don't knowwhether there will be more or less [confusion]. There was certainly alot of confusion in late November, December, and early January for avariety of reasons. People saw the reserve figures going up, whichwas one confusing aspect. The money supply figures weren't going up,particularly, but the reserve figures were; and interest rates weregoing down. We get all different constellations of events. But Ithink you are misled if you think that pure persuasion is going toconvince people. It may have an impact, but we are going to get mixedreactions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker mentions that there will be mixed reactions to a certain topic, with some people believing it more than others and some not believing it at all. This indicates a disagreement or difference in opinions among different individuals.


Passage number 114.
MR. SCHULTZ. I would just remind you of how he charmed GailCincotta.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply reminding the audience of how someone charmed Gail Cincotta.


Passage number 115.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON(.). The ability to persuade isasymmetrical also.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a neutral observation about the asymmetrical nature of the ability to persuade.


Passage number 116.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's probably right. People believewhat they want to believe. If they saw the inflation rate comingdown, they would be more persuaded. But we are in this unfortunateposition where I suspect the consumer price index, anyway, is going toremain at or above--or maybe if we are really lucky a little below--its current level for three months because of the extraneous questionof the oil import fee and the way the interest rates get factored intothat. We probably will have three months of that, which will carry usinto July. Now, maybe if we are lucky, the producer price index willbegin showing some declines; that depends partly I suppose on how theytreat the oil import fee in the producer price index. I don't think[the impact] is negligible. We are far better off if we see theaggregates under clear control and a given interest rate movement thanif we see the aggregates shooting up and interest rates going down;the latter would be the worst of all worlds. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and speculating about the inflation rate and its impact on various economic indicators.


Passage number 117.
MR. WALLICH. I'd like to follow up on what Larry said. Ithink it is perfectly possible to convince the market that we aresticking to a fixed money supply policy. That doesn't mean that weare not engaging in a very stimulative policy at a time of recession.That's exactly the nature of that policy. It's not really a policy;it's a procedure. And it's analogous to building strong automaticstabilizers into the fiscal system where without tax cuts therecession will produce a large deficit which, of course, is verystimulative. Here we have generated a procedure that is highlyrestraining when demand for money rises against a fixed supply becauseinterest rates rise sharply; and it's highly stimulative on the waydown. So we convince the market that we are on track with ouraggregates. All that we are telling them is that we are going to havelow and extremely stimulative interest rates. Their analysis will bequite correct. Now, if it's a question of proving that we arefollowing our policy, I think we can be persuasive. But that doesn'tmean the market will believe that we are not following a policy thathas very stimulative effects. So, I think we need to look at thereality--namely, that we would be stimulating very severely if we letinterest rates go down--rather than at the procedure. The proceduresays we haven't changed our method of feeding money into the economy.4/22/80All that makes very relevant what Steve said: That we mayhave to modify our path. We may be able to do this within the limitsof the [annual] ranges of 4 to 6-1/2 percent for M-1B and 3-1/2 to 6percent for M-1A. I think we would not have to go outside thoseranges, at least for the remaining two months of the first half of theyear. It would be very alarming if we went to money growth rates forthe second quarter that would make us maintain the 5 percent rate ofgrowth from December to June because we would have to have two monthsof very high growth rates in order to overcome the weakness of Marchand April. This is an occasion where we ought to allow a little basedrift: Let the past be the past and make sure that in May and June wedo not have very large increases in the aggregates. Now, to theextent that the funds rate can contribute to controlling that, weshould be concerned about the funds rate and not let it drop very low.Our techniques of supplying reserves, of course, can give us a betterhandle on the expansion of the money supply. And when we get totalking about specifics, I'd like to supply some more specificsuggestions on how large an increase we ought to aim at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. The speaker is discussing their views on a specific policy and procedure and suggesting potential modifications.


Passage number 118.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Our present target is not 5 percent. It's4-1/2 percent or somewhat less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the current target as 4-1/2 percent or potentially lower.


Passage number 119.
MR. WALLICH. That comes out of the movement in the previousperiod, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement simply reflects the speaker's opinion about the cause of something. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 120.
MR. AXILROD. For December to June the Committee last timevoted on 4-1/2 percent or somewhat less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a fact about a previous vote by the Committee.


Passage number 121.
MR. PARTEE. It's consistent with the numbers you gave, whichare the average over the longer run. Henry mentioned M-1B also.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, acknowledges that the statement made by Henry about M-1B is consistent with the numbers provided.


Passage number 122.
MR. ROOS. Do you accept the fact that if we keep moneygrowing slowly, there is a direct effect on output. Isn't that partof the risk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question asking for acceptance of a causal relationship between slow money growth and its effect on output.


Passage number 123.
MR. WALLICH. No. I don't believe there is any direct effectfrom money to the economy. The economy in my opinion runs on interestrates. The effect from money goes to interest rates and from there itgoes to the economy. And the prescription for a fixed rate of growthof the money supply, far from being a neutral and noninterventionistpolicy on the economy, is a policy of very extreme intervention. Onemight even call it fine-tuning. You want wide swings in the interestrates and that's what we get by having inelastic growth of the moneysupply. [Rates] are high in expansions, which restrains, and are verylow in recessions, which stimulates. There may be very good reasonsnormally for stimulating strongly in a recession and then as demandfor money builds up again to get interest rates rising early in theexpansion. But in our present predicament, where we have to worrymore about inflation than anything else, I don't think we can affordthis remedy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses his opinion about the relationship between money and the economy, but there is no overt disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 124.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 125.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I agree with the staff's furtherdownward revisions in the projections for the forthcoming period. Andif I had to guess, I would say that they still haven't got them quitelow enough, because I just don't see any area in the economy thatseems to have significant strength. Housing is headed much lower, I4/22/80think. The consumer is grossly overextended. We are getting grassroots reports of growing personal and business bankruptcies. TheRedbook, and particularly the addendum that the New York Bank sent in,suggests that inventories are not as closely in alignment with needsas we had thought earlier, and that was the main thing we werecounting on to keep this recession relatively moderate. And I wouldguess that there is probably going to be greater-than-expectedweakness abroad, so that this recession might well take on more of aninternational cast than I think most people are assuming at thismoment. If I am right on this, then prices will probably come downsomewhat more rapidly than the staff and most other people areassuming. I have a lot of sympathy for what Henry was saying,primarily because I think we have made errors in the past. By thesame token, when it comes to policy, I think we would be well advisedto stick to the targets that we adopted last time, which inclines metoward "B." The only thing that causes me problems is this estimateof a sharp decline in the aggregates in April. If that [occurs], inorder to stay on this targeted path we have to have growth in May andJune in the principal aggregates of over 9 percent, and I think thatwould scare the devil out of the market and lead people to concludethat we had abandoned our October 6th policy. So, if April does comein that weak, then I would want to hit the midpoints of the rangessometime later--maybe in September or somewhere down the line ratherthan try to get [growth] back to the midpoints by June. What I'mreally saying, I guess, is that we ought to stick to the reservetarget. And I would like to see rates come down, if that's thenatural fallout of this. That should help prevent April from being solow and would permit us, hopefully, to hit the midpoints by June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. Mr. Black agrees with the staff's projections for the forthcoming period but believes that they haven't lowered them enough. He also expresses concerns about the state of the economy, including housing, consumer overextension, and bankruptcies. He believes that there may be greater-than-expected weakness abroad, leading to an international recession. However, he also acknowledges that sticking to the targets set in the past would be advisable. Overall, Mr. Black's statements contain both agreement and disagreement, showing contention in the passage.


Passage number 126.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. April is pretty well gone, I'm afraid.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that April is almost over.


Passage number 127.
MR. BLACK. Well, probably so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is likely agreeing or acknowledging something mentioned before, but without any clear indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 128.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 129.
MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think we have the firstbig test of our new operating procedure ahead of us. It may be moresevere than the staff has projected because we feel the second quarteris likely to be weaker than the staff forecast. If at this juncturewe begin to revise our money growth targets, then in effect we areback to managing interest rates again. If we abandon, for allpractical purposes, our money growth targets at the first occasion wefind interest rates that are uncomfortable, then how is the marketgoing to have any confidence that when we require uncomfortableinterest rates on the up side we will not then also abandon our moneygrowth targets. We would be right back to where we have been. Now,to stay on the course, particularly if the economy is weaker than thestaff projects, is going to be uncomfortable. I think we're going tohave to live through a period of weakness in the dollar because of thevery short time horizon of the foreign exchange trigger. And we willget talk--no matter how persuasive our Chairman is--about the FederalReserve letting loose too soon. But we've simply got to ride itthrough. Rather than viewing lower rates as stimulative, as Henrydoes, I would view them as a force for mitigating the severity of therecession, because there is no question that we are in for a verysharp decline. The issue is: Do we want a monetary policy that isgoing to make the recession, if anything, sharper, steeper and longerthan the staff has forecast. So, it seems to me, it is fish or cut4/22/80bait on our new operating procedure in the second quarter--whether itis at this meeting or some other meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Morris argues against revising money growth targets and suggests that sticking to the current course may lead to a more severe recession. He also disagrees with Henry's view that lower interest rates are stimulative, instead suggesting they would only mitigate the severity of the recession.


Passage number 130.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Baughman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage is not provided, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 131.
MR. BAUGHMAN. First, Mr. Chairman--and it's possibly atrivial question--on page I-24 in the Greenbook it's reported that oneof the reasons for strength in exports of nonagricultural commoditiesis the high price of silver in [the form of] exported coins. Is thata significant business.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about the significance of a particular business aspect mentioned in the Greenbook.


Passage number 132.
MR. TRUMAN. Yes, exports of coins were something over $2billion at an annual rate in January and February.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply provides a statement about the amount of exports of coins in January and February without any opposing viewpoints or disagreement presented.


Passage number 133.
MR. BAUGHMAN. Aside from the silver price, was that about anormal volume.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information about the silver price and the volume.


Passage number 134.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, we don't have volume figures for it; andin fact, we never will. That is one of the problems in puttingtogether the first-quarter GNP numbers. The price increase clearly issome of it, as well as other random factors in terms of when theexports actually take place. But the two together, and they willnever be unscrambled in the statistics, gave us a big increase in thefourth quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It is simply providing information about the challenges in putting together GNP numbers and explaining that the price increase and random factors contribute to a big increase in the fourth quarter.


Passage number 135.
MR. BAUGHMAN. And this is a product in which I take it wecompete in the world market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the speaker's understanding that they compete in the world market.


Passage number 136.
MR. TRUMAN. It so happens that we had a lot of silverexports and that they were very high priced in that period, whichresults in a big increase in nonagricultural exports in that period.I don't think it goes beyond that. The price has since come down, soeven if we have a normal level of exports, we are going to get lowernonagricultural exports.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement providing a possible explanation for the decrease in nonagricultural exports after a period of high silver prices.


Passage number 137.
MR. BAUGHMAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage "MR. BAUGHMAN" does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 138.
 But it is silver exports in formal coinsrather than--MR. TRUMAN. That's how it's recorded on the statistics;that's the only information I have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about how the information is recorded in statistics.


Passage number 139.
MR. BAUGHMAN. With respect to the general economic forecast,I have no particular quarrel with it. It seems to me that thedirection and the amount of the revisions from a month ago are quiteappropriate in the circumstances. With respect to the remarks thathave been made here that were oriented to policy, I think I agree witheverything that has been said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker explicitly states that they have no particular quarrel with the economic forecast and agree with everything that has been said regarding policy.


Passage number 140.
MR. MORRIS. That's not possible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that something is not possible without any opposing view or disagreement.


Passage number 141.
 [Laughter]MR. BAUGHMAN. It seems to me that it is. When we adoptedour current policy posture, we did it knowing that it was going togive us strong swings in interest rates as we undertook to determinewhether or not stabilizing the rate of growth of the money stockimparts stability or instability to the real economy. So as I see it,we decided that we would find out whether all of the statisticalanalysis that has been made through the years has a firm basis. Andit seems to me that we should stick with it until we do find out-14-4/22/80whether stability or instability flows from stabilizing money stockgrowth. We've redefined money with the idea that we're bringing thatback to the real world concept, so to back away right at this point intime would just preclude our achieving what it seems to me is atstake.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing the decision made to adopt a certain policy posture and the need to stick with it in order to determine if it leads to stability or instability in the economy. There is no disagreement or conflicting viewpoints expressed in the passage.


Passage number 142.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions the name "Governor Partee," without providing any context or information about any disagreement or contention related to the governor.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 143.
MR. PARTEE. I agree that there's a sizable decline inactivity now in process. It was inevitable, I think. But it'sprobably worse because of the policies we've followed over the lastsix months in defense of a principle. The principle was that in theabsence of knowledge about how interest rates should move--because wehave so little knowledge of the rate that people are willing to paybased on expected rates of return and on inflation--we would provideaggregate growth that we thought appropriate to a moderation of theinflationary course. When we get into a decline, it has always seemedto me extremely difficult to forecast how far it might go becausethere are dynamics involved. There have been shocks: Chrysler, amajor bank that has been referred to, silver, and the possible failureof a brokerage firm. There are shocks of that kind that can affectattitudes and deepen, more than anyone anticipated, the reduction inspending that people are willing to undertake. And what we have arethe automatic stabilizers to guard against this becoming cumulativeand self-reinforcing in its downward movement. Now, the automaticstabilizer in the case of fiscal policy, of course, is the fact thatwe get budget swings. And the automatic stabilizer we've introducedin monetary policy is the fact that we'll get interest rate swings aswe hold to particular ranges of growth that we're willing to see inthe monetary aggregates. Not to let that automatic stabilizer workwould risk a self-reinforcing cumulative decline in activity becausewe don't know what is happening, as we didn't on the up side, topeople's willingness to pay rates of interest for the use of money. Ithink, Henry, that one ought to distinguish between the automaticstabilizer principle and the setting that we put it on, which is thelonger-run presumption. We have a setting for M1 growth; I won't sayM-1A or M-1B because I want to say it's approximately 5 percent. Now,if the underlying rate of inflation is 10 percent, which I think itis, or if it's 15 percent, which you think it is, that's a very, verytight setting on monetary growth because it means there isn't much ofanything left for real growth. In fact, it would suggest that unlessthe inflation rate comes down significantly, there won't be any realgrowth in the economy. And that is very much analogous to a settingin the budgetary posture of, say, a full employment budget of $100billion. It's quite similar. It seems to me that we deliberatelychose a tight setting and we ought to stay with a tight setting; butit also seems to that me we ought to let the automatic stabilizer workbecause not to do so would be very much like the actions of this groupin the period from 1929 to 1933. We could get a reinforcing declinein activity that is propelled by monetary contraction. And we can'tstand that kind of risk for our economy or for the world.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is arguing that the policies followed in defense of a principle have worsened the decline in activity. He suggests that not allowing the automatic stabilizers to work would risk a self-reinforcing decline in activity, while others may disagree with this viewpoint.


Passage number 144.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 145.
MR. BALLES. I don't know that I can add much to the commentsof my three colleagues to my right except to say that I'm essentiallyin agreement with them. It certainly took a great deal of courage forthis Committee to let interest rates rise to these extraordinary-15-4/22/80levels that we've seen, and I think that was the right thing to do.I'm beginning to see encouraging signs, at least, that we've brokenthe back of inflationary expectations. I think we should be equallycourageous on the other side, while sticking to our monetary targets.If that implies that interest rates are going to decline, that doesn'tbother me one bit. As far as the foreign exchange value of the dollaris concerned, I've never believed--and I don't think it's the view ofthis Committee--that some given level of the dollar is an objective inand of itself. Obviously, we want to prevent disorderly changes fromone level to another. But as far as interest rates coming down beingan implication of sticking to our present monetary targets, thatcertainly wouldn't bother me in the short run because of theextraordinarily high levels from which they'd be declining. Ourcredibility would be badly undermined, as others here have said, if weabandoned the monetary growth targets and went back to some implicitview of a proper level of interest rates. I think we can and shouldpersuade the market that what we're doing is a steady state coursehere; and if one implication of that is declining interest rates, somuch the better. That will teach them that we can operate on bothsides of this market. Personally I wouldn't be very much concernedabout the implications of declining rates in the near future if westick to these present targets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with his colleagues and expresses his support for the Committee's decision to let interest rates rise. He also expresses his belief that declining interest rates would not bother him and that it is important to stick to monetary targets for credibility.


Passage number 146.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 147.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The new operatingprocedures seem to me a bit more effective when we're seeking to.restrain credit on the up side than when we're trying to encourage theextension of credit on the down side. As a result, I've been pleasedwith what we've been able to do on the up side, but I am concernedabout where interest rates will go as we move into a recession. LikeErnie, I agree with much of what has been said here this morning; itseems to me it's all relative. If we move into the May-June periodwhen things are very weak, having come from a period when we'vesuccessfully--hopefully--killed off inflationary expectations andpeople are wondering what is going to happen and they see interestrates drop not to the 13 percent level implied by alternative B butmaybe to 10 percent, then we may lose all that we've gained over thelast 60 days by going to a 20 percent prime rate or a 19 percentfederal funds rate. Thus, I think this Committee does have aresponsibility to moderate [the movement of interest rates] on thedown side. It's not that rates can't go to 13 percent or maybe to 10percent, but they shouldn't do it in a 30-day period or perhaps evenin a 60-day period. I would be concerned if we just turn those ratesloose even with a down side of, say, 13 percent. If we're looking ata very weak economy and indecision by those who take down credit orhold money, then it is perhaps true that within a couple of weekswe'll find that 13 percent is not the right level; so via a[conference] call it will go on lower. I would hate to see that takeplace. If the staff is correct that to achieve [the money growth of]alternative B we're talking about increasing nonborrowed reserves at a20 percent annual rate through those two months, I think that's fartoo fast and would add confusion to the market rather than stability.And I think right now we need stability.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their concern and opinion about interest rates in the future, but there is no explicit disagreement with any other person or viewpoint.


Passage number 148.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Mayo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unfortunately, the passage you provided is incomplete and lacks the necessary information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. Please include the rest of the passage for a more accurate analysis.


Passage number 149.
4/22/80MR. MAYO. Well, Mr. Chairman, most of my points have beenmade. I would stick with the targets. I would not see any objection,however, to our interpretation of "about" 4-1/2 percent being 4-1/2percent or a little less rather than 4-1/2 percent or a little more.Okay, so that's fine-tuning, but I think we can lean in that way forone reason or another. Having said that, I would only add one otherpoint: I think the main advantage of the credit restraint programthat we have embarked upon, with great pain, is that it perhaps hasadded the public awareness frosting to the cake, if I may put it thatway. The average consumer--I think for the first time really--hasmade an association, even just from reading the front page of hisdaily paper, that somehow credit restraint does have something to dowith inflation. I've heard even from builders, believe it or not,that they can wade through this and that the whole idea that the banksare now clamping down a little on consumer credit and so forth isgreat in that it is going to help a great deal on inflation. Allright, maybe that is overly magnified. But I think we have thepublic's attention in a way that our October decision failed to getpublic attention. It was still a market-oriented attention that hadsome limited significance outside of the financial community but [theaverage consumer] really didn't understand it. They understand itwhen the First National Bank of Chicago puts in the paper that they'regoing to charge $20 for a Visa card. They understand it when theyfind that on their Sears bill they have to pay 10 percent rather than8 percent of the outstanding balance. These things come home. Ithink the main advantage of the credit restraint program has been inpublic education; and that in itself can have a tremendous effect oninflationary expectations, giving us a few months.- In the meantime,during the difficult period that Paul referred to, for the next two orthree months, we just have to grit our teeth and bear it. If interestrates go down, that's fine; but I would tend to lean a little towardthe lower end of our aggregate range--if not clear to the [lower]margin, a little below the midpoint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is the speaker expressing their opinions and observations.


Passage number 150.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Eastburn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 151.
MR. EASTBURN. Just a couple of comments: On the theologicalissue, I come out with a view that we did make a decision back inOctober and that it was a very fundamental decision and we ought toadhere to it on the down side as well as the up side. In my scale ofpreferences, I'm going to worry more about a very sharp undershoot ofthe aggregates in the foreseeable months than about too sharp adecline in interest rates. And on a more technical scale, if we'regoing to have a decline in rates, I'd prefer to see it begin andproceed rather smoothly than to try to hold rates up and then all of asudden have a very sharp drop, say, in the second half of the year.So, if it's going to happen, we ought to let it start to happen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing his own views and preferences, but there is no indication of a disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 152.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage "Governor Rice." The passage only mentions the name of a person, without providing any further context or information for potential contention or disagreement.


Passage number 153.
MR. RICE. I have no reason to disagree with the revisedprojections of the staff. It seems to me pretty clear that as aresult of recent developments the recession is going to be moresevere, that the recovery is going to be weaker, and that we'll be ina period of recession for a longer time than originally expected. Iagree with much of what Governor Partee has said and what Frank Morrishas said. I have very little to add to that. It seems to me that thebasic risks are that if we revise our targets downward, we risk making4/22/80the recession worse and that if we stick to our current targets, werisk some misunderstanding of our policy and the inflationarypsychology in the market might worsen. I would be clearly inclined totake that latter risk. I find it hard to imagine that whateverinflationary psychology might develop as a result of a temporaryexpansion in the rate of growth in money would last for a long time inthe face of a nominal GNP growth that is roughly twice the rate ofgrowth of the money supply. In other words, if we allow money to growat 4-1/2 percent against a nominal GNP growth of twice that amount, Ifind it difficult to believe that inflationary psychology can continuefor very long against those facts. Therefore, I am inclined to stickwith our current targets. And I would see the period that we're in--where we demonstrate that we are sticking with our course and aremaintaining our goal of restricting money supply growth--as anopportunity to educate the public on our operating procedure and whatit means as well as on our determination to stick to our goals forgrowth in the money supply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Rice states that he agrees with the revised projections of the staff and agrees with the statements made by Governor Partee and Frank Morris. He also explains his reasoning for sticking with the current targets and does not present any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 154.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about Governor Teeters or any related topic, so there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 155.
MS. TEETERS. I don't have much to add to what has been said.I would like to remind you that it took us two months to raise thefederal funds rate by 5 full percentage points. And if you'reuncomfortable about the period ahead, I'm very uncomfortable about theperiod we've been through. We choked the horse. Now, do you want tocompletely strangle him or do you want to be able to ride him a littlefurther down the line. I find these interest rates outrageously high.And March housing starts are real housing starts; they're not aseasonally adjusted number in the middle of the winter sort of thing.If we get low housing starts in April and May, we aren't going to haveany housing this year. And we're obviously not going to have verymany automobiles built.We went into this with the idea that we would do it as anautomatic stabilizer and that if [rates] went up, they went up. Theywent a lot higher than I ever anticipated. And I think they've done alot more damage than most of us know at this point. We should stickto our policy and, if anything, make some allowance for [rates] to godown a bit further. It's time that we come off [these high rates].We've always had the reputation in the past of staying [with a policystance] too long; this policy was designed to get us to the pointwhere the market was signaling what the interest rates were going todo. It seems to me the market is signaling rather strongly that thepeak is past; we should take that signal and let the market rates godown. I'd like to support Bob Mayo's comments about the March [creditcontrol] program. He's the only one who mentioned it this morning.The six of us here [on the Board of Governors] have been fighting allthese questions and answers and appeals and everything else; I thinkwe've had a tremendous amount of impact both psychologically and onbanks as to what the growth rates are going to be. Those standardsare in place regardless of what happens to interest rates in themarket. And finally, on the international scene, interest rates aregoing to have to come down in this country over the next 18 months.Whatever happens out there is going to happen. If we drop themsuddenly, we're going to get a market reaction; if we drop themslowly, we're going to get a market reaction; if we keep them up,we're going to get a market reaction. I view the international[situation] as one we're going to have to live with; we will have to-18-4/22/80take whatever comes out of it rather than try to gear our domesticpolicy at this point to controlling the international value of thedollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. TEETERS is expressing her discomfort and concerns about the high interest rates, low housing starts, and the impact of international events on the value of the dollar. She is suggesting that the rates should be lowered and that the domestic policy should not be focused on controlling the international value of the dollar.


Passage number 156.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No one else has volunteered but there area few people [who have not commented], like Mr. Willes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 157.
MR. WILLES. I promised my wife I'd be quiet today. But aslong as you've given me the opportunity, I'll just make a few briefcomments. We had Yoshiho Suzuki from the Bank of Japan in our Bankthe other day and asked him to give a speech to some local people. Itwas very interesting to hear him in that speech analyze the Japaneseexperience where they have wholesale prices, because of oil imports,going up by about 24 percent and the consumer price index going up byabout 7 percent. They in the Bank of Japan ascribe that to theirwillingness to hold firmly to fairly stable rates of monetary growth.We found that a pleasant message, as you can imagine, in Minneapolis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply sharing their experience and perspective on a speech given by Yoshiho Suzuki from the Bank of Japan.


Passage number 158.
MR. PARTEE. Are profits being squeezed. Is that how thatworks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 159.
MR. WILLES. To some extent, profits have gone down. Alsothey have found reductions in energy utilization being forced by thepolicy and so on. There has also been a cut in real incomes becausewages have not adjusted. They haven't allowed wages to [rise withinflation].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that there has been a decrease in profits, reductions in energy utilization, and a cut in real incomes due to the policy. It also mentions that wages have not adjusted, implying that there is a disagreement or contention over allowing wages to rise with inflation.


Passage number 160.
MR. TRUMAN. And 5 percent productivity [growth].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement present in the passage. It simply states a statement made by Mr. Truman regarding a 5 percent productivity growth.


Passage number 161.
MR. WILLES. And 5 percent productivity [growth]. Thatdoesn't hurt. It's a question of what leads what; and that's a wholeother discussion, which I won't take time for. The only other thingI'd say, Mr. Chairman, is that I've listened to this discussion todaywith great interest and was particularly interested in the way Chuckposed the issue. As we look over the history of what the Committeehas done, what the economic profession has done, and what the economyhas done, it seems to me that we ought to have very modest objectivesbecause it's not at all clear that we understand in a very detailedway how this complex system of our works and how we can intervene insuch a way as to make it work substantially better. Therefore, it's aquestion of trying to minimize perceived risk. And it seems to us,given our current state of understanding, that the best thing we cando is to lay out for all the world to see a fairly simple policyprocedure, a rule that we're going to follow. I think it's very hardto lay out such a rule in terms of interest rates because interestrates are subject to too many variables. But we can lay out such arule in terms of the growth in the aggregates. It's not going to getus to heaven; it's going to have some undesirable consequences fromtime to time. But on average monetary policy is probably lessdisruptive if it is more predictable than otherwise. As aconsequence, it seems to us that the decision we made last fall was awise one and we ought to stick to it. And we ought to be rigorouslyconsistent about that because at least over time, as the markets cometo understand that we are going to be rigorously consistent, we willreduce substantially not only the risk associated with our ownpolicies but the over-reactions that the market sometimes makes totheir perception of our policy. So, as others have said, if interestrates are going to go down, I think this is one time when we just4/22/80ought to let them go down because we've got to make sure that weestablish the credibility in the basic policy thrust that we've beenfollowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily discusses the need for consistency and predictability in monetary policy.


Passage number 162.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Schultz.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The given phrase "Governor Schultz" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply identifying a governor by their last name.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 163.
MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I certainly would agree that it isimportant that we continue with a course that strengthens ourcredibility. I believe we have made the right moves in going to adifferent kind of procedure. I think it's important that we hold tothat 3-1/2 to 6 percent [Ml] figure for the year. But while I wantinterest rates to go down--I think it's important that they go down--Ireally am concerned about the speed with which they go down. We haveto keep in mind that this is where the action is right now. Thecountry is looking to the Federal Reserve. Like it or not, we are inthe eye of the storm. And people look at interest rates. We've donea lot of things. If there's anything to be said for the whole creditcontrol program--and in my view there's damn little--it's the shockeffect. And it has had a shock effect. It was important. [Changing]inflationary expectations was crucial. Why did the actions we took onOctober 6th not work better. Because people thought [our actions]were just going to be overridden by other things that were happening.So we see interest rates at these awful levels. But people arelooking at those interest rates; and if they see them come down toorapidly, they're going to say the Fed has given up [on inflation].And we're all they have to look to at this point in time. Let's notpanic and do something that will tend to negate the strides we'vemade. We're getting there and we're getting the job done. A fedfunds rate of 15 to 16 percent wouldn't bother me much, but I must saythat if it starts getting down around 13 percent or below, under thesecircumstances, I would get really nervous.As you know, we haven't been that good with our forecasts orprojections. It does look as if this economy is weakening veryrapidly and going off a cliff. But I would remind you that it lookedpretty weak in October. It looked as if we had done the job then.Now, [the evidence] is stronger this time, and I feel pretty wellconvinced; but I don't see the necessity for letting interest ratesjust absolutely also fall off the cliff. I think the implications ofthat are very important. We can do something here which says we willstay within the target ranges, but let's not panic on these interestrates. I'd let them come down slowly. I hope we can hold these fedfunds rates; I think they're important. I like our new operatingprocedure but interest rates, whether we like it or not, are aperception that other people have. And I hope we don't get in toomuch of a hurry and blow this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. Mr. Schultz expresses concern about the speed at which interest rates go down, while also acknowledging the importance of lowering them. He also expresses frustration with the credit control program and disagrees with the idea of letting interest rates "fall off a cliff" too quickly.


Passage number 164.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess we've left you the unusualprivilege of going last, Mr. Solomon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that Mr. Solomon will be going last.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 165.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, that's the privilege of a newboy. I want to second very strongly what Fred Schultz said. I thinkwe ought to stick with the "B" targets and accept the March-to-Junetargets that fall out. I'm perfectly willing to see a decline ininterest rates, but I really would urge you not to permit tooprecipitous a decline. I would like to suggest, in view of the factthat the staff is projecting a 16 to 17 percent funds rate ascompatible with the alternative B targets, that we ought to have a4/22/80phone consultation if it looks as if the funds rate is moving downvery precipitously and significantly penetrating the 16 percent range.The reason I say that is because, like Fred, I feel that people judgeour credibility--at least all the people I speak with in New York--notsimply by a mechanistic adherence to the aggregates. They also judgeour resolve and our credibility, particularly given the fact that theyhave had considerable skepticism about it in the past, by interestrate movements as well. And I believe in your October 6th statement,Paul, you did say that this was not a mechanistic formula and thatjudgment would be used. Interest rates should go down. They will godown. It's not going to do any damage to the economy if the declineis somewhat more gradual. So, I would hope that we would have a phoneconsultation if it looks as if they're going to go significantly belowthe 16 percent level that the staff is presently projecting asconsistent with those "B" targets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker is suggesting that a phone consultation should be held if interest rates decline too quickly, indicating a disagreement or at least a concern about the pace of the decline.


Passage number 166.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, why don't we have a break and comeback to this and be more operational in our comments after the break.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage suggests taking a break before continuing the discussion to ensure that participants can provide more practical or effective comments afterward. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 167.
MR. PARTEE. Does that include First Pennsylvania.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question and does not express any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 168.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine the presence of contention or disagreement in the given passage "MR. AXILROD" as no actual passage or text is provided.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 169.
 Yes, that included [an allowance of] about $500million, when we were [calculating] that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Actually it included about $500 million of[borrowing by] First Pennsylvania, so one might say the equivalent isa little higher than that to allow for the fact that they areborrowing $600 million at this point. But that's fine-tuning. It's-23-4/22/80not all that far from where we are. There has been a lot of talkabout interest rates. I suppose what people mean when they sayinterest rates is the federal funds rate. We've had quite a declinein market rates, particularly in the long-term rates relative to thenormal fluctuation in long-term rates. They've gone back three-fourths or more of the [amount] they went up in January and February.Some long-term rates may be very close to where they were in January;the CD rates seem to have moved down faster than the federal fundsrate. The Treasury bill rate is down to 12 percent, plus or minus,depending upon which [maturity] you look at. As Peter said earlier,that's down 3 percentage points or more from the peaks. So in termsof the interest rates people are looking at in the market, there'sprobably room here for a decline in the federal funds rate thatwouldn't even be reflected much in these market rates because it hasalready been anticipated in some sense. I don't know whether that'sfair or not. We just don't know how it will hit the marketspsychologically because people may then anticipate the next move inthe federal funds rate.But I do recognize in making the judgment about where we setthe borrowing level, consistent with our techniques and amid all theuncertainties, that there are some implications for interest rates.There is a little danger, particularly in the short run, because wedon't know what all these recent money supply figures mean. Among theunfortunate things that could happen--and there are quite a few ofthem--if we propelled the funds rate to the extreme low end [of the"B" range], it could get low enough so that it affects the wholestring of market rates. If we began getting in May and June increases[in the money supply] of 9, 10, 11 percent or generally in the higharea, which is what the econometric relationships would say, in amonth or two months from now we're going to be saying that we have topull back in the other direction. And presumably at that point therecession would have moved somewhat further and I suspect we'd be inan extremely awkward position at that time of not being very eager to[tighten]. Perhaps I've leaned too far toward the risks, whether inthe exchange market or more importantly--and I don't think they'reunrelated--of in some sense having given up and [seeing] inflationaryexpectations rise again, having been [unintelligible] to a degree.And then, as I say, if the aggregates were really running high in arelatively short time period, having been through a rather futileexperience in this difficult business, we will be sitting here facingexactly the opposite dilemma we are in today of saying to ourselves:How much do we really want to tighten--tighten in the sense ofinterest rates or borrowing--at this point.What I am suggesting is that I'm not sure we have to make achange in the basic aggregates decision we made last time. Monetarygrowth is running short of that at the moment, which definitelyimplies some relaxation of money market pressures and the borrowinglevel. We've already gone some distance in that direction; we'd gosomewhat more. We would expect to see the federal funds rate declinefrom its present level. I don't know what that means for marketrates. I'd suspect, if anything, not much change to some furtherdecline. If Steve is right, that means 16 percent plus or minus onthe federal funds rate in the short run. I don't think we can be sureof that, but let's say he's right; I don't know what range to putaround it. But with a 4 percentage point range we can feel our wayahead on that perspective. We meet again in four weeks according to-24-4/22/80our present schedule; that's an unusually short period of time. Bythat time we will know whether we're getting some reaction or whetherthe straightforward projections of the money supply are being borneout. I do not mean that we would not in the normal course of eventsmake some further judgment on the reserve path and the borrowing pathif the money supply continued to be weak in the next four weeks. Theoption is clearly open--I don't know whether I want to pin it downprecisely but we can do so if you want--to consult, if in my judgmentthe degree of decline in the federal funds rate seems to betroublesome in terms of interpretations of our policy, whether thoseinterpretations were manifested domestically or internationally. Wecan always have a consultation, and I certainly would be prepared todo that. But I think we ought to recognize that the probability isthat there will be some decline in the federal funds rate. Again, Idon't know what that means for other interest rates, but the short-term outlook would definitely be for a decline in the federal fundsrate as we see it today. Now, if we suddenly get a burst in the moneysupply figures, maybe that won't amount to much [of a decline]; but ifwe had a great drag in the money supply figures, we would [expect]some decline fairly immediately.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that there are different opinions and uncertainties about the impact of interest rates and the money supply on the economy. They mention the risks of propelling the funds rate to the extreme low end and the possibility of inflationary expectations rising again. The speaker also suggests that there is a lack of consensus on whether to tighten or relax monetary policy in response to the current situation.


Passage number 170.
 I don't know what the funds rate isdoing now Peter, but--MR. STERNLIGHT. It's about 17 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they do not know what the funds rate is currently, but the other person provides the information by saying that it is about 17 percent.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 171.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --with the high level of borrowingsearlier this week and some softness in the money market today andpresumably even more tomorrow, it will already have pointed in thatdirection because the level of borrowings currently is too high. It'svery simple in a technical sense, I suppose, [for the funds rate] topersist at a lower level next week. That's what one would expect themarket to do under these conditions. I think that's a fairly clearoutlook for the very immediate future. It probably will be in the 16to 17 percent area by the end of next week anyway, maybe throughoutthe week, just on this kind of decision which is basically analternative B decision. I think that's where I would leave it.One could argue either side of this. You could say that youdon't quite believe Mr. Sternlight--and I would agree that there's alot of uncertainty--and that the business scene is so uncertain youwould push for more money [growth] and take a much lower federal fundsrate in the process. I suggested why I think that may be imprudent inthe very short run. You can take the opposite view and say it's toomuch risk, so let's not have the federal funds rate decline at all. Ithink that would probably be a mistake in this period, too. I'd playit in between, which happens to come out [to alternative B].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker presents two different viewpoints on what should be done with the federal funds rate, and acknowledges that both sides of the argument have valid points.


Passage number 172.
MR. PARTEE. Paul, are you specifying a funds rate target.Is that what we're going to be doing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply asking Paul to clarify if they are specifying a funds rate target.


Passage number 173.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I'm just telling you where I think thefunds rate is likely to be with [an alternative B] borrowing target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion about where they think the funds rate is likely to be with an alternative borrowing target. They are not expressing disagreement with anyone else's viewpoint.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 174.
MR. PARTEE. I see. I don't think there's any problem ifSteve is right and we get around 7 percent money growth in May andJune. But what if we got zero money growth in May and June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is expressing a different viewpoint or concern than Steve's previous statement about 7 percent money growth. Mr. Partee is questioning the potential outcome if there is zero money growth in May and June.


Passage number 175.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We won't know that in the short run, soI'm really talking about what we will do in the next two or three-25-4/22/80weeks. We're going to meet again in four weeks. We will know more,obviously, two or three weeks from now, and we may want aconsultation. I'm just setting the dial at the moment and telling youwhat I think the result will be. I say it with some temerity or someuncertainty because we don't know all that much about theserelationships in the short run. But that is my best guess. Thedispersion around the guess is rather wide. I myself suspect that therisk, if that's the right way to put it, would be that the funds ratewould come out a little lower rather than a little higher than whatSteve has suggested. All I'm suggesting is that we adopt this courseand rely upon him for giving us the best single point estimate in avery uncertain situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing their uncertainty and giving their best guess based on the available information.


Passage number 176.
MR. AXILROD. I might add, Mr. Chairman, that we set that$1-3/4 billion [borrowing level of alternative B] before the banksthis week suddenly decided to borrow more. So I would go on to saythat there's a lot of uncertainty in this borrowing/funds rate/discount rate relationship here. But our best judgment at the time weset this was that $1-3/4 billion of borrowing would be roughlyconsistent with this whole pattern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that there is uncertainty and acknowledging that their judgment may not align perfectly with the borrowing/funds rate/discount rate relationship.


Passage number 177.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm saying basically that something like"B" looks right--or, more specifically, what we adopted last time,which is now "B" in terms of the December-to-June period as a whole,or 4-1/2 percent growth just looking at M-1A. We said about the samething for the others. Technically we said "or somewhat less" for M-1Band M-1A. And we said what for M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing information about different measures of growth and stating their previous findings without any conflicting opinions or disagreement.


Passage number 178.
MR. ALTMANN. [About] 7-3/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states the percentage as 7-3/4 percent.


Passage number 179.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So this alternative does have a lowerfigure for M2 than we had last time, reflecting the decline in M2. Ithink what has happened in M2, certainly in part, is that we just shutoff the money market funds; and I'm sure there was some substitutionbetween money market funds and Treasury bills, which are not in M2.So I'm not certain that involves a real or substantive economicdifference. It just reflects what we count in M2 and what we don'tcount in M2. If we look at M-1A and M-1B, alternative B with theproviso "or somewhat less" is precisely what we decided last time.The difference, of course, is that growth has to be much faster thanthat in the last two months to come up into that range, which is whythe level of borrowing is being reduced from $2-3/4 billion orwhatever we had last time to $1-3/4 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the reasons for the decline in M2 and discussing the differences between M2, M-1A, and M-1B.


Passage number 180.
MR. EASTBURN. Another approach would be to say "somewhatmore or less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests another possible approach without contradicting or challenging any previous statement.


Passage number 181.
"MR. PARTEE. Or "around.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 182.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That depends. It gives a little feelingof how cautious we want to be about moving down the borrowing level Iwill say instead of the interest rate level. If we say "or somewhatless," there's a little more room for being a bit more cautious inmoving down the borrowing level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating that the level of caution in moving down the borrowing level depends on how cautious one wants to be, without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 183.
MR. PARTEE. That's what we said last time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating an agreement with a previous statement.


Passage number 184.
4/22/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In any event, consistent with "B," we'dhave to move it down. There's no question about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating a fact and acknowledging that there is no question about the need to move something down.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 185.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Wouldn't it be a little better to seta borrowing level of about $1-1/2 billion plus emergency lending andany special contingencies since, as I understand it, included in that$1-3/4 billion is that uncertain situation and we don't know what elsemay arise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents a disagreement about the appropriate borrowing level and whether it should be set at about $1-1/2 billion or $1-3/4 billion plus emergency lending and any special contingencies.


Passage number 186.
MR. PARTEE. We could do that, except it should be $1-1/4billion, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply offering a correction or clarification.


Passage number 187.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think what we're really saying isroughly $1-1/4 billion plus whatever that emergency borrowing orseasonal borrowing or whatever happens to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not express disagreement or contention. It is a statement that clarifies and explains a financial situation.


Passage number 188.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. As we did the projections we thought$1-1/2 billion would be more consistent with the projections. But wedefer to Steve, if he feels that his 16 to 17 percent assumption andstaying on alternative B is more consistent with $1-1/4 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges their thoughts about a projected amount but defers to Steve's perspective on the matter.


Passage number 189.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In that connection, Steve, remind me:What has borrowing been ex this special borrowing situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It is simply asking for a reminder about borrowing in a special situation.


Passage number 190.
MR. AXILROD. In the first three weeks of April, ex thespecial borrowing, it has been running around $1.8 to $2 billion. Itwas about $1.8 billion in the week of the 16th. This week, though, ithas moved up to around $2 billion. That, of course, is with the fundsrate running 18-1/2 to 19-1/2 percent. So our thought was that withthe funds rate running in the 16 to 17 percent range, the borrowinglevel would drop from what it has been running.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply providing information about the borrowing level and the funds rate.


Passage number 191.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Another thing is that if we had theregular discount rate at 16 percent, I think we'd be pretty sure thefederal funds rate would not rapidly go much below 16 percent.Whether our surcharge exerts any drag at all on the funds rate as itgoes down to 16 percent isn't clear. But there's very littleborrowing at that rate except for the special situation. My own guessis that it would exert a very minor drag rather than a really strongdrag.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents the author's speculation and guess without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 192.
MR. PARTEE. We're also below [path] on total reserves,aren't we, Steve. That would be another reason for adjusting theborrowing down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Partee mentions that they are below on total reserves, suggesting a need to adjust borrowing down. This implies that there may be a disagreement or differing perspectives on whether or not to decrease borrowing.


Passage number 193.
MR. AXILROD. Yes. I should be clear, Mr. Chairman, that theborrowing level in alternative B was on the assumption that rateswould come down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact or assumption.


Passage number 194.
 And the borrowing level in alternative C--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. By rates you're talking about the federalfunds rate basically.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is providing a factual statement about borrowing levels and interest rates. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 195.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, the funds rate. Alternative C was morelike the borrowing that we had [earlier]. And even that was shaded alittle lower because we thought the funds rate would be more like 18percent, which is a shade below what it had been. So we did put insomething that carries with it an easing in the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining their reasoning behind their decision to implement a policy that results in an easing in the funds rate.


Passage number 196.
4/22/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. I realize that, but you said yourguess is around 16 to 17 percent or somewhat lower. I guess thatmeans 16 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states a statement made by one person and acknowledges their estimate of a percentage.


Passage number 197.
MR. AXILROD. I'd say it means 15 to 17 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod simply states a percentage range without any indication of disagreement or differing opinions.


Passage number 198.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But it also implies in the normal courseof our operations that if the money supply in the next week or twocontinued weak, assuming for the moment that Steve is right, [thefunds rate] would be lower. [Money growth] would have to be quite alot stronger probably [for the funds rate] to be much higher. But Ihave no particular feeling about the federal funds rate range we have[in alternative B].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It is describing a hypothetical scenario without any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 199.
 It might be logical to reduce the upper endsince--MR. PARTEE. It would be rather nice symbolically to move theupper limit down to 19 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply suggests that reducing the upper end would be logical and symbolically nice.


Passage number 200.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Or 18 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the statement "Or 18 percent." This is a concise statement providing an alternative option or percentage.


Passage number 201.
MR. PARTEE. Well, that gets a little tight. I like 19.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is expressing his preference for the number 19, but there is no opposing viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 202.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I personally wouldn't like to see it go upto 20 percent again. I'm not at all sure I'd want to see it go up to19 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 203.
MR. PARTEE. After all, we could get a spurt in the moneysupply. The fact.that we've had two minus months increases the oddsthat we're going to have plus months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply stating a fact and discussing the likelihood of future positive months based on previous negative months.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 204.
 That's the only rule that Ihave and--MR. BALLES. Unfortunately, it hasn't worked that way overextended periods in the past, for example in the summer of 1979 and agood part of '76 and '77. We have a long history of sustainedovershoots and undershoots, and that's what I think we have to guardagainst now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that the only rule they have hasn't worked in the past, while Mr. Balles counters that by mentioning examples where it didn't work. This shows disagreement or contention between the two speakers.


Passage number 205.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're talking a little out of perspective.In perspective, with this unexpected drop [in M1] last week from alevel that was already running a bit low, we start from a lower base;but it's still one week's figure and heaven knows what the future willbring. We can't all be speaking. Mr. Winn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not include any statements that indicate contention or disagreement. It is more of a speculative and uncertain tone, but there is no overt disagreement among the speakers mentioned.


Passage number 206.
MR. WINN. Paul, the seasonal adjustment for April makes mefairly nervous, so I'd like to get a bit of feeling for May before wepump in an inordinate amount of reserves in the next week. I thinkthe danger of being whipsawed is very great. I haven't any concernabout your suggestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Winn expresses his concern about the seasonal adjustment for April and the potential risk of being whipsawed, but he does not dispute or disagree with Paul's suggestion.


Passage number 207.
MR. PARTEE. Of course, we don't pump reserves in unless wehave a shortfall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is simply stating a fact without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 208.
MR. WINN. No, I understand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Win, states that he understands something, indicating agreement or comprehension rather than disagreement.


Passage number 209.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not beyond what I said. But if you'reinterpreting what I said as "pumping," it is "pumping" a bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply clarifying their previous statement about something potentially being considered as "pumping."


Passage number 210.
4/22/80MR. WINN. With the inflation problem being what it is andwith the fact that everybody doesn't read our policies the same way, aflip in our policy on inflation at this time could be mostunfortunate, given all the other things we've done to move in theother direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It simply states that flipping the policy on inflation at that time could be unfortunate considering other actions taken to move in a different direction.


Passage number 211.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's get some other comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply suggests that other comments be sought without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 212.
MR. EASTBURN. I think your proposition makes a lot of sense.It's a good mini-max solution to the very uncertain conditions that weface. If you add the idea that we would consult (a) if the ratesseemed to be coming down faster than we'd like to see them or (b) ifthe aggregates were coming in quite low, which in my view would be thegreater [probability], I think what you suggested is probably the bestwe can do at the present time. Then we'll just [deal] with it day today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Eastburn, agrees with the proposed solution and expresses their support for it.


Passage number 213.
MR. PARTEE. I'm agreeable to it, too, Paul. It's a niceintermediate course, and it is only four weeks to the next meeting.We could get a reversal or it could get a lot worse. So I wouldsuggest, as I think you did, that we take a point off the upper end ofthat [funds rate] range and live with "B" and expect the funds rate tocome down some from where it has been, maybe to the area of 16 percentor a little below. It might have to go down further if we get greatweakness in the aggregates; it wouldn't have to go that far if we geta good rebound.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 214.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I feel some discomfortin what I'm about to say in the sense that it may be taken that Idon't have great faith in our new procedures. But maybe it's becauseof uncertainty. I'd feel somewhat more comfortable if we were to movetoward "C," [which has 4 percent growth for M-1A]. [Our directive]now has 4-1/2 percent or somewhat less. I'd also point out that the"C" [growth rates] are well within the ranges that we set for the yearas a whole, the 3-1/2 to 6 percent for M-1A, for example. So itwouldn't do great violence but would recognize that we have gotten abit less [money growth thus far] in the first half of the year. Andas a result, I'd feel more comfortable with it. I take some comfortalso from your statement that if the funds rate gets to the 16 percentlevel, whether we adopt "B" or "C"--and I don't think it makes muchdifference which one we choose in the short run--there will be aconsultation. And the point of that consultation would be to discusswhether or not interest rates should continue to drop very quickly. Ihave a considerable concern that we should not in the next two weeks,or even before the next meeting, be at a 13 percent rate, for example,which is the bottom of the funds range [under "B"]. Thus, I wouldprefer to move to "C," with the understanding that the consultationwould indeed take place at about 16 percent and we could discusswhether or not the rate should go below that in such a short period oftime.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Guffey expresses discomfort and uncertainty about the current procedures and suggests moving towards option "C" for a lower growth rate of M-1A. He also expresses concern about the possibility of interest rates dropping too quickly and suggests having a consultation at a 16 percent funds rate to discuss further actions.


Passage number 215.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage is not provided. Please provide the passage in question.


Passage number 216.
MR. ROOS. I would subscribe to "B," Mr. Chairman. I thinkyour analysis is totally consistent with the facts of life. I don'twant to belabor the 20 or 19 percent upper limit on the funds rangeother than to say that any change in it, to the person whoconcentrates on minuscule parts of what we're doing, might imply that-29-4/22/80we still have an inordinate concern about the fed funds rate. But Idon't feel strongly about that. "B" basically makes good sense to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Roos, agrees with the analysis presented by the Chairman and indicates that option "B" makes good sense to him.


Passage number 217.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions the name "Governor Wallich" without any additional information, so it is impossible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 218.
MR. WALLICH. I'm afraid I don't like any of the three[Bluebook alternatives]. I'd like something a little stronger. Itdoesn't mean that we'd have to get outside of our range. We can livewithin the 4 to 6-1/2 percent annual range on M-1B, which [is theaggregate] I like to think in terms of. We would have to have a lowergrowth rate for the March-to-June period and, therefore, for May andJune. We'd have to go a little below [the growth rate in] alternativeC for M-1B for the second half of our half-year period, to somethinglike 3-1/2 percent perhaps. Bear in mind, if you will, that this doesmean a substantial increase in liquidity in the second half of theyear because nominal GNP, according to our forecast, is going to growat 5 percent and M2 on the path in alternative B is going to grow at ahigher rate than that. So we're going to accumulate liquidity on theway down. I don't know how fast we're going to come out of therecession.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing his own opinion and preferences about the alternatives, but there is no mention of any conflicting views or opposing arguments.


Passage number 219.
MR. PARTEE. Isn't M-1B growth just about that, 5 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement and a question without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 220.
MR. WALLICH. Well, [you are] talking of "B." But now lookat M2, which is after all what guides bank credit mostly. If that hasa reduction of velocity, I see considerable accumulation of liquidity.In any event, after all that has happened, I think we'll be sittinghere a year. or a year and a half from now and I will then be askingthat we stick by our targets. And some members of the group will say:What. You're trying to cut off this expansion at 8 percentunemployment. I fear the logic of the argument is going to cut bothways at that time. That's why I'm willing to budge now on my side,but I hope you'll support my side next time around. As far as thefunds rate is concerned, I don't care if we cap it at 19 percent ifthe aggregates turn out to be as fast as [estimated] and we follow thealternative B target. If that [monetary growth] were reached, wewould probably find [the funds rate] moving back to the top of itsrange and we would have to have a consultation. I very much think weought to put a floor on the funds rate [that would trigger] aconsultation at 16 percent at the minimum.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 221.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who else wants to say something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "Who else wants to say something" is simply asking for additional input or opinions.


Passage number 222.
MS. TEETERS. Henry has a one-way ladder. Have you noticed.It keeps ratcheting up as we go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about Henry's ladder.


Passage number 223.
MR. SCHULTZ. "B" sounds fine; I'm not a bit uncomfortablewith funds in the 15 to 17 percent range and I think having aconsultation point makes a lot of sense. Maybe I just don't knowquite enough about how the projections are put together to have greatbelief in them, but on the track record they have been[unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their comfort with funds in a particular range and their lack of belief in projections. This does not indicate any disagreement with others.


Passage number 224.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's one of those things you're better offnot looking into too closely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement suggests that it is preferable not to investigate or delve deeply into a certain subject or matter. It does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 225.
MR. SCHULTZ. I'd really just like to sneak up on this animala little in case he springs at me. So, rather than borrowing at4/22/80$1-1/4 billion plus the emergency or the special lending, I'd like tostart at $1-1/2 billion and if things look a little weak, then we canmove back down in line with the sort of technique we're talking abouthere. It seems to me that we have time and, as you say, this lastweek may have been quite an aberration. We may get a big change inthese numbers. If we started at $1-1/2 billion and the aggregatescontinued to come in weak, it would be easy enough to move borrowingdown to $1-1/4 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is proposing a strategy and suggesting a higher starting borrowing amount but acknowledges that they may need to adjust it if the situation changes. There is no conflicting viewpoint or disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 226.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual passage being provided.


Passage number 227.
MR. MORRIS. I don't have any problem with "B." And I thinkit would be desirable to move the top [of the funds rate range] downto 19 percent. It's not clear to me what the consultation point is.Is it 16 or 15 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 228.
MS. TEETERS. Or is it the money supply going negative. Wehave a consultation any time we get a big number but we don't seem tohave very many consultations when we get little numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact or observation about their consultations.


Passage number 229.
MR. MORRIS. Well, we won't have a consultation, presumably,if the money supply is coming in weak.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris is making a statement about the potential lack of consultation if the money supply is weak.


Passage number 230.
MS. TEETERS. I know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not include any statements or arguments that would suggest contention or disagreement. It simply states the individual's name and a statement of knowledge.


Passage number 231.
MR. WALLICH. When the funds rate drops as a result, we willhave a consultation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply mentions that there will be a consultation when the funds rate drops.


Passage number 232.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The implication, in terms of aconsultation, is that we would have a combination of two things. Wecan make a formal decision on it if you want to, but we would have acombination of a weak money supply and a sharply declining funds rate.If the money supply were not coming in very low, we wouldn't face theinterest rate constraint so to speak. So the consultation wouldbasically be about the money supply coming in low or the interest ratecoming in low, whichever way you want to look at it, becausepresumably it would be the same [phenomenon].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact and explaining the implications of a low money supply and declining funds rate. There is no conflicting view or argument being presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 233.
MR. SCHULTZ. I'm not uncomfortable with consultation at 15percent. I wouldn't mind seeing it get down in that range, but itwould make me feel--to use Larry Roos' term--a bit antsy below 15percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Schultz expresses that he wouldn't mind seeing the consultation at a lower percentage, but he also admits that it would make him feel uncomfortable or "a bit antsy" below 15 percent. This implies a difference of opinion or contention regarding what the ideal percentage for consultation should be.


Passage number 234.
MR. ROOS. But Fred, if I may, Mr. Chairman, the factors thatwould essentially cause interest rates to decline would be a softeningof economic activity and a softening in the demand for credit of asubstantial scope. If that were to happen--if the economy were in aseriously weakened condition and credit demand fell off--and, let'ssay, we consulted, our only option it seems to me would be to pullmoney out of the economy with great force. And boy, that wouldcertainly put the final kobosh--if I may use another Missouriexpression--on the recession. Is that correct. I don't know whatpart of the world that expression came from. But that would reallydrive a very serious nail into the recessionary situation and would beprocyclical and accelerate a recession.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Roos is presenting a hypothetical scenario and expressing agreement with the idea that pulling money out of the economy forcefully would worsen the recession.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 235.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you're probably overstating thepossible significance of what would be happening in a 2- or 3-week4/22/80period. I think what you say is true if one looked at it in a longenough perspective. But we're dealing with uncertain seasonaladjustment factors, uncertain week-to-week numbers, and an extremelyuncertain relationship between borrowings and the money supply in a2- or 3-week time period. That is all we're talking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents disagreement. The speaker is suggesting that the significance of what would be happening in a 2- or 3-week period is being overstated, while acknowledging that the statement may be true in a longer perspective. The speaker then lists different uncertainties and challenges in making accurate assessments within such short time frames.


Passage number 236.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm not as experienced as the rest ofthe people at this table, but it doesn't seem to me that we need aformal decision in this regard. We ought to give the Chairman anindication, as he himself suggested I guess, that when the funds rategets down to the 16 percent range, more or less, he would initiate aconsultation. I don't think that requires any kind of formalinstruction. And at that point it really is a question of making ajudgment on what is happening not only in terms of the fed funds rateand the interest rate picture but on the aggregates and the rate atwhich reserves should be fed to the System. I think it's just aprudent measure to take, and I hope we would all be able to combine onasking you to pursue that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 237.
MR. WALLICH. I think we ought to look at other interestrates, too, because the funds rate has become a very poor indicator ofthe rest of the spectrum of rates. If bill rates, for instance, wereto fall more rapidly than the funds rate, that would be a furthersignal to the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and suggesting considering other interest rates in addition to the funds rate.


Passage number 238.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know who has not talked yet. Idon't think you have, Emmett.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply expressing uncertainty about who has not talked yet and suggesting that Emmett might be one of the people who have not spoken yet.


Passage number 239.
MR. RICE. Well, I'm prepared to go along with what yousuggest. Alternative B seems right, and I would be willing to see onepoint knocked off the top end of the federal funds range to 19percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Rice is expressing his agreement and willingness to go along with a suggestion.


Passage number 240.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who else has comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it is a neutral question asking for input or opinions from others.


Passage number 241.
 I seem to have anumber of Committee members who haven't--MS. TEETERS. I can support alternative B and taking off theone percentage point [on the funds rate range]. I think we're morelikely to run into a problem of not being able to maintain the growthrates of the money supply, [which may mean we would] need aconsultation. I also think that the spread between the federal fundsrate and other market interest rates may be a function of thesurcharge. I think the banks are doing everything they can to keepout of the window and not pay the surcharge and, consequently, there'sgreater demand and greater pressure on the funds rate and on otherrates. So that gap may just have developed out of our own actionsrather than anything drastically different in the market. So I wouldsupport "B" and a 13 to 19 percent funds rate range. I don't knowabout the borrowings. I think we're almost going to have to play thatby ear. We may just have to end up with a range on the borrowings[and see] how they come in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and opinions, but there is no indication of any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 242.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me fine-tune this a bit further,if I can, after listening to people here. What I would continue topropose is the same language in the directive that we had last time,which in some sense is "B" minus. It's this language of "B" [Mlgrowth] or somewhat less, which has some significance. I don't feelstrongly about the federal funds rate, but there seem to be more-32-4/22/80people who would like to knock it down to 19 percent, I guess, Murray.In thinking about the borrowing again and listening to these comments,I would modify what I said to this extent: I'd suggest that we startout with $1-1/2 billion with the intention, if in the next week or sothe money supply were developing more or less as projected, of itprobably being at $1-1/4 billion in the second week or the third weekfrom now. I'm just being slightly more cautious; if the money supplywere kicking up above what we're now projecting, we'd probably stay atthe $1-1/2 billion for a while.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is adjusting their proposal based on input from others and discussing potential changes in the borrowing amount based on the projected money supply.


Passage number 243.
MR. GUFFEY. Is that exclusive of the big bank borrowings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward question about whether a certain amount of money includes borrowings from big banks.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 244.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, these figures all exclude the bigbank borrowings. So that's a slight modification toward a little morecaution than has been suggested.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The statement "So that's a slight modification toward a little more caution than has been suggested" suggests that the figures provided earlier may have downplayed or overlooked the impact of the bigbank borrowings. This implies a difference of opinion or caution in the interpretation of the data.


Passage number 245.
MR. AXILROD. I interpret that, Mr. Chairman, forconstructing the path--it's only four weeks here--as putting in $1-1/2billion for the first two weeks and $1-1/4 billion for the last twoweeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their interpretation of how to construct the path.


Passage number 246.
 What would actually develop--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess so, but the last two weeks wouldbe affected by what happens.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "What would actually develop" appears to indicate a question or uncertainty, and the following statement "I guess so, but the last two weeks would be affected by what happens" seems to express a conditional or speculative opinion. While there may be some uncertainty, there is no clear disagreement or debate present.


Passage number 247.
 We might move a little more rapidlytoward the $1-1/4 billion if money came in low; or if it came in high,we would--MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not express contention or disagreement. It simply presents hypothetical scenarios based on different financial circumstances.


Passage number 248.
 I think that would happen if the data we gettomorrow or next week--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If the money supply were right on thepresent projections, we'd presumably get down to $1-1/4 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no explicit contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is expressing a conditional scenario related to the data and money supply projections.


Passage number 249.
MR. AXILROD. Two weeks from now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is a statement and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 250.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Two weeks from now, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement "Two weeks from now" simply states a future time period and does not involve any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 251.
MS. TEETERS. We don't have the borrowing in the directive,do we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a fact and asks for clarification.


Passage number 252.
MR. ALTMANN. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage as it simply states "No" in response to a question.


Passage number 253.
MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think one thing we shouldhave learned in the last few months is that we are unable to forecastthe volume of borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing a belief or opinion.


Passage number 254.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have to have some flexibilityhere. But it's useful to discuss this just to get some sense of whichway the caution should be exercised in the short run. What we'resaying, I think, is that we want to see some increase in the moneysupply, first of all, to meet these targets. We are willing to seesome short-run decline in the federal funds rate to achieve that, andthat is reflected in the lower borrowing figure. But there's also ahealthy feeling of caution about not moving so fast that we have toreverse ourselves. So that caution is expressed in going downtentatively over a period of time on the borrowing number. That's insubstance the way I would interpret [this directive]. That leavesHenry with some concern. Does that help you infinitesimally.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 255.
4/22/80MR. WALLICH. It helps me infinitesimally.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that something helps them, without any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments presented.


Passage number 256.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. May I ask a question. If the fedfunds rate goes below 16 percent, will that make the 3 percentsurcharge on the discount rate sustainable. Would there would be alarge amount of pressure to take that off as not being appropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 257.
 Idon't know enough about this--MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that they do not have sufficient knowledge about a certain topic.


Passage number 258.
 I don't know, either, but it certainly wouldtend to bring the borrowing down pretty fast if we had a 16 percent--MS. TEETERS. There's not much borrowing at that rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is unsure and speculating about the effect of a 16 percent rate but is not in conflict with anyone else's opinion.


Passage number 259.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's very little borrowing at that ratenow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. The speaker is stating a fact that there is very little borrowing happening at a specific rate.


Passage number 260.
MR. PARTEE. Except at one bank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 261.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's a separate decision. Obviously, itwould raise the question at the very least. How much pressure it willbring I suppose is a judgment as to whether we want to give that kindof overt signal at that particular point in time. There's no doubtthat the question will arise. I'm not sure it would arise veryforcibly at 16 percent, but if the funds rate began to go below 16percent, then the question would arise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is expressing different possibilities and potential outcomes, but there is no direct disagreement or contention.


Passage number 262.
MR. EASTBURN. The only question that remains in my mind iswhether or not we want to say "or somewhat less." It would be helpfulto me if Peter would give me some interpretation of how it wouldaffect his actions any differently if "somewhat less" were in or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Eastburn is seeking clarification or further explanation from Peter regarding the potential impact of including or excluding the phrase "or somewhat less" on his actions.


Passage number 263.
MR. STERNLIGHT. That really has more to do with theconstruction of the paths than specific Desk action. Having the "orless" gives me a little sense or tone of being a bit moreaccommodative of lower growth. Steve might want to comment on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 264.
MR. AXILROD. Operationally, I think there are two things,President Eastburn. If we construct the path on 4-1/2 percent, whichis the exact point, then the "or less" would mean to me that if totalreserves were falling short a little, we would not make a big upwardadjustment in nonborrowed reserves to offset that. That would be theimmediate operational [effect]. We'd just let the normal drop inborrowings occur and work its way through. The other thing that couldbe done, but which the Committee hasn't followed, of course, would beto set the initial path not at 4-1/2 percent but 4-1/4 percent. Butassuming the path is set at 4-1/2 percent, it would mean to me thatwhen total reserves are falling somewhat short we wouldn't rush in toraise nonborrowed reserves to offset that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining their interpretation of the "or less" clause and discussing possible operational adjustments.


Passage number 265.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we've accepted this kind ofoperation where the path is set consistent with the 4-1/2 percent butwe have a slightly higher borrowing figure at the beginning than theone in the center of Steve's frequency distribution.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their perspective on a specific operation and acknowledging that there is a slightly higher borrowing figure at the beginning compared to the center of Steve's frequency distribution.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 266.
 I happen tothink that frequency distribution is a rather flat bell instead of a--MR. AXILROD. Yes, but with some limits to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, the speaker states their belief that frequency distribution is a flat bell, while Mr. Axilrod expresses agreement but with some limitations. This suggests a disagreement or contention over the specific shape or characteristics of the frequency distribution.


Passage number 267.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, are we ready to vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple question asking if the group is ready to vote. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 268.
4/22/80MR. GUFFEY. Does this imply consultation at 16 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states a question asked by someone identified as Mr. Guffey.


Passage number 269.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think I have the message onconsultation. Don't hold me to an exact number. If the federal fundsrate drops to 16 percent on one day, on Wednesday afternoon or even onanother day, don't stay right close to the telephone. If there's aproblem in that area, I'll let you know. I have a sense that if themoney supply is running low and interest rates seem to be going downbelow that level, people want a checkpoint. And I understand that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their understanding and intention to provide updates on the federal funds rate and the money supply to address any concerns or questions from the audience.


Passage number 270.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I agree very much with Tony. I think wehave to be careful not to make this too formal because if it isformal, it ought to be in the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Partee and Tony agree on the idea of not making something too formal.


Passage number 271.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I understand [the thinking] about the 16percent. But the real sense of what we're saying, consistent withthese directions, is that if the money supply persists in coming inlow, that is what is going to make the interest rate go down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their understanding of why some people might think a certain way, but clarifying their own viewpoint, which is consistent with the given directions.


Passage number 272.
 So wecould state it as--MR. PARTEE. Consultation if we have low money supply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is stating a possible course of action.


Passage number 273.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Consultation if the money supply doesn'tseem to be coming up. Are you ready to vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is asking if the person is prepared to vote in a consultation if the money supply does not appear to be increasing.


Passage number 274.
MR. ALTMANN. This is 4-1/2 percent on M-1A, 5 percent onM-1B, with "or somewhat less" in the case of both, and a federal fundsrate range of 13 to 19 percent. M2 is 6-3/4 percent; that's thealternative B specification for M2.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Guffey YesPresident Morris YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesPresident Roos YesGovernor Schultz YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich NoPresident Winn YesTen for and one against.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 275.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [To complete the agenda] I just have toremind you that there is a meeting set for Tuesday, May 20.We have a little time, and I won't take all of it. But amemo was distributed to you and we thought we would have a discussiontoday, though not a prolonged one, of these different ideas of reserve--what do we call it, Mr. Axilrod. It's not reserve management; thathas the wrong connotation. It's reserve computation, I guess.SPEAKER(.). Various reserve proposals.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear instances of contention or disagreement. It is mainly about reminding the reader about a meeting and discussing a topic related to reserve management.


Passage number 276.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The Board, of course, openly will have todecide that. That material has been sent out to all the Reserve Banks-35-4/22/80and there is going to be a meeting of the Bank economists about it,isn't there, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and seeking information from Steve.


Passage number 277.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, I believe--we'll talk to Mike [Keran]--it's May 2. We, Mr. Lindsey, Mr. Simpson, and myself, will be meetingwith the various Bank economists to discuss it in detail.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Axilrod, Mr. Lindsey, Mr. Simpson, and Mike Keran will be meeting with the Bank economists to discuss something in detail.


Passage number 278.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Pending that discussion, anyrecommendations have been left out of that document. That is myunderstanding; I have not read it myself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their understanding that recommendations have not been included in the document.


Passage number 279.
MR. AXILROD. That is right. We think we've covered theissues that the Committee members have raised. One is mildlyirrelevant, as we're told it's illegal.SPEAKER(.). Totally irrelevant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 280.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've changed laws these days.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement is a simple statement of fact that laws have been changed recently. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 281.
MR. AXILROD. Unless the Committee members would like tosuggest other options, we hope to have this discussion with Mr.Keran's group and then be prepared to have a more pointed memorandum,with this as background, for the Committee at a later point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement indicated in the passage. Mr. Axilrod is simply suggesting a course of action and stating the intention to have a discussion and prepare a memorandum for the Committee.


Passage number 282.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is just your opportunity, if you hada chance to read it, to convey any violent feelings you might have hadabout something left out of this or any tentative conclusions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is asking for the reader's input or opinion on something that may have been excluded from the text. It is not expressing any disagreement or contention itself.


Passage number 283.
MR. BLACK. Which one is illegal. Excuse me, Henry.SPEAKER(.).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black is simply asking a question and then politely interrupting Henry.


Passage number 284.
 That takes the fun out of it, if you--MR. BLACK. Well, I always favor ones that are unpopular orillegal. I just thought I'd save some time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a conversation between two individuals where Mr. Black expresses his personal preference for unpopular or illegal activities. There is no disagreement or argument presented in this passage.


Passage number 285.
MR. WALLICH. Paul, this is a very technical matter and ithas many ramifications. Sometimes before when we've had a verytechnical matter, for instance on the directive, a subcommittee wasappointed. I wondered whether this would lend itself to that kind oftreatment. I guess by implication this examination by the ReserveBanks is a subcommittee in some sense. I don't want to carry this toofar. And then I assume this is not before the Open Market Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit indication of contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of one person, Mr. Wallich, expressing his thoughts and considerations about a technical matter. There is no conflict or disagreement evident in the passage.


Passage number 286.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. The final decision is going to be aBoard of Governors decision. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a factual statement about the final decision being made by the Board of Governors without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 287.
MR. AXILROD. But [we will present it at] a joint Board andPresident's meeting. We weren't assuming this to be part of an FOMCmeeting since it's a matter to be decided ultimately by [the Board].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the matter will be presented at a joint meeting.


Passage number 288.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are we going to be able to have adiscussion about it next month, in substance, do you think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 289.
MR. AXILROD. Oh, yes; that's our idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod expresses agreement with the previous statement by saying "Oh, yes; that's our idea."


Passage number 290.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The schedule will be that first it will gothrough the Reserve Bank economists together with the Boardeconomists.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no apparent contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply describes the order in which the schedule will proceed.


Passage number 291.
4/22/80MR. AXILROD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 292.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then the document is going to be modifiedto reflect the discussion and it will presumably have somerecommendations, or differing recommendations, at that point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there may be differing recommendations during the modification of the document.


Passage number 293.
MR. AXILROD. There are no recommendations in this documentexcept implicitly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that there are no recommendations in the document, which suggests that there is no disagreement present.


Passage number 294.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right. So we will try to schedule asubstantive discussion of this at the time of our meeting prior to theBoard of Governors having to decide this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the idea of scheduling a substantive discussion before the Board of Governors makes a decision.


Passage number 295.
MR. MORRIS. But it is important that we make a decisionfairly soon, because if we are going to make a change, both ReserveBanks and commercial banks are going to have a lot of work to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that a decision needs to be made soon because there is a lot of work that needs to be done by both Reserve Banks and commercial banks if a change is to be made.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 296.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. My problem with this in part is thatwhatever is nice conceptually, given all the other burdens put on theReserve Banks--or all of us at this point--with the membership and thespecial program and the seasonal borrowing privilege and theoperational problems, this may create [problems] for the banks on topof all the other things they're doing now at our request. We have areal hazard. I think we have to make a pretty persuasive argument,particularly if we're going to do it quickly on top of all these otherthings. I think one can draw the opposite implication: That if it'sa marginally good idea and we want to do it but [our desire is] notoverwhelming, we might want to wait a while just to let the banks getout from under some of these other special things we're imposing onthem now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker is expressing disagreement and contention with the idea being discussed. They point out various burdens and problems that the Reserve Banks and banks will face if the idea is implemented, and suggest waiting to let the banks handle their current obligations before considering the idea further.


Passage number 297.
MR. MORRIS. But if we were to do it, the logical date wouldbe September 1 when we bring in all of these new institutions, If weare going to make a change, if we could make a decision next month,that would give us five months to prepare.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Morris about a potential decision and timeline.


Passage number 298.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I must say that is one view on the Boardstaff. We're going to have to get these techniques out now. Theyreally are going to be tested. But it's going to be impossible to runon our current method after September 1st--with all the phase-in,phase-down, sideways movements, [vault cash] counting as reserves, andnot counting as reserves--because we won't know what we're doing.SPEAKER(.). Mr. Axilrod doesn't fully share that view, Ipresume.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker simply speculates about Mr. Axilrod's view, but there is no clear indication of disagreement.


Passage number 299.
MR. AXILROD. I don't think we're going to be any worse offthan we are now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 300.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll be no worse off to we'll be in animpossible [position]. And some people think there's no differencebetween those two.SPEAKER(.). Well, at least we'll have better data. I thinkthat will be a big step forward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that some people may not see a difference between two scenarios, but there is no explicit disagreement or argument. The second speaker simply offers a positive perspective by stating that having better data will be a big step forward.


Passage number 301.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] then the assumption isinteresting enough. Again, this may be a minority view. But the4/22/80estimate of the nonmember banks is that the way we do it now will bebetter than if they were reporting daily for some indefinite period.SPEAKER(.). I have to mention the credit unions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker briefly acknowledges that there may be a minority view, but there is no explicit disagreement or contention expressed. The mention of credit unions does not introduce any conflicting opinions either.


Passage number 302.
MR. BAUGHMAN. Could I raise a question on a differentsubject if we're through with this one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 303.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 304.
MR. BAUGHMAN. In view of the policy action taken today,based on the prospects for the economy and so forth, I'd raise aquestion as to what kind of posture we should be taking now that we'regetting our first reports on our consultations with the big banks andbig holding companies [regarding the voluntary credit restraintprogram and its] 6 to 9 percent [limit on overall credit growth].Just by way of example, for all member banks in the Eleventh Districtthus far total loans have increased at a 12-1/2 percent annual rate.But in March they did not increase at all. Now, these first reportsare going to give indications that [credit growth] will run well inexcess of 9 percent, so we have geared up for some rather hard-nosedconsultations calling for plans, projections, etc. It seems to methat we could rather easily get into a posture here that would lookfoolish, and that's not a very good posture to be in. So I raise aquestion as to whether you have any advice in that respect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker raises a question about the appropriate posture to take in response to the reports on credit growth exceeding the 9 percent limit. They express concern about potentially looking foolish and ask for advice in this regard.


Passage number 305.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have a gut reaction, but let's see whatGovernor Schultz's gut reaction is first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their curiosity to hear Governor Schultz's gut reaction before stating their own.


Passage number 306.
MR. SCHULTZ. That's pretty nice. My gut reaction is for nowjust to go ahead and get in their plans and talk to them. I'm notready yet to give up too quickly on the first go-around. I'mperfectly willing to take the chance of looking a little foolish; Ithink we're going to look foolish no matter what we do. I don't thinkthat's a situation we can get out of with credit controls, but I'dhate to give up too quickly on this thing. My feeling is to have atalk with them and then next month, if it looks as if things areeasing off, then we can begin to ease off. We may eventually have toface the question of whether we want individual banks to cut backbelow 9 percent if it looks as if the total for the country is goingto be at 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Schultz, is expressing his personal opinion and strategy for dealing with a situation. He is willing to take a chance and have a talk with someone, and then potentially ease off if things improve. He also mentions a potential question that may need to be addressed in the future. However, there is no indication of any disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 307.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's a little early to judge that, Iwould think. And it's very hard to lay down any sense of rigidityabout this. But as a matter of common sense, take your case. Youhave banks who probably are not unlike what we are finding in a lot ofareas. You say [loans] are increasing at an annual rate of 12 or12-1/2 percent for the first three months or a bit more than threemonths.SPEAKER(.). That's an average. So presumably half of themare well above that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and stating that it is too early to judge and that it is difficult to establish any strict rules or principles in the given context. They also provide an example to support their point without challenging or contradicting any previous statements or arguments.


Passage number 308.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. First of all, that's not a figure that'sabsolutely out of sight. And second, you say [that credit growth] isslowing down. It seems to me you should have a consultation withthose banks, as Fred is suggesting. But you're not in a situationwhere you would jump up and down on the table or whatever and say they-38-4/22/80have to be back within 9 percent by a certain date. You say: "Look,you were a little high or were quite high in the early part of theyear; the most recent information we have shows it slowing down, andwe presume it's going to continue to slow down. You have a program inplace and all the rest and we'll look at you again next month and seeif it has continued to slow." But you don't tell them to stop makingloans at this point to get within 9 percent in the next 30 days or 60days or 90 days.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing a situation and proposing a course of action without any opposing views or conflicting opinions being presented.


Passage number 309.
MS. TEETERS. But it's a regional problem to some extent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Teeters is simply stating that the problem is regional to some extent.


Passage number 310.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, to the extent we have a regionalproblem--. I don't know if other people have a sense of this at thispoint. Well, here's a question: Suppose there is a 20 percent loangrowth in a particular bank. Is that something we should stomp on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and posing a question for consideration.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 311.
MR. PARTEE. What is it. Is it non-priority loans. Is ittake-over loans. That's another aspect of consultation.SPEAKER(.). Well, it will be heavily loaded with oil and gasloans, almost inevitably.SPEAKER(.). In the second respect.SPEAKER(.). Real estate loans have been very strong also.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speakers are discussing different types of loans and their importance, suggesting differing perspectives or opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 312.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But if you had a bank with 20 percent[loan growth] and it's not in a priority area, I think you have to betougher on that bank than on a bank that's way below and consistentwith the program. I don't think we can just say that the program[does not apply] for that banker when he comes in with a 20 percentfigure. That's in the interest of fairness, I agree.SPEAKER(.). I'd look foolish.SPEAKER(.). If our economic projections are correct, then weought to be phasing out this program in about two months anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. 

The first speaker argues that a bank with 20% loan growth should be treated more strictly than a bank with lower growth, even if the 20% growth is not in a priority area. They believe that the program should still apply to that bank. 

The second speaker disagrees and suggests that the program should be phased out in about two months, implying that it should not apply to any bank, regardless of loan growth.


Passage number 313.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON(.). In New York only one commercialbank has come in over 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 314.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. At an annual rate. That surprises me.Well, you have no problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing surprise and agreement with the information being presented.


Passage number 315.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON(.). We do have a bit of a problem withthree bank holding companies. But we're looking into the data onemore time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that there is a problem with three bank holding companies and that they are reviewing the data again.


Passage number 316.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd say this isn't the time to stomp onthem the way we would if the economy were running away.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. The speaker simply expresses their opinion that it is not the right time to "stomp on them" (possibly referring to a particular group or policy) as they would in a different economic context.


Passage number 317.
MR. BAUGHMAN(.). Well, I've gotten what I asked for.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Baughman, seems to be expressing a statement or observation without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 318.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Were there any other feelings on this,while we're on the subject. I was going to [bring this] up afterlunch.4/22/80SPEAKER(.). I don't want this analogy to sound too strange,but I think credit controls are little like the Vietnam war. We needto decide earlier rather than later to declare that we've won and pullout. And it seems to me that we have a particularly difficult problemwith some regional differences that in a way are discriminatory. As aconsequence, the sooner the overall situation allows us to say "Okay,we've done it and we can now scrap it," the better off we will bebecause we are putting some institutions--through no fault of theirown, really--through a harder vise than other institutions. Andthat's one of the undesirable effects.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion about credit controls and making an analogy to the Vietnam War. They are not presenting opposing viewpoints or engaging in a debate.


Passage number 319.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's right to an extent, andnobody is going to be [happier than I] to get rid of [the program]when the time comes. It's just a question of when the time is[right] psychologically, which is difficult [to gauge]. But given thesituation we're in now, as opposed to two months ago before we had theprogram, I'd say we can afford to be a little more understanding of abank that has a legitimate regional growth problem. That was withinthe framework of the original program anyway; it was just a questionof how it should be administered.SPEAKER(.). Well, that's very helpful.SPEAKER(.). It looks to me as if oil and gas loans ought tobe priority items, too, if we can extend that priority list.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speakers are expressing their thoughts and opinions, but there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 320.
MS.TEETERS. Not publicly.SPEAKER(.). Hang in there, Nancy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "Hang in there, Nancy" is a statement of support and encouragement.


Passage number 321.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Of course the problem, I suspect, is thatmany oil and gas people are not getting the loans that they wanted.But the language that we use to one bank--SPEAKER(.). I know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It only presents a suspicion or assumption regarding a problem faced by oil and gas people.


Passage number 322.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --has to be reasonably consistent withwhat we say to another bank. If a banker says "Gee, I talked to BobBlack and he told me I could draw all the oil I wanted in WestVirginia" and then some other banker says "That's not the message Igot from Willis Winn"--SPEAKER(.). [Unintelligible] in Cleveland.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply explaining that there needs to be consistency between what one banker says to another bank and what was actually discussed with a person named Bob Black. The speaker in Cleveland is not expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 323.
MR. PARTEE. Remember, if that's a loan to an oil company,that doesn't mean that it's a loan for the purpose of drilling an oilwell. It might be for some entirely different purpose.SPEAKER(.). Like borrowing silver.SPEAKER(.). That wasn't the kind I was talking about though,Chuck.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 324.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. By and large I think you can be tough onthe qualitative guidelines [unintelligible] gas drilling, but I don'tthink you should be giving them any sense that this is an open seasonon takeover loans or silver loans or something like that.-40-4/22/80 -41-SPEAKER(.). We'll regard this as a dance instruction. We'lltip-toe around it until it is demised.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show contention or disagreement. It simply represents an individual's opinion about being tough on qualitative guidelines for gas drilling and expressing a different perspective on takeover loans or silver loans.


