Passage number 1.
 MR. FISCHER.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Without objection.  Our first agenda item is the selection of a Committee officer.  As many of you know, Michael Held, who is seated near the anteroom door, has been appointed general counsel and executive vice president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  I am pleased to recommend that the Committee select Michael as its deputy general counsel.  Consistent with the Committee’s standard practice for appointment of its officers, this selection would be effective until the Committee’s first regularly scheduled meeting in 2017.  Michael has been with the New York Federal Reserve for the past 18 years and is a highly experienced central banking attorney.  Vice Chairman, would you like to make a comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is making a recommendation for the selection of Michael Held as the Committee's deputy general counsel and there is no indication of any opposition to this recommendation.


Passage number 2.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes.  First, I’d like to second the notion of him becoming the deputy general counsel for the FOMC.  He has big shoes to fill with Tom Baxter retiring from the New York Fed, but I’m sure he will do so very ably.  I’ve worked with him for many years, and I very much trust his knowledge and his judgment.  It’s nice to have him here at the FOMC on a more permanent basis, taking a seat next to Scott, who’s not here today, but— [laughter]—we will be seeing Michael there on a regular basis.  I’m very pleased.  Thank you.  CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Any discussion or any objections.  Okay.  Seeing none, the selection is approved unanimously by the Committee.  And congratulations, Michael, we are looking forward to working with you in your new role. That takes us to the second agenda item, which concerns proposed revisions of the documents governing foreign currency operations.  As you know, the staff has been engaged in a long-term effort to develop proposed revisions to the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations, the Foreign Currency Directive, and other related documents. You all received memos on the proposal from the staff in mid-August, and last week we sent a short additional memo from the Foreign Currency Subcommittee. This project has required a lot of careful analysis involving staff from both the New York Federal Reserve and the Board.  That work was carried out under the general oversight of the Subcommittee, and I’d like to thank the staff for what seems to me to be an excellent proposal. In my view, it meets the important objectives of the project. I might note that the proposal provides that the Subcommittee, in consultation with the Committee, may give additional instructions to the Desk regarding holdings of foreign currencies. As I mentioned, the Subcommittee recently sent the Committee a short memo, which included draft instructions that the Subcommittee would plan to issue to the Desk.  Unless there are objections, the Subcommittee would issue these instructions within a few days following this meeting.  The Committee will not be asked to vote on those instructions.  Let me now turn to Simon, who’s going to summarize the proposal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a description of a meeting and the approval of a new position.


Passage number 3.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I think it’s a nice proposal.  There’s a lot of references to “Chairman” in this, and it’s a little bit of residual language.  Could we perhaps switch it to “Chair” and not have “Chairman” in it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a suggestion to switch the term "Chairman" to "Chair" in the proposal, but the tone remains positive and agreeable.


Passage number 4.
 MS. ALLISON.  Actually, “Chairman” is the term that’s used in the Act.  So that’s why we’ve retained it in these documents.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage states a fact about the use of the term "Chairman" in the Act and the decision to retain it in the documents. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 5.
 MR. POTTER.  I did feel strange saying that throughout the briefing, but it was to conform with the Federal Reserve Act. So it’s the “Chairman” writing a particular check.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply explains why the speaker referred to themselves as "Chairman" during a briefing, attributing it to conforming with the Federal Reserve Act.


Passage number 6.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Maybe we need to update the Federal Reserve Act after all.  [Laughter] CHAIR YELLEN. Not touching that.  Okay.  Other questions or comments.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It only includes a suggestion to update the Federal Reserve Act, followed by a light-hearted response and a request for other questions or comments.


Passage number 7.
 MR. LACKER.  As many of you know, the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond has a long tradition of raising concerns about foreign exchange intervention on the grounds that, if they’re sterilized, they’re meaningless.  If they’re not sterilized, they imply a change in monetary policy stance, which would imply some compromise of our monetary policy independence from the Treasury. I realize we don’t have a vote, but, on principle, historically, the Richmond Federal Reserve has dissented on anything having to do with foreign exchange authorizations.  I mention this, first, to avoid disappointing those who might have been expecting me to mention this any time a foreign exchange matter is brought up, but also to say that these new documents strike me as the right way for one to authorize foreign exchange operations, if one must.  And I commend the staff on a very thorough and excellent review of these things. More broadly, though, foreign exchange operations increasingly seem to be an anachronistic tool.  Back in the day, in the old operating regime, if we were going to maintain an interest rate peg, we had to sterilize them, so they were kind of meaningless.  If we didn’t sterilize them, they’d drive the rate down.  Nowadays, it’s not obvious that they should be expected to have any meaningful economic effect.  It might be worthwhile in the not-too-distant future to give that more thought and maybe give some thought to the role played by ourforeign exchange operations.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Other comments or questions.  Okay.  If there are no further questions or discussion, we’ll now vote on the proposal.  This vote will be to approve all four of the revised documents in the staff proposal—namely, the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations, the Foreign Currency Directive, the Committee’s Rules of Organization, and the Committee’s Rules of Procedure.  These documents are included in Simon’s briefing package.  With the proposed changes to these documents, the procedural instructions with respect to foreign currency operations would no longer be necessary and would be rescinded.  Is there a motion on this proposal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Lacker followed by an announcement by Chair Yellen.


Passage number 8.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  And a second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply shows a statement being made and then acknowledgement and gratitude being expressed.


Passage number 9.
 MR. FISCHER.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Any objections.  Okay.  Without objection, the proposal is approved.  Thank you.  We are ready to move on to our third agenda item, and Simon is going to begin with the Desk briefing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 10.
   MS. GEORGE.  I had a question for Lorie on the reinvestment purchases.  At one point, the expectations were that we would cease reinvestments when we’d get to a federal funds rate of 1 to 1¼ percent.  Are those expectations of when people expect us to cease reinvestments moving at all relative to expectations for the funds rate, and how would they compare with our own.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward question being asked by Ms. George.


Passage number 11.
 MS. LOGAN. The reinvestment expectations in the policy survey are adjusting to changes in expectations for the rate level, so they’ve been consistently moving out as expectations of the path of policy have moved out.  That relationship has stayed fairly stable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact about the reinvestment expectations in the policy survey adjusting to changes in expectations for the rate level. They also mention that this relationship has remained stable.


Passage number 12.
 MS. GEORGE.  So with our projections coming out, they are likely to change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. George is simply stating that the projections are likely to change.


Passage number 13.
 MR. POTTER. So 1⅜ is the median estimate of where the federal funds rate will be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states a fact, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 14.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Any further questions. We do not need a vote on the new counterparty policy, but I would like to see whether there is general support for the Desk to go ahead with the plans as we’ve discussed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply thanking someone and asking if there are any further questions or if there is support for the plans that have been discussed.


Passage number 15.
 MR. FISCHER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The explanation is not sufficient to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 16.
 MR. DUDLEY.  Yes. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  You have general support.  And I do need a vote to ratify domestic open market operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply acknowledging that there is general support and requesting a vote to ratify domestic open market operations.


Passage number 17.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Without objection.  We’re ready to move along to the economic and financial briefings, and David Wilcox is going to start us off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any sign of contention or disagreement. It is a simple exchange of statements indicating a smooth transition to the next agenda item.


Passage number 18.
 MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  This is for David Wilcox.  I thought the discussion and the decomposition on unemployment experiences by different racial groups was extremely interesting. It seems very important as we try to figure out where we are with regard to remaining slack and where that remaining slack may be, although it’s a little unclear as to why there are these very differential experiences. As I look at it, I thought the decomposition by education was very striking, both in terms of the variability and in terms of the levels.  And, as you were talking, it seems a little harder superficially to associate that kind of a pattern with sectoral differences as opposed to potentially alternative explanations like discrimination.  But I wondered whether you had any further thoughts on what this is telling you so far or what additional analysis you might think about doing to try to get further insights into that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 19.
 MR. WILCOX.  I think it’s a really important question to be investigated.  As I said in the course of the briefing itself, I don’t regard this work as having laid to rest the question.  I’m a little skeptical that differential exposure to cyclical industries—in particular, manufacturing and construction—can account for the high-beta experience of blacks and Hispanics.  My view on that is informed importantly by the results, perhaps most especially those in the lower-right panel in exhibit 16, which show that even for African Americans with a bachelor’s degree or more, this multiplier of 1.8 pertains relative to whites. I haven’t looked at the industry exposure of African Americans and whites with a bachelor’s degree or more, but I’m a little skeptical that the exposure of African Americans with a bachelor’s or more to construction and to manufacturing could be significant enough to account for that.  Industry exposure itself may account for some of this behavior.  I am skeptical that it provides a complete explanation. There are marked differences in the age structure of these racial and ethnic groups.  For example, relatively speaking, the Hispanic population has far fewer elderly than the white population.  So another avenue for investigation is something akin to what I’ve done that would investigate the potential role of differential age structure and account for this sort of situation.  But I think there’s a lot of work to be done not only here inside the Federal Reserve, but by outside researchers as well. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Wilcox expresses skepticism about the idea that differential exposure to cyclical industries can fully explain the high-beta experience of blacks and Hispanics. He also suggests that industry exposure and age structure may not provide a complete explanation.


Passage number 20.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is not providing any information or stating any claim that can be disputed or disagreed upon. It simply states the initials "MR" without any further context or explanation.


Passage number 21.
 WILLIAMS.  I thought that the box in Tealbook A, “Alternative View:  A Return to the Greenspan Conundrum,” was really interesting.  I want to reiterate something I think I’ve said many times over the years—how much I appreciate the alternative view boxes.  I know that you’re not supporting the particular views here, but I think they are really valuable, at least for us—2,500 miles away we sit and discuss these, and it forces us to think through things in a very constructive way.  So, again, I view this as a very positive exercise. However, that one exercise did get me looking at the alternative scenario that was related to that, which was, again, named “A Return to the Greenspan Conundrum.”  One intriguing result of that alternative scenario was that the unemployment rate comes down to 3¼ percent in late 2019.  I know that throughout my lifetime we’ve never had a 3¼ percent unemployment rate.  I actually don’t think we’ve had one, probably, since World War II.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 22.
 MR. POTTER.  You’re not that young.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the fact that the speaker, Mr. Potter, makes a statement that contradicts or challenges the age or youthfulness of the person addressed.


Passage number 23.
  [Laughter] MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The presence of laughter suggests a light or humorous tone, rather than any conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 24.
 WILLIAMS.  Okay.  Now, I don’t think we’ve had an unemployment rate that low. CHAIR YELLEN.  No, I don’t think so.  It got down to about 3.5, I think, in 1999.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Williams and Chair Yellen agree that the unemployment rate reached a low point of about 3.5% in 1999.


Passage number 25.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is not stating any specific ideas or arguments that could lead to contention or disagreement. It is simply providing an abbreviated title or abbreviation ("MR") without any further information or context to suggest disagreement.


Passage number 26.
 WILLIAMS. Yes. 3.9. CHAIR YELLEN. It has not gone to 3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any specific content or context that would indicate contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement of agreement or confirmation.


Passage number 27.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage is not provided, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 28.
 WILLIAMS. No. CHAIR YELLEN.  But what about in the ’60s, at the end of the ’60s.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not display any contention or disagreement. It is a simple exchange of statements between WILLIAMS and CHAIR YELLEN.


Passage number 29.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Proper nouns don't provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 30.
 WILLIAMS.  It didn’t go to 3¼ percent in the ’60s.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a factual statement about something that happened in the past. There is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 31.
 MR. WILCOX.  No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is because MR. WILCOX does not express any opposing view or disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 32.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not present any opposing opinions or conflicting viewpoints. It simply provides the initials "MR" without any additional context or information, making it impossible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 33.
 WILLIAMS.  Okay.  So the unemployment rate has not gone down to 3¼ percent in my lifetime.  I’ll stick with that.  [Laughter]  The question I have is—I think this simulation was done in the FRB/US model—if you thought through that scenario of a really strong economy, in which monetary policy, for whatever reason, is not taming output growth, do you really think the unemployment rate would go down to close to 3 percent.  Or do you think that something else would give in the model. Are we pushing this model outside of the historical norms far enough that maybe labor force participation would pick up, maybe wages would pick up, or something. How do you think about scenarios of an essentially linear model when you’re taking it well outside a historical norm that was estimated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. Williams is questioning whether the simulation in the FRB/US model is accurate and whether the unemployment rate would actually go down to close to 3 percent in a strong economy with uncontrolled output growth. He suggests that other factors may come into play, such as increased labor force participation or higher wages.


Passage number 34.
 MR. WILCOX.  Really tough question.  I don’t have a ready, fully formed answer for you. I’ll answer with a partial response, which is that I suspect that a feature of a lot of these alternative scenarios in which we’re stressing one aspect of the economy would entail other aspects.  So the all-else-being-equal assumption would fail for sure.  Now, where the rivets would pop off, I think, is what you’re asking, and I don’t know the answer to that.  If I had thought 3.2 percent unemployment was absolutely outlandish, I wouldn’t have shown the resultsin the scenario.  I do think it begins to push the boundaries of what we’re likely to see, but, by design, this is a pretty extreme scenario.  I thought it was appropriate to show that kind of an outcome even though it pushes pretty far into the tail of the probability distribution. I don’t have a ready answer for how things might evolve differently from the way that the model portrays them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply explaining that they do not have all the answers and that the scenario being discussed is extreme and unlikely to occur.


Passage number 35.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not provide any information or context to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 36.
 WILLIAMS. The question I go to is, if we look at episodes in which unemployment went very low or in which we were pushing the economy hard, did we actually see something different happening.  Do we get off the linear relationships.  Do wages accelerate more quickly, or does something else happen differently in those extreme scenarios.  I’m thinking about the stuff that I remember Mike Kiley doing years ago, looking at how relationships work when you’re at the ends of the distribution.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Williams about questioning the behavior of relationships in extreme scenarios.


Passage number 37.
 MR. WILCOX.  As it happens, I think Mike is here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wilcox simply states that he believes Mike is present.


Passage number 38.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 39.
 WILLIAMS.  He’s going to deny my referencing his work.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage because the speaker states that someone will deny referencing their work.


Passage number 40.
 MR. WILCOX.  Mike, do you have anything to add to this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wilcox is simply asking Mike if he has any input or additional information to contribute.


Passage number 41.
 MR. KILEY.  I think, David, the only thing that I can add is that if you look at the picture—although I don’t have it in front of me—that President Williams is referring to, you can see that the confidence intervals of the unemployment rates are very low.  And the folks that work on the FRB/US model are quite worried about exactly the point that President Williams is raising, that historical experience doesn’t have these things.  What are the relevant nonlinearities.  Are they on participation.  Would they be in wages. But I just don’t think we have historical episodes.  The one that is in our lifetime, the one in the late 1990s, was accompanied by very favorable other developments regarding productivity, et cetera.  So wage   pressures or price pressures or other things weren’t particularly apparent. We might imagine they might arise, but that experiment didn’t particularly shed light.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 42.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 43.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a polite expression of gratitude by Williams.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 44.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. One comment on a point that President Williams raised. A rate of 3.2 percent today would be very different than a rate of 3.2 percent in the late ’60s because the demographics of the population are quite different.  So while I basically take your point, I think you’d have to adjust for the changes in the demographic structure of the economy. I want to come back to the issue of the black and Hispanic unemployment.  I think there’s no question that discrimination is a factor because we have a lot of evidence on things like long-term unemployment that hurts people in terms of their ability to be hired.  So while we don’t know the proportion, I think discrimination definitely plays a role.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage acknowledges some agreement with President Williams' point about the difference between a 3.2 percent rate today compared to the late '60s due to demographic changes. However, it introduces a different perspective by suggesting that discrimination is a factor in unemployment rates, which could indicate some disagreement or contention.


Passage number 45.
 MR. WILCOX.  I’m inclined to agree, and this evidence pushes me further in that direction.  Another body of research that corroborates that view is the matched résumé submitting, showing that when identical résumés are sent to employers but one of the names has a stereotypical ethnic association, and callback rates differ dramatically between the two. So that, in my mind, is another piece of corroborating evidence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is presenting additional evidence to support a previously stated viewpoint.


Passage number 46.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I just wanted to make it clear that it’s not up in the air.  There’s actually evidence. CHAIR YELLEN.  Right.  There is evidence. President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers agree that there is evidence to support their previous statement.


Passage number 47.
 MR. EVANS.  Well, I agree with President Williams that extrapolations like this do make you wonder about what could go wrong, and I think there are other things that could happen, right.  In a simulation like this, it could be that the matching technology for employment is better so that, in fact, labor market outcomes are more efficient and you get lower  unemployment.  To the extent that there’s tension, I agree it would be manifest either in wages or maybe inflation expectations.  And in this scenario inflation expectations are undoubtedly anchored, but if there was a tension, I would expect that to go wrong.  So that’s the element of the model or the data I’d be looking for, in order to try to weigh in on that. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Evans expresses agreement with President Williams and offers his own perspective on potential outcomes of the simulation, specifically mentioning the possibility of better matching technology for employment leading to lower unemployment. He also acknowledges that tension or disagreement could arise in the form of wages or inflation expectations, but there is no explicit disagreement or contention.


Passage number 48.
 MR. LOCKHART.  We’re going back and forth between President Williams’s comments and the earlier comments on further study.  I’d also add that gender cuts, I think, could tell us a great deal. And just yesterday in Atlanta, I attended a meeting that talked about the judicial system and incarceration rates and the effect of a record of some kind on employment. So this is a multilayered thing.  If we’re going to tackle it, I think we have to tackle it in a very thorough way, and that’s why I mentioned the gender cuts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is merely adding additional thoughts and information to the discussion.


Passage number 49.
 MR. WILCOX.  I agree completely, but despairing of being able to come to the Committee with a complete answer on all dimensions, I thought I’d come to the Committee with some evidence that I thought was pretty interesting, even if only partial. The incarceration rates are just astonishing—not only the stock of individuals who are currently incarcerated, but those who have a previous record of incarceration.  And that’s bound to be a significant influence in what’s going on. With regard to gender, I absolutely agree that that’s another important dimension to be explored.  But, as I say, I wanted to come before my own retirement [laughter] with some kind of discussion to the Committee.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Further comments or questions.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Wilcox, expresses agreement with a previous statement and acknowledges the limitations of his evidence. He also agrees that gender is an important dimension to be explored. The response from Chair Yellen and the lack of further comments indicate a general consensus.


Passage number 50.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  My question is on exhibit 2 in “The International Outlook,” panel 6, “Real Dollar Indexes.”  We talked before about the reason we’re  projecting a stronger dollar is because we think we’re going to surprise markets with our path of rate increases. So is that surprise the Taylor (1999) rule, or is it the SEP median.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification on a specific exhibit and its relation to the projected stronger dollar.


Passage number 51.
 MR. KAMIN.  Well, the surprise is the difference between the staff assumption about the federal funds rate over the next three or four years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that there is a difference in the staff assumption about the federal funds rate.


Passage number 52.
 MR. BULLARD.  Which is Taylor (1999).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the following passage.


Passage number 53.
 MR. KAMIN.  Which is Taylor (1999).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the provided passage without further context. The passage states "Which is Taylor (1999)," which seems to be referencing a source or a specific argument made by Taylor in 1999. However, the passage does not provide any information or discussion about the content of Taylor's argument, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement without knowing the specific points being discussed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 54.
 MR. BULLARD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The use of the word "yes" indicates that there is contention or disagreement in the passage. However, without further context, it is impossible to determine the specific nature of the disagreement or who is involved.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 55.
 MR. KAMIN.  I would just say, because the entire outlook for the U.S. and global economy is conditioned on that assumption, I wanted to make clear that it’s a staff assumption about the future path of the federal funds rate, which is indeed based on Taylor (1999). It’s the comparison of that and one measure of what the market expects, which is the OIS rate path.  And it’s that gap that represents the surprise because the markets, as represented by the OIS rates, expect a much shallower uplift in the federal funds rate than is embedded in the staff forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: There is a disagreement or contention between the staff assumption about the future path of the federal funds rate and the market's expectation, as represented by the OIS rates. The staff forecast expects a higher uplift in the federal funds rate than what the market expects.


Passage number 56.
 MR. BULLARD.  Would you say that this is becoming increasingly tenuous, to make this kind of assumption, because Taylor (1999) is getting further and further away from market expectations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the assumption being made is becoming more doubtful because a certain source is becoming less relevant over time.


Passage number 57.
 MR. KAMIN.  Well, that’s a question for my colleagues.  [Laughter]  The reason that we use that staff assumption about the path of the federal funds rate is so that our dollar forecast is exactly consistent with both the economic forecast and the conditioning assumption about monetary policy.  Then that raises the question about what is the right conditioning assumption regarding the federal funds rate, and we have reviewed that, and I’ll let one of my colleagues speak more on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply deferring to their colleagues and stating that they have reviewed and discussed the conditioning assumption regarding the federal funds rate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 58.
  MR. LAUBACH.  In a tough spot.  The one thing that I would simply note is that, as time progresses, the median expectations from the primary dealer survey, for example, are for a substantially flatter increase than what the Taylor rule applied to our economic forecast implies. So, by the end of 2019, I think you are looking at a gap on the order of about 1¼ percentage points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The statement suggests a disagreement between the median expectations from the primary dealer survey and the implications of applying the Taylor rule to the economic forecast.


Passage number 59.
 MR. BULLARD. The assumption there is informing the whole outlook and sort of changing the whole context of what you’re presenting to the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that an assumption is informing the outlook and context of what is being presented to the Committee.


Passage number 60.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. But aren’t these really small effects.  We’re talking about, what, 3½ or 4 percent on the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It only presents a question and a statement presenting a small effect.


Passage number 61.
 MR. KAMIN.  Yes.  On the dollar, you can look at the picture on panel 6.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kamin simply states a fact about looking at a picture on panel 6.


Passage number 62.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. The uncertainty associated with that has got to be a lot greater.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement expresses a personal opinion about the level of uncertainty, but there is no opposing viewpoint stated or implied.


Passage number 63.
 MR. KAMIN.  Yes, you can see that our real dollar goes up about 5 percent over the next three and a half years or so. The 5 percent is a non-negligible amount but, stretched over that long a period, it does not have very strong effects on U.S. economic growth.  Now, in the Tealbook we have an alternative assumption of a 10 percent rise over a much shorter period, and that is, of course, very material.  And, as Vice Chairman Dudley mentions, that uncertainty dwarfs the arguments you might have about the baseline path of the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 64.
 MR. BULLARD.  Well, the reason I bring this up is because it’s particularly stark when you look at exchange rates because you would expect foreign exchange markets to already have encompassed assumptions about various central bank policies, and therefore you wouldn’t be able to predict very well—and, in fact, you can’t predict very well—what’s going to happen toexchange rates.  But here we’re saying we have some kind of information that the markets do not have, and then that’s feeding into the entire forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Bullard is presenting his perspective and discussing the limitations of predicting exchange rates.


Passage number 65.
 MR. KAMIN. That’s exactly right.  We do believe that the current configuration of exchange rates incorporates all information about the future that is expected both by markets and by us.  In almost all areas of global economics that might influence the current exchange rate are information sets that we probably hold in common with the markets.  So there’s really one key area in which our views differ from the market, and that’s the assumption about the future path of the federal funds rate. We also incorporate into our dollar forecast some differences in views about foreign central bank monetary policy, but they’re not that material. It’s mainly differences of views about U.S. monetary policy, about the federal funds rate, which in turn lead to expectations on our part that the market will be surprised.  That is that one difference between our information sets and the markets’ that we build into our forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining that their views differ from the market's in terms of the future path of the federal funds rate and expectations about U.S. monetary policy.


Passage number 66.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a polite exchange between Mr. Bullard and Chair Yellen.


Passage number 67.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  My question is spawned by President Williams’s question, only looking at the Tealbook.  The Tealbook unemployment rate for 2019 of 4.2 percent, and long-run of 5—would there be historical experience to say what happens when you go from 4.2 to 5, just even in that range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for historical information about what happens when the unemployment rate increases from 4.2 percent to 5 percent.


Passage number 68.
 MR. WILCOX.  There’s not a lot.  The excursions of the unemployment rate below the natural rate and then back up to the natural rate are pretty rare, and as I think Michael Kiley was referring to, one has to wonder whether at that point, with a rising unemployment rate, some nonlinear dynamics might take over and we might end up with something other than a smooth landing.I think the record of the postwar period, in my view, is less dispositive on that point than it might first appear because many of the recessions in the postwar period were actually deliberatively induced by the Federal Reserve in order to wring inflation out of the system.  This is what gave rise to the designation by Christina Romer and David Romer of the so-called “Romer dates” when they divined that the mind of the Committee had switched from one mode, which was promoting economic growth, to another mode, which was fighting inflation.  So I think it’s less evident than it might seem on the surface that it’s impossible to accomplish a smooth landing of the kind that’s portrayed at the baseline projection, but there isn’t a long historical record to show that it can be done. If I may, just ever so briefly, I’d like to come back to President Williams’s original comment about the alternative view.  I’m aware that there’s been quite a lot of turnover on the Committee since that franchise was introduced, and I thought I might just place it a little bit into context.  It’s the only place in the Tealbook in which I give individual staff members a byline, so they’re individually invested and identified in the production of that.  The goal here is to ask staff members to make the case for an off-baseline possibility of consequence to you as policymakers. I’m asking them to act as lawyer advocates of a nonbaseline possibility.  And my compact with them is that I will never ask them if they believe that their scenario is superior to the baseline scenario, because if I did that, I would be putting them in the position of saying that they think their judgment is better than mine. Now, I suspect that, frankly, many of them do believe that [laughter], but I never force them to come out and say that to my face. It’s good enough.  And the way that I assess the quality of their work is, simply, “How well did you marshal the evidence on behalf of your case.  Did you argue it well by appealing to history, foreign central bank experience, U.S. central bank experience, or other issues like that.”  All I’m asking them to   do is, articulate a plausible possibility off baseline with the goal, I hope, of advancing the ability of all of you to think through various contingencies that you might confront. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily a discussion of different viewpoints and approaches to economic analysis.


Passage number 69.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage alone does not provide enough information for a definitive answer.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 70.
 WILLIAMS.  Yes.  I want to clarify something, again, for people who may not be following exactly what David said earlier.  You said something about how you may have assumed that it’s impossible to get a soft landing when you have the unemployment rate way below its natural rate.  You didn’t actually say what the fact was, and the fact is, it’s never happened.  So I just wanted everyone to be clear.  That’s the thing that you were talking about that you weren’t convinced by, but I think that does get to President George’s question.  We have not seen an example in the postwar history in which the unemployment rate went up more than ½ percentage point that wasn’t associated with a recession.  Now, the reasons for that, which you brought up in the debate about why that is the case, is definitely a live subject. But it is a striking—not even a “stylized” fact but a fact that this hasn’t occurred in the past.  So it is an area in which I worry that, when you have an unemployment rate that low, it is very hard, and historically hard—you have to go way back in history, I think—to find an example of that being successful. I don’t know if that was a legal two-hander [laughter].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Williams, disagrees with something that David said earlier and points out that it has never happened that a soft landing was achieved when the unemployment rate is way below its natural rate. Williams expresses concern about the possibility of success in such a situation, challenging David's stance.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 71.
 MR. EVANS. This is an important issue.  I’m going to guess that in models you’ve written down, President Williams—I don’t tabulate these things myself—if you simulate them, you probably have a lot of examples in which the unemployment rate has gone up in those simulations without it being what somebody might call a recession.  Andin view of the small number of recessions that we’ve had and some lack of luck during some of these—as we were talking about in Chicago just last week, one of my colleagues pointed out that, well, 1990 and ’91 could have been a soft landing, but then Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait came about.  And, you   know, things happen during fragile times.  So there’s a small number of observations.  There are some shocks that do that.  If it was as much of a slam dunk as your comment kind of suggests offhand, then your models ought to be reflecting this, and I just don’t think they are.  So it’s worth a lot of discussion because, frankly, I think it is a big deal.  If, in fact, undershooting the natural rate of unemployment is something that is going to lead to a recession, and if we think that the Phillips curve mechanism is going to be important to get inflation up to our target, well, then, we’re probably never going to get it up to target, because we’re going to say, “If I do this, I’ll have a recession, and that would be worse.”  And then that’s going to ratify that 2 percent as a ceiling.  So I think this is a really important issue for more discussion. CHAIR YELLEN.  I absolutely agree with you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates a disagreement or contention regarding the relationship between undershooting the natural rate of unemployment and the possibility of a recession. Mr. Evans questions the validity of President Williams' comment, suggesting that if it were true, the models would reflect it, but he doesn't believe they do. This indicates a disagreement about the accuracy and effectiveness of the models.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 72.
 MR. WILCOX. I agree, President Evans—and President Williams, too. I think that one needs to acknowledge that this is an area in which it is going to be difficult to make solid progress in research. I certainly feel that I can’t speak with great conviction that our nice, tidy linear models describe well the dynamics that take over in a more fragile economy when demand is growing more slowly.  One is struck, for example, by the profile of unemployment over the business cycle.  You see steep increases in the unemployment rate, and you don’t see equivalently steep declines in the unemployment rate.  And in a simple, tidy linear model like the FRB/US model, there probably shouldn’t be that discrepancy in behavior. Now, that said, my impression is that there have been two attempts at a soft landing in the post–World War II era.  And, as President Evans just mentioned, I think there is an easily identifiable event with regard to one of them—namely, the 1990 invasion of Kuwait by Iraq— that provided a plausible shock of sharp magnitude that disrupted economic processes. I just don’t think you can look to the historical record and get a dispositive answer on that question. And I don’t have a huge amount of confidence in the ability of our models to discriminate, because the kind of model you go to in looking for that answer—that will pretty much give you the answer. If you go to a linear model like the FRB/US model and you rely on that model as the source for your answer, you will decide that it’s feasible that there’s no particular problem here. If you go to a model that incorporates nonlinear dynamics, that will be the answer that you get. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

There is contention in the passage because Mr. Wilcox expresses uncertainty about the accuracy of linear models in describing the dynamics of a fragile economy. He also expresses doubt about the ability of models to provide a definitive answer to the question at hand.


Passage number 73.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  I’ll talk about it in my own session, so I will follow-up then. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Rosengren mentions that he will talk about something in his own session, and Chair Yellen acknowledges this and says that they will follow up later.


Passage number 74.
 MR. LACKER.  I just want to confirm my recollection of a number that the previous Chairman told us about in early 2008, and I think it’s that the unemployment rate doesn’t rise more than 0.3 percentage point without a recession. Is that the right number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 75.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Three-month moving average.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the statement "Three-month moving average" itself. It is simply a statistical term used to describe a method of smoothing data over a three-month period.


Passage number 76.
 MR. LACKER.  Of what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I'm unable to provide an answer without the passage you are referring to. Could you please provide more context or the specific passage?


Passage number 77.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. A three-month moving average of the unemployment rate. If it goes up more than 0.3 percentage point, we’ve always had a recession.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 78.
 MR. LACKER.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage only includes a sentence fragment and does not present any specific information or statement that can lead to contention or disagreement.


Passage number 79.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The abbreviation "MR" does not provide enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 80.
 WILLIAMS.  Not causation. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage consists of short statements made by different individuals and does not show any explicit disagreement or contention between them.


Passage number 81.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Just on this Greenspan conundrum discussion, we may not have observed a 3¼ percent unemployment rate in President Williams’s lifetime.  But we did observe a conundrum in the early 2000s, and we do have some experience with that.  In that episode, we did not see this huge decline in the unemployment rate.  That’s just another way to look at that issue.  So it’s not like it’s completely out of historical experience.CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Why don’t we get started then on our economic go-round.  We’ll have a few comments and then take a coffee break.  Let’s start with President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply sharing their perspective and providing additional information on the topic being discussed.


Passage number 82.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Oh, am I going now. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply shows a conversation where one person confirms that another person should proceed with their actions.


Passage number 83.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  I’m sorry.  I thought we were going for the break.  [Laughter] My apologies. CHAIR YELLEN.  No problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple exchange where Mr. Rosengren apologizes for a misunderstanding, and Chair Yellen reassures him that there is no problem.


Passage number 84.
 MR. TARULLO.  He was changing what he was going to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a straightforward observation and does not involve any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 85.
  [Laughter] MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  We can come back to you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage consists of a brief exchange between Mr. Rosengren and Chair Yellen. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 86.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  My forecast is quite similar to that of the Tealbook.  I expect real GDP growth for the second half of this year to be more than 1 percentage point higher than for the first half of this year.  This pickup will largely reflect continued strength in consumption and some rebuilding of inventories.  Growth in real final sales to private domestic purchasers has been fairly solid over the past year, and I expect a solid increase in 2017 as well.  Thus, abstracting from transitory fluctuations induced by inventory changes, domestic economic growth remains quite healthy, with limited spillovers to date from the strong dollar and weak growth of our trading partners. My expectation regarding core PCE inflation for the second half of this year is slightly higher than the Tealbook’s.  By the end of 2017, I expect core inflation to be only slightly below our 2 percent inflation target.  One concern with such an inflation forecast has been the decline in inflation expectations in the Michigan survey.  However, as with other measures of inflation expectations, the lowest quartile has been relatively stable, with most of the decline coming from   the higher quartiles.  Such behavior could be consistent with households finally realizing that the inflation environment has changed. Even with a noticeable rise in the funds rate, I expect the unemployment rate to reach 4.5 percent by the end of 2017.  This forecast of an overshoot of full employment is not an outlier, as both the Tealbook and the Blue Chip consensus forecast also expect the unemployment rate to be 4½ percent by the end of 2017.  Using the Tealbook’s estimate of the natural rate, this implies a ½ percentage point overshoot of full employment.  My estimate of the natural rate is a bit lower, so 4½ percent implies only a 0.2 percentage point overshoot of full employment.  Thus, within 15 months, all three forecasts expect the unemployment rate to fall below where the consensus of the Committee expects the unemployment rate to be in the long run. Like the Tealbook, I expect the unemployment rate to continue drifting down through 2018, reaching 4.2 percent at the end of 2019.  Hence, my forecast envisions economic growth in excess of potential, even with 100 basis points of tightening in 2017.  The Tealbook also expects the unemployment rate to fall to 4.2 percent.  While this is my modal forecast, I believe risks are balanced around that outlook.  There is a significant risk that we will exceed this already large overshoot of full employment.  If foreign trade partners grow more quickly or moderate demand does not draw workers back into the labor force, the unemployment rate could easily decline even further. One reason why I see balanced risks associated with the Tealbook forecast of the unemployment rate is because I believe an assumption of an additional increase in labor force participation is far from certain.  My staff examined state-level participation rates to see if participation has risen significantly in states whose unemployment rate is quite low.  They do not  find a strong state-level correlation between recent changes in participation rates and low unemployment rates.  Thus, we must consider the possibility of a more significant overshoot of full employment, which would bring with it significant risks to the sustainability of the expansion. If we find ourselves in the position in which we need to increase the unemployment rate ½ percentage point or more in order to return to full employment, we will be attempting a feat that is yet to be accomplished. Historically, every attempt to raise the unemployment rate ½ percentage point or more from below full employment has resulted in a recession that produces a much larger rise in unemployment than a few tenths.  Overshooting tends to happen in both directions.  This was part of the discussion that we were just having, as mentioned earlier by President Williams and President Evans.  I think this is actually very fundamental to the discussions that we are having today.  While it may be possible to have a soft landing, is it probable, particularly if we do a significant overshoot. While there are advantages to using accommodative monetary policy to probe for additional improvements in labor markets, particularly for low-skilled workers and minorities who may benefit from a stronger market, we must balance these potential benefits against the risk of a significant overshoot of full employment that could ultimately do even more harm to the same populations.  Should we once again be unsuccessful in fine-tuning a slowdown, the ensuing recession will likely fall disproportionately on low-skilled workers and minorities. I will discuss the policy implications of that concern tomorrow.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is presenting their forecast and discussing the risks associated with the forecast, but there is no disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 87.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The tone and content of reports of my District contacts and directors in the most recent cycle were largely unchanged from the reports given before the July and June meetings.  Overall sentiment remains positive, with an outlook of continued, steady, moderate growth.  If there was any difference this time around, comments were slightly more cautious in tone.  We heard some mention of uncertainty related to the upcoming election. Reports on consumer spending were positive on balance.  Most retailers report solid sales levels and expect modestly higher sales for the remainder of 2016 compared with earlier this   year. A minority of reports pointed to softening sales.  Auto sales were worthy of note.  Earlier cautionary reports on the sustainability of auto sales of our director who heads the country’s largest retailer seem to be accurate. He very clearly attributes some of the slowing to added caution of consumers ahead of the election. While firms tied to the oil and gas sector continue to report layoffs, many of our contacts remain in net hiring mode and report widespread wage pressure.  And according to a number of reports, labor market tightening has deepened at various levels of the firm, with some weighting to low-skill, and broadened across a range of job types.  These trends are confirmed by the elevated reading of the Atlanta Fed’s Wage Growth Tracker. In this cycle we repeated our practice of asking about pricing power of firms, and pricing power, to generalize, remains constrained.  That said, margins seem to be holding steady for most contacts. At a more strategic level, we picked up a theme in this cycle of firms reevaluating business models to avoid expanding capacity.  We heard reports of efforts to leverage underutilized assets at capacity owned by other firms before moving forward with traditional growth-oriented investments.  A major national rental car company is exploring the use of idle space in parking lots with valet service in lieu of building new rental facilities. As regards the third quarter, our tracking estimate as of this morning puts the quarter at just short of 3 percent annualized GDP growth, with real final sales growth around 2.3 percent.  So I’m confident we’re experiencing meaningful acceleration after the weak first half. My forecast has not changed materially from June.  My forecast anticipates continuation of moderate GDP growth around 2 percent for the forecast period.  This marginally exceeds potential but is sufficient to absorb any remaining resource slack.  In my forecast, I have an assumption of some acceleration of growth of business fixed investment.  So far this year, we’ve heard little from District contacts that would support this assumption.  The reasons for a cautious approach to capital spending are familiar—most notably, a reference to uncertainty.  This cycle we did a survey of more than 200 CEOs, CFOs, and business owners and asked about uncertainty tied to the upcoming election.  Roughly one-third reported that uncertainty about election results is influencing their business decisions, and we took that number to be material.  A failure of business investment to pick up after the election and through the forecast period is a downside risk to my outlook. Regarding our inflation objective, my forecast foresees a modest acceleration of inflation achieving the 2 percent target by year-end 2017.  We read the August CPI report and its various cuts as consistent with this view.  I see the risks to my outlook as being more balanced today than at the time of our June meeting, and I’m comfortable with describing the near-term outlook as “roughly balanced,” as in policy alternative B, or just “balanced,” as in alternative C.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear instances of contention or disagreement. It simply presents information and observations about various aspects of the economy without indicating any conflicting opinions or perspectives.


Passage number 88.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Anecdotal and aggregate statistical information received during the intermeeting period remains consistent with the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis’s new regime-based view of near-term macroeconomic outlook and monetary policy.  Our view emphasizes a forecast that places real GDP growth at about 2 percent over the forecast horizon, with inflation also at about 2 percent. Unlike the Tealbook, we do not regard 2percent real GDP growth as being meaningfully above trend.  Consequently, we also expect relatively little change in the unemployment rate over the forecast horizon.  We think end-of-year unemployment rates will remain centered on 4.7 percent. We see optimal monetary policy as being regime dependent. Under the current regime, we see the current setting of the policy rate as being just slightly below neutral.  We think there is a case to be made to move the policy rate to the regime-neutral value at some point.  However, unless there is a switch in regime, we think it is unwise to give the impression, as the Tealbook does and perhaps the dot plot does, that the Committee is on the precipice of a 275 basis point move in the policy rate over the forecast horizon.  Instead, we should acknowledge that, on the basis of the information we have today, we do not expect much different to happen over the next several years, and, therefore, we do not need to forecast a major move in the policy rate. At the heart of the St. Louis Federal Reserve view is that real GDP growth has been slow and is not expected to meaningfully accelerate.  The annualized real GDP growth rates for the past three quarters are 0.9 percent, 0.8 percent, and 1.1 percent, averaging about 1 percent, well below even pessimistic estimates of the potential real GDP growth rate. Although growth looks set to accelerate in the second half of 2016, all this will do if it materializes is bring the real GDP growth rate for all of 2016 somewhat closer to, but less than, 2 percent.  Any acceleration from there into 2017 is likely to be modest and is, in my mind, a speculative guess. I think it strains credulity to suggest that eight years after the Committee moved the policy rate close to zero, there is still any meaningful cyclical dynamic that would push the real output growth rate above potential in a statistically significant way.  A better way to think about the current situation is to accept that the current real output growth rate is slow and likely not too different from the potential growth rate.  The corollary is that the unemployment rate is likely to remain in the 4½ to 5 percent range as long as we remain in the current regime. This is what happened during 2006 and 2007, a period that was arguably characterized by stronger GDP growth—due in part to the housing bubble, to be sure—than what we are witnessing today. Inflation has been running somewhat below 2 percent according to PCE-based measures, with CPI-based measures somewhat higher.  We think an inflation forecast centered on 2 percent over the forecast horizon is reasonable.  I was encouraged, in reaching this forecast, by page 22 of Tealbook A, which gives the staff forecast of headline PCE inflation, core PCE inflation, and core CPI inflation in graphical format with 70 percent confidence intervals.  I think it is reasonable to interpret these figures as illustrating forecasts essentially centered at 2 percent over the forecast horizon. I do remain concerned that market-based measures of inflation expectations remain too low to be consistent with the 2 percent inflation forecast.  This is a risk to the outlook that I have described. Output growing at its potential rate, unemployment essentially unchanging, and inflation expected to hit 2 percent sounds like a steady state.  However, the regime-switching conceptualization acknowledges that this situation can and will change at some point in the future. The most likely candidates for a switch in regime are, one, faster productivity growth and, two, an abating of the very large liquidity premium on short-term government debt.  Both of these possibilities would suggest upside risk to the St. Louis Federal Reserve’s policy rate forecast.  However, as of today, I see little evidence that a switch is occurring on either of these dimensions.  Accordingly, we continue to assume we are in a low-growth regime, driven in part by low productivity growth, as well as in a regime characterized by very low real rates of return on short-term government debt, the so-called r†.  This, in turn, leads us to project a very flat policy rate path over the forecast horizon.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you very much.  President Harker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any obvious contention or disagreement. The author is presenting their view on the macroeconomic outlook and monetary policy, but they do not explicitly argue against any other views or positions.


Passage number 89.
 [Laughter] MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The inclusion of laughter suggests a light-hearted or comedic tone, indicating a sense of agreement or amusement among the people involved.


Passage number 90.
 WILLIAMS.  Apparently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The word "apparently" suggests that the statement that follows is likely true or accurate, without indicating any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 91.
  [Laughter] MR. EVANS. This remark came from a CEO describing the most recent discussions of the Business Roundtable, and it is discouraging.  Separately, but along this same theme, Manpower Employment Services’s CEO said most of his customers expect to be in cost-cutting mode next year.  Such plans hardly are consistent with an outbreak of capital spending.  Also, the head of John Deere reported that its internal baseline projection for 2017 is for a slight decline in equipment sales, but the company is preparing for the possibility of even worse outcomes. As corporate CEOs prepare to navigate an economy with 1¾ to perhaps 2 percent trend growth, I realize that I haven’t spoken with anyone who talks about robust expansion plans in the United States. Turning to inflation, my numbers are again close to the Tealbook.  I see both core and total inflation moving up gradually but still falling short of our 2 percent target at the end of 2019. While we see less overshooting of potential output than the Tealbook, our forecast is conditioned on a flat dollar and a somewhat slower pace of policy normalization.  Our monetary policy assumption is a key factor in our forecast narrative, as we see it bolstering inflationexpectations and their eventual upward pull on actual pricing.  That said, I again see downside risk to this forecast.  TIPS-derived inflation compensation in financial markets and many survey measures of inflation expectations remain low, and my business contacts report few inflationary pressures and no appreciable pricing power. We have heard more accounts of wage increases, but it is striking how modest the gains are.  There are very few reports that appear commensurate with the 2 percent PCE inflation environment.  If we were likely to see a quick return to 2 percent inflation, I would expect to see more bubbling up with these indicators by now, but there just isn’t that much there.  Instead, I see a rather firmly entrenched low-inflation psychology.  Indeed, why are businesses holding the line on wages even when many tell us there’s a shortage of workers.  It must be because they don’t expect to be able to increase prices enough to justify the expense.  This psychology is unlikely to change quickly, not without more dramatic and sustained increases in aggregate demand or something else supporting expectations of upward movement and underlying inflation.  Until this happens, even modest inflation increases remain more of a hope than a solid expectation. Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is describing the views of various CEOs and presenting their opinions and forecasts on topics such as cost-cutting, capital spending, equipment sales, inflation, and wage increases. The speaker also shares their own observations and forecasts, but there is no apparent disagreement with the views of the CEOs mentioned.


Passage number 92.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information given to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 93.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair. The District economy expanded modestly since the previous meeting, and unemployment rates held steady, although they did tick higher in a few states.  The divergence between energy and non-energy-producing states remains notable, with states like Oklahoma and Wyoming in what could be viewed as a regional recession. Our District survey shows the manufacturing sector is also still facing some headwinds, with the majority of the weakness concentrated in the oil-producing states, although within the energy sector, the rig count in the District has stabilized and started to modestly increase. In the agriculture sector, farm income is expected to fall, and lower crop prices continue to weigh on profit margins.  Margins also remain poor in the cattle and dairy sectors, and as a result, agriculture credit conditions bear close watching, as loan repayment rates have fallen. Although agriculture and energy certainly remain soft, the spillovers to broader activity in the District have been limited so far and primarily are centered in those energy- and agriculture-concentrated states.  And even in these states, economic activity is more diversified than a few decades ago, which accounts for sentiment that is relatively more upbeat. In the much larger services sector throughout the region, services are growing at a pace similar to that of the nation. My outlook for the national economy is little changed.  I expect GDP growth in the second half of the year to pick up significantly from the disappointing pace in the first half, and  looking at next year, I continue to see moderate growth, with inflation rising to 2 percent. The key question for me in framing this outlook is whether consumers can continue to pull the economy forward over the next few years.  Consumption growth was strong in the second quarter, with another robust gain projected in the current quarter. Looking ahead, I expect consumption growth to be supported by strong labor market conditions.  The steady growth in average hourly earnings, amid modest productivity gains, also points to a tightening labor market.  Consistently, last week’s Census report on income and poverty highlighted a welcome gain in real median household incomes last year.  Although the labor market looks likely to continue its improvement, I do think a risk worth monitoring is the decline in the workweek since the beginning of the year.  Analysis by my staff offers a couple of observations concerning the declining hours in retail trade, leisure and hospitality, and professional business services.  In the categories of leisure and hospitality and professional business services, which comprise a substantial share of employment, the workweek appears to be returning to a level comparable with a few years ago, suggesting there may have been some overshooting in the average workweek in these sectors.  On the other hand, the workweek for retail trade has been on a downward trend since late 2011.  This may be related to structural changes in this sector, such as the emergence of online retailers. Regarding the outlook for residential investment, analysis by my staff suggests that the falloff in single-family construction reflects a limited amount of undeveloped land in locations desired by households, a supply-side factor that is likely to persist for a considerable time. Additionally, existing home sales appear to be constrained by a shortage of listings.  These supply constraints may lead homeowners to remodel an existing house rather than buying a new one.  With improvements accounting for one-third of residential investment, spending associatedwith home improvements could resume its upward trend of the past three years and offset much of the drag over the medium term arising from the behavior of new construction. Like Tealbook, I see few signs of strength in business fixed investment, yet nonfinancial corporate debt as a share of GDP is approaching its highest level on record going back to 1959.  Debt-to-earnings in the nonfinancial corporate sector is also at multidecade highs for firms able to issue investment-grade debt.  For firms issuing high-yield debt, debt relative to earnings is also at its highest level since 2003.  Clearly, the nonfinancial corporate sector has increased leverage, which concerns me in an environment in which S&P 500 firms have collectively spent more on dividends and buybacks than they generated in operating income in the last seven quarters. An unusually low rate environment has facilitated these trends, and the economy could be at risk if earnings disappoint and the markets reevaluate exposures to the sector. Finally, since our July meeting, inflation expectations in the recent Survey of Consumer Expectations moved up both at the one-year and three-year horizons.  Last week’s CPI release was also encouraging, as core goods inflation was not a drag on the overall CPI for the first time in three months.  This suggests some stabilization in the portion of U.S. inflation that is most affected by dollar strength.  With the stable trend in core CPI above 2 percent, stable survey-based inflation expectations, tight labor markets, and rising wages, I see inflation as fully consistent with our mandate for price stability and moving toward our long-run goal of 2 percent. Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN. Thank you.  President Kashkari.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 94.
 MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The Ninth District economy continues to perform well, though the pace of economic growth slowed.  Wage growth appears moderate. Price inflation remains subdued, partly reflecting depressed oil prices in our large region with the Bakken. Actually, we welcomed the very good news from the Census last week on the 5.2 percent rise in median household income between 2014 and 2015, with significantly fewer households in poverty.  It’s great that the recovery is finally extending more broadly across the income distribution, and it reflects steadily strengthening labor market conditions between 2010 and last summer. We hope the growth in median income will continue. On the inflation front, from our perspective, we’ve made little progress toward our inflation objective.  I find it interesting that the staff forecast of core PCE inflation is to remain at 1.6 percent for both 2016 and all of 2017.  Market- and survey-based measures of expected inflation are near record lows.  Some attribute this to temporary factors and argue that inflation is coming.  The inflation hawks might be right, but I’m looking for it in the data, not just faith and hope. On the labor market front, growth has slowed over the past 12 months.  The unemployment rate and the staff’s labor market conditions index are little changed since last summer, and as others have noted, recent manufacturing and retail sales data have been disappointing.  Economic growth in Mexico and Canada, our major trading partners, also looks very weak, so my baseline outlook is more of the same:  sluggish growth, subdued inflation. We have talked about this many times since I’ve been here that there’s asymmetry with our tools related to the lower bound, so for me, the risks to the outlook are tilted to the downside.  It’s much tougher for us to respond to very low inflation than to high inflation.  The risk of unsustainable growth stoking inflation seems remote,in view of the less than 2 percent GDP growth and the stable labor market indicators  And I think I’ve mentioned it before: If it were to  surprise us on the upside, that’s a high-class problem compared with surprising us on the downside.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting information about the economy, discussing wage growth, inflation, and labor market conditions. The speaker also mentions the risks to the outlook and expresses a preference for higher inflation rather than lower inflation. However, there is no direct disagreement or contention expressed in the passage.


Passage number 95.
 MR. KAMIN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Obviously, my colleagues and I were just as shocked as you all were when we woke up to the news this morning.  Who would have guessed that, after all of these years, Brad and Angelina would have finally split up.  [Laughter] By comparison, the Bank of Japan’s announcement following its monetary policy meeting yesterday was more in line with expectations.  Just to back up and reiterate what Paul Wood described yesterday, the Bank of Japan has basically been struggling with two main monetary control problems of late. One of them is how to get inflation and inflation expectations back up to its 2 percent target.  And the second problem is how to do that without further flattening the yield curve and putting downward pressure on bank profits and those of pension funds, insurance companies, and other financial intermediaries. In response to those concerns, the Bank of Japan launched the so-called comprehensive assessment project.  The outcome of that, which was announced last night, was basically two main elements of the program. The first of these is a so-called inflation-overshooting commitment, in which the Bank of Japan commits itself to expand the monetary base until the observed rate of increase in the CPI exceeds 2 percent in a stable manner. Now, that has at least two, or maybe two and a half, distinctive elements.  The first of those is that the Bank of Japan basically abandoned a particular date at which it was predicting that it would achieve its 2 percent target. The second aspect of that is that it committed not just to hit its target, but also to exceed it. And the third was a slight clarification, being very explicit, that the QE program would continue until it achieved that slight overshoot.  It had had a soft commitment before to continuing the program until it got to its target. But this made it a little bit more concrete. That was the first aspect of its announcement. The second aspect was a so-called yield curve control aspect.  Basically, that involved a commitment to control both the short-term and the long-term aspects of the yield curve in order to prevent a shallowing of the yield curve that would put excessive pressure on financial industry profits.  In particular, the Bank of Japan committed to keep the 10-year yield at zero.  It had previously been below zero.  Then it announced a number of technical measures that might be used to achieve that, including buying JGBs at a fixed interest rate and even making low fixed-rate loans up to 10 years’ maturity. In the event, that was the basic framework that the Bank of Japan announced.  It didn’t really announce any concrete new actions immediately or for the future, but the framework is broadly consistent with our earlier forecast that the Bank of Japan would continue to make heavy QE purchases over the next several years and might, in certain situations—greater weakness— lower the near-term policy rate further into negative territory.  But neither of those actions was taken today. The announcement was, broadly speaking, in line with market expectations.  In response, the JGB yield moved a little bit—for the 10-year, a little further up, although it’s still a little bit negative.  The basic index of stock prices in Japan rose about 2 percent.  Commercial bank stocks rose a lot more, around 7 percent.  The yen initially weakened, which was presumably part of the goal of the program, but actually has subsequently strengthened. Right now, it’s actually slightly stronger than it was before the announcement for reasons that are a little bit unclear.  Global markets have pretty much taken everything in stride.  Foreign stock prices are up a bit.  I think U.S. futures are little changed, and U.S. yields are little changed, too.So that’s what I have for you.  I’d be happy to take any of your questions. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kaplan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing a summary and analysis of the Bank of Japan's announcement, and there is no mention of differing opinions or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 96.
 MR. KAPLAN. In the press release, I saw they talked about keeping their 10-year at zero, associated with bond buying.  But it struck me:  Won’t they need to sell the 10-year to keep the rate at zero.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It presents a statement from Mr. Kaplan and his personal observation.


Passage number 97.
 MR. KAMIN.  I think the answer could well be “yes,” but they were not explicit on that point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 98.
 MR. KAPLAN. Okay.  So they could do either, and people are anticipating they could actually sell the 10-year, if necessary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating that people are anticipating the possibility of selling the 10-year, but it does not indicate any disagreement or contention between different parties.


Passage number 99.
 MR. KAMIN.  I don’t know that people are expecting that, but it is a natural question to ask.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 100.
 MR. POTTER.  There are no details yet. I think, at the end of the month, they’ll release more details.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Potter is simply expressing the lack of details at the moment and speculating that more details may be released at the end of the month.


Passage number 101.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Okay, got it. CHAIR YELLEN. Are there any other questions.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a simple exchange between Mr. Kaplan and Chair Yellen, with Chair Yellen asking if there are any other questions. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 102.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Steve, are you willing to speculate on any spillover onto our yield curve. A few weeks ago, the Wall Street Journal, I believe, carried an article that talked about major Japanese institutions essentially buying the long end of our curve, hedged.  At that time, they were concerned that if the hedges expired and they went off hedge, it could have some effect on the yield curve here in the United States.  How should we think about this affecting financial conditions and the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question posed by Mr. Lockhart to Steve, seeking his opinion or speculation on a specific topic related to the yield curve and its potential effects on financial conditions and the dollar.


Passage number 103.
 MR. KAMIN.  I guess what I’d say is that if their actions had involved a much more substantial change in their target for yields—for example, if their goal was to drive 10-year JGByields up to 25 or 50 basis points—you could imagine that actually having a material effect on capital flows and leading to some upward pressure on our longer-term yields and perhaps downward pressure on the dollar.  But so far, as they are targeting the 10-year yield at zero, which is only a little bit higher than it had been, it doesn’t seem like the changes that are in store are large enough, at least for now, to make a material difference for the dollar or our yields.  Again, this announcement is more like a backup or contingency plan just in case the yield curve was to get too shallow again. CHAIR YELLEN. Are there questions.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement by Mr. Kamin and a response from Chair Yellen.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 104.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  But doesn’t that constrain their ability to actually go more negative.  Presumably, if you’re fixing the 10-year rate at zero, people can go in and out of the 10-year at zero risk as long as that peg is on.  So, as they lower the short end of the market, you’d assume there’d be no trading at the short end.  People would just be buying at the 10-year maturity. Am I missing something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Rosengren is questioning the effectiveness of setting the 10-year rate at zero and suggests that it may actually constrain the ability to go more negative. He argues that as the short end of the market is lowered, there would be no trading at the short end, and people would just be buying at the 10-year maturity.


Passage number 105.
 MR. KAMIN. Well, let’s put it this way.  I think the goal is to anchor the long end so that the yield does not fall too much, giving them the freedom, in some sense, to lower the short end even further into negative territory.  In their announcement, further down in the text, they talk about their view that Japanese economic performance is more influenced by short- and medium-term yields than by longer-term yields, with the longer-term yields being the ones that might, if they fall, negatively affect the financial industry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the belief of Mr. Kamin regarding the goal of anchoring the long end of yields to prevent them from falling too much and allowing the freedom to lower the short end even further into negative territory. There are no opposing arguments or conflicting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 106.
 MR. ROSENGREN. Who’s the marginal investor that would choose to be at the short end rather than at the long end, in which they can go in and out at will as long as there is rate pegging.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any specific contention or disagreement. It simply poses a question without presenting conflicting viewpoints or opinions.


Passage number 107.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  The point is, you’re reducing the risk of moving to a 10-year instrument.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a point.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 108.
 MR. POTTER.  They haven’t shown that they can actually do it yet.  So that would be part of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Potter is expressing doubt or disagreement with the idea that "they" can actually accomplish something. The phrase "They haven't shown that they can actually do it yet" indicates his contention.


Passage number 109.
 MR. KAMIN.  I think your point is well made.  Suddenly, it makes the 10-year look like a great risk-free investment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with the point made by someone else and expresses their agreement by stating that it makes the 10-year investment look like a great risk-free option.


Passage number 110.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Although your prospects for capital gains on the 10-year will go away.  It could be argued before that if you thought Japan was going to continue to go into deflation and 10-year yields could keep falling, they had a capital-gains component—which they’re taking off the table now.  And I think it’s pretty complicated to see how people react to this, frankly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is mainly stating a possible argument or perspective regarding the potential impact of Japan's 10-year yields on capital gains.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 111.
 MR. POTTER.  If it is credible—you’d be taking the capital gains off it. CHAIR YELLEN. Are there any further questions.  [No response]  Okay. If I might, I’d like to start off our policy go-round, and I want to emphasize that today’s decision is not an easy one.  On the basis of the data in hand, one person may reasonably conclude that the economic outlook and associated risks argue for an increase in the target range today, while another looking at the same information reasonably decides that holding off is the better strategy.  In contrast to many of our previous meetings, the appropriate policy decision today is not clear cut.  This ambiguity is reflected in alternatives B and C, which present essentially the same characterization of the incoming data and the economic outlook yet arrive at different conclusions about what action we should take. We may not all agree on today’s decision, but I think, in line with the SEP, that most of us will be inclined to support an increase in the federal funds rate before year-end if the economy  continues along its current trajectory, with economic growth picking up as expected, continued solid employment gains, an absence of notable downside inflation surprises, and the emergence of no significant new risks.  If this assessment is correct, we should be careful not to exaggerate the consequences of raising the federal funds rate now as opposed to in an upcoming meeting. My recommendation for today is not to move and to adopt alternative B, teeing up a likely move in December if things move along their current course.  But why not move now,as the economic consequences of tightening today instead of waiting until December are probably minimal. At our July meeting, after all, I said that raising the target range in September would likely be appropriate if we saw reasonably strong payroll gains in July and August, which we have, and the overall outlook remained favorable, which it has.  And, at the Jackson Hole symposium, I said that the case for tightening had strengthened. Still, despite the generally satisfactory state of current conditions, I recommend that we hold off raising the funds rate for the moment for two reasons.  First, incoming data suggest to me that we have a bit more running room than I’d anticipated, and I see little danger that monetary policy is falling “behind the curve.” As I said yesterday, some slack still remains in the labor market. Utilization appears to be increasing at a relatively slow pace.  There are few signs of emerging inflationary pressures, and inflation continues to run below our objective.  Under these conditions, we can afford to proceed patiently, and doing so will promote additional labor market improvements and so speed the return to 2 percent inflation.  I think we’ll have ample time to adjust policy in the event the economy shows signs of becoming overheated.  After all, as long as we remain in a low-r* environment, it won’t take very many rate increases to get back to a neutral policy stance.  Furthermore, a moderately tight labor market might also pull more people back into the labor force than we anticipate, and that’s a potential supply-side benefit that we shouldn’t close off prematurely.  Indeed, as I noted yesterday, we have seen solid employment growth over the past year without significant declines in either U-3 or U-6.  Over the past year, the labor market seems to have had more room to improve without creating inflation pressures than I’d expected.  This is an important reason why I’m inclined, in the words of alternative B, “for the time being, to wait for further evidence of continued progress toward [our] objectives.” Second, I consider waiting until we’ve seen somewhat more progress on our objectives advisable on risk-management grounds.  If economic growth in the second half of the year was to turn out to be stronger than I anticipate or if we were to begin seeing signs of accelerating wages and prices, we would have ample opportunity to respond appropriately over the course of 2017 and beyond.  But if economic conditions were instead to turn out to be weaker than expected or if downside risks to the outlook were to emerge, then we would probably regret having decided to move today.  After all, the surprising events that we’ve encountered so far this year—turmoil in global financial markets, wild month-to-month swings in the data, and Brexit— demonstrate that bumps in the road are common and the concerns related to the effective lower bound are not to be dismissed.  And this is especially true in an environment in which we find ourselves repeatedly lowering our estimates of r*. While I strongly believe that economic performance has been well served by our caution in raising interest rates thus far this year, we clearly can’t delay too long because policy does need to be forward looking.  If labor market conditions improve somewhat further in coming months, as I expect, then a December rate hike will, in all likelihood, be warranted to reduce the risk of the unemployment rate markedly undershooting its longer-run level in 2017 and beyond.I think an increase will be appropriate even if inflation readings remain near their current levels, as I expect. The language in alternative B is meant to convey this expectation for policy.  I recognize that the phrase “for the time being” is essentially a calendar-based reference, but I think, in the current circumstances, we need to be clear in our intentions.  Softening this language by just saying that policy will be data dependent would, in my view, only increase confusion about our reaction function and intentions. So let me stop there, and our next speaker is President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Chair Yellen presents two alternatives (B and C) that arrive at different conclusions about what action should be taken. She also mentions that not everyone may agree on the decision regarding raising the federal funds rate. Additionally, she outlines her own recommendation to hold off on raising the rate, while also mentioning that some may argue for tightening now instead of waiting until December.


Passage number 112.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage, "MR," does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 113.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  My views are actually quite consistent with what President Williams just laid out.  I would say that I would also endorse his view that it would be quite worthwhile to have a discussion of what the likelihood and costs of possibly overshooting are.  I think those comments were made by Governor Tarullo and Vice Chairman Dudley yesterday, and I think that that would be a very good discussion to have. For this meeting, I support alternative C.  Since our last tightening in December, we have made significant progress toward achieving our dual mandate.  We have added more than 1 million jobs since the beginning of the year.  As evidence that labor markets have tightened relative to earlier in the recovery, wages have risen gradually above the 2 percent level that they seemed stuck at earlier. Core PCE inflation was running between 1.3 and 1.4 percent and is now at 1.6 percent.  This progress has occurred despite significant headwinds from abroad, including a slowdown in China, a surprising Brexit vote, and continued European banking problems.  Based solely on the economic progress since our last tightening, a further increase in rates could easily be justified. It is in the forecast, however, that the case for raising rates at this meeting becomes even more compelling.  The Tealbook’s and my own forecast expect that by 2019, the unemployment  rate will have dropped to 4.2 percent despite an assumption that monetary policy accommodation is more aggressively removed.  As I highlighted yesterday, such overshoots in the past have always been followed by recessions, as the unsustainably low unemployment rate begins to generate higher inflation rates, rising asset prices, or both.  Driving the unemployment rate to such a low level goes well beyond probing on full employment. We should aim for a long and durable recovery.  A significant overshoot of full employment places the recovery in jeopardy.  We now have the ability to raise rates gradually and gently probe to find the level of full employment.  But our ability to gently probe shrinks the longer we defer action.  Failure to continue the gradual removal of accommodation now could ultimately require us to raise rates faster and more aggressively, which could shorten rather than lengthen the duration of this expansion.  Thus, I am arguing for tightening now out of a concern that not doing so today will put the recovery at greater risk.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 114.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I think the decision to raise the policy rate at this meeting versus later this year is a close call.  In the big scheme of things, an increase  at this meeting, as opposed to the November or December meeting, won’t matter much in its effect on the real economy.  Therefore, exercising my prerogative as a nonvoter, I’m prepared to support either alternative B or alternative C, and I won’t vehemently oppose waiting until December. On the basis of the data in hand and progress toward objectives in my forecast for the second half of this year and 2017, I believe there’s a good data-dependent case for at least one increase this year.  My criteria are growth of real GDP and of employment at rates consistent with absorbing remaining resource slack over the forecast horizon.  I’ve also been looking for indications that wage growth is picking up.  I see those conditions as being satisfied by the third-quarter data we now have in hand. Because the probable decision today is alternative B, I’d like to comment on some implications as I see the situation for the next two meetings. The case for waiting, as I see it, is to accumulate more data evidence that the current read on third-quarter activity is not a head fake and progress toward our objectives will be sustained into the fourth quarter. In light of some weaker signals in the very recent incoming data, I see the wisdom of this approach.  But the forward lean in paragraph 3 of alternative B naturally raises the question of, at what point over the next two meetings will we likely have accumulated enough evidence that we remain on track to pull the trigger on a rate increase. Looking to the data calendar, by the November meeting, we will have just one more employment report.  By the December meeting, we will have two more employment reports. Otherwise, we will not have a lot of information on the fourth quarter, particularly about economic growth or inflation.  If December is the date we have in mind, it strikes me that labor market developments, therefore, will be the determining factor in the decision. In view of the  forward lean in the alternative B draft statement, it’s desirable to have a common understanding of what data will be required to make a “go” or “no go” call and when we will have that data in hand.  Without that understanding, I’m concerned that the Committee is inviting communications challenges on the question of why we passed on this meeting—and might pass on the November meeting, if that’s what we choose to do. I have some reservations about delaying a rate increase decision to December.  My reservations relate to risk events that could be timed to be around the December meeting.  Although the date has not yet been set, there’s a possibility the Italian constitutional referendum could be scheduled around the time of our meeting.  The Italian referendum is considered by some observers to be critical to the future of the EU. Closer to home, there’s a chance that the continuing resolution expected to be passed by the Congress before the elections will expire on or about December 9.  Depending on election results, there could be another budget showdown just before we meet. These are events that could create a lot of volatility in financial markets and an awkward environment for a rate hike, even if the data play out in a satisfactory way.  Let me emphasize that I’m not projecting that market noise and volatility associated with these transitory events will materially affect inflation and employment outcomes.  Brexit passed with little apparent effect on the real economy of the United States. But even if the economic fundamentals are satisfactory for a policy action, the Committee might be hesitant, as we were in June. At some point, repeatedly backing off, even if justified by developments, will hurt the Committee’s credibility. So I am not opposed to waiting until December, but, with these concerns I’ve expressed, I’m trying to assume an “eyes wide open” mindset.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Harker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 115.
 MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair. Because of my fairly upbeat outlook for the economy and the slow but persistent march of inflation to target, I could easily support a funds rate increase at this meeting.  However, due to a variety of risks, including heightened political and subsequent policy uncertainty, I can see this case for being a bit cautious.  However, I don’t view the language in alternative B as sufficiently indicative of a funds rate increase by December. I actually preferred the original draft language. I felt it more clearly communicated a predilection for a rate hike in the near future. My reading of that language was that, absent a significant departure from our expectations of how the economy will evolve, we would be raising the funds rate this year.  The revised language seems a bit more guarded and hedged, which makes me somewhat uncomfortable.  The current statement acknowledges an improved outlook for the economy and a balanced assessment of risks but remains vague about what it would take for the Committee to raise rates. What further evidence do we need for us to move.  Do we need to hit our inflation target or continue to see it evolving in line with the Tealbook forecast—or just be more sure that we will not see any disinflation between now and the end of the year. I think we should be clearly signaling that if economic growth appears to be attaining its projected rate, we would very likely raise rates this year.  Now, of course, the signal can be delivered outside of this statement via the press conference and speeches that we all give.  And we often put too much emphasis on the words in one single statement.  But I do think it’s important that we begin to move the market probability of a rate increase this year.  Thus, taking that into consideration, I can live with the current alternative B language, although, again, I preferred the original draft language.It’s not overly important whether we act today, as several of my colleagues have said, or in the very near future. What’s important is that the signal we deliver today and in the future will, in itself, start the process and will achieve some measure of tightening in financial markets that will start to move those probabilities. So if economic data materialize in line with the staff forecast, it is very important, in my view—I echo President Lockhart—and I think it’s important to the credibility of the Committee, that we act this year.  I think it’s important that we send a strong signal today and in the future that we will.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their support for a funds rate increase but also acknowledges the risks and uncertainties that may warrant caution. They express a preference for the original draft language and highlight the importance of sending a strong signal about potential rate increases. Overall, there is a consistent point of view throughout the passage.


Passage number 116.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I have to say that these are among the most thoughtful comments I remember on any morning of a policy decision, so I really appreciate the conversations. We are facing hard and consequential choices in the period ahead.  It’s only 25 basis points at the moment, but there’s so much more.  And I look forward to more conversation about the important issues—about the risk of overshooting and what the evidence is.  At the moment, I’m reluctant to weigh the evidence that we talked about yesterday on overshooting at face valueon the basis of the time periods that we’ve experienced. I do recall, as research director, with my former boss providing commentary and advice very much like I’ve heard this morning, about “One way to make sure we can sustain the recovery is by increasing interest rates at this moment, because that’s how we keep the momentum going without overshooting.” But I believe all of the overshooting evidence to date was in an environment that’s very different from what we’re facing today.  In the 1970s, in the ’80s, and in the ’90s, inflation was always well above what the Committee’s objective was—in the 1970s, it was double digits—and the Committee was hoping just to get it down.  In the 1980s, when Chairman Volcker left office, it was 4 to 5 percent, substantially higher than where we are and what we’ve committed to.  The advice was always “Let’s get it down.”  So when we found ourselves overshooting, the risk was so much worse because we were not going to be moving down in a secular fashion, but we were going to lose what progress we’d made. Now, today, we’re in a very different situation, in which inflation is below our inflation objective.  How will policy respond.  It is true that, in the past, Taylor rules have captured the Committee’s intention to raise rates to keep the economy sustainable.  Maybe that’s the way the Committee behaved.  But we’re lower than our inflation objective, so the Lucas critique really bears minding at this point.  Do we know that the policy environment that the Taylor rule was premised on is the environment that we face now.  I don’t know that the answer is “yes.”  I don’t know what the right answer is to any of these questions.  I look forward to more discussion. I have to say, I can’t refrain from making the following comment—and I’ve used this myself.  When we use the term “humble” or “humility,” it’s almost always used in the context that, because I get to say it first, I’m going to talk about what I think is the more humble channel or thought—that type of thing. It’s a first-mover advantage, I’ve always felt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a reflection on the thoughtful comments made by others and a discussion of the different policy decisions and considerations related to inflation and interest rates. The speaker expresses uncertainty and a desire for more discussion on the topic.


Passage number 117.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as the phrase "MR" does not provide any context or information to analyze.


Passage number 118.
 WILLIAMS.  That’s why you go first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, identified as WILLIAMS, is simply stating that the other person should go first without expressing any opposition or disagreement.


Passage number 119.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Well, once again, I found Tealbook B’s “The Case for Alternative B” very useful in developing the argument for waiting for more evidence before deciding to raise the federal funds rate 25 basis points.  However, I see the case for going now as almost as strong as that for waiting.  Or, in the words of Tealbook B, page 35, I “judge that not much additional evidence would be needed to warrant a rate hike,” and I therefore accept the Tealbook’s request that I so indicate in my statement. Tealbook B’s outline of the current economic conditions and outlook points to the staff’s real GDP forecast for the second half of the year of about 2.6 percent growth and to the fact that they see the near-term risks to the U.S. economic outlook as roughly balanced.  They note, however, that headline inflation is likely to run below the 2 percent target.  That is to say, the staff and the draft statement of alternative B are in close agreement on the state of the economy, both the present state and expectations of future states.   The staff’s presentation is valuable, but I’d like to highlight a few points they make with which I do not fully agree.  First, their presentation refers to the solid average gain in payroll employment over recent months as indicating that there have been increases in labor utilization.  But they then go on to argue that because the unemployment rate has, on net, remained constant at 4.9 percent since the beginning of the year, there has been little increase in labor utilization. I do not understand this argument, which does not even mention the increase in the labor force participation rate that has taken place over the past year.  And, accordingly, I judge that labor utilization should also be regarded as a positive factor in assessing the current state of the labor market. In the policy strategy discussion of the case for alternative B, the staff starts by considering the possibility that policymakers “may judge it prudent to wait for more evidence that domestic demand will continue to grow at a moderate pace and that the labor market will strengthen somewhat further” before raising the interest rate. They then give three arguments for this possibility.  First, while job gains have rebounded since May, the unemployment rate and other indicators have changed little since the beginning of the year.  A further wait “could allow the Committee to better assess underlying trends in employment, productivity, and inflation.” Second, policymakers may be leaning toward raising the interest rate, but a number of factors— among them, slow output growth, little change in labor utilization, and low wage and price inflation since the start of the year—may have reduced FOMC voters’ confidence in the view that current policy provides considerable accommodation.  So a wait-and-see posture might seem appropriate. Well, these two arguments have been deployed in the past to explain why we have elected not to move on occasions in which the economic gestalt was similar to that of today.  They are valid, and they are likely to remain valid.  But they are doubts that, before making a decision to take action, any serious decisionmaker has to examine and take into account and decide that they’re not sufficiently important to prevent action. The third argument the staff makes for being hesitant to move is that the nominal interest rate is close to the effective lower bound, which limits the ability of monetary policy to respond to negative shocks.  My second doubt about the staff’s view is, this seems to me to be a reason, when a decision is close, to move—to build up a policy reserve to deal with future negative shocks.  In saying that, I should add that I believe the global level of the nominal interest rate is set primarily by the United States, and that decisions by us would have affected the interest rates of other countries.  That is to say, I think that relative interest rates would likely not have been very different had we raised our rate on some previous occasions.  This subject, the effect of our policies on those of other countries, is one to which I believe we should give more attention at some point in the near future.  We have been taking the rest of the world into account as a Stackelberg follower and not as a leader, and we are the leaders in the global economy. My third doubt is, the staff then points out that a decision to maintain the current target range would be in line with the expectations of financial market participants.  This is not convincing as a reason not to move, for it ignores the fact that the market’s expectations of what we are likely to do is heavily influenced by the speeches of the Chair and other members of the FOMC and by the wording of the statement.  That is to say that the expectations of market participants are, in most respects, a policy choice of the FOMC—which is to say that our communications could have prepared the markets and the public for either decision that we were going to make. Let me add a fourth point that is frequently made in favor of waiting—that we know how to deal with high inflation if it comes.  We do, but we also know that dealing with high inflation, if it comes, requires a “tough love” approach where, unfortunately, the toughness is typically more needed than the love.  And that is what we will face if we don’t move in time. All in all, I do not think there’s a strong case for waiting, which means that I support alternative B and expect that if the economy continues on its current course, we should raise the federal funds rate at our December meeting.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kaplan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. Mr. Fischer acknowledges the arguments made in Tealbook B and expresses his agreement with some points while also highlighting a few points with which he disagrees. However, he ultimately states that he supports alternative B and expects a rate hike in the near future.


Passage number 120.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair. In the first half of the year, we’ve seen weakness outside the United States, particularly in China.  Our GDP forecast is lower than at the start of the year, and we’ve been making frustratingly slow progress in meeting our inflation target.  For all of those reasons and others, I’ve agreed up to now with exercising patience before removing accommodation.  I’ve also been influenced by analysis that showed that the neutral rate is lower than it had previously been thought.  And, I am a believer that the economy is not yet overheating.  I also agree that there are persistent headwinds, particularly demographics and other global risks. These issues need to be weighed, however, against the costs of accommodation, particularly the cost to savers as well as the market and business imbalances that are being created.  I’m particularly and increasingly concerned about a growing trend toward use of what I will loosely call the carry trade—people going out on the risk curve, people leveraging up low-volatility assets to produce acceptable returns, and overallocation to risk assets by institutions and households.  As a result, time frames for risk assets are becoming shorter, and I think, as I mentioned yesterday, that is putting increasing pressure on corporate leaders to leverage up to   buy back stock.  I think all of these financial trends can be managed, but I think we’re at the point—if not now, then very soon—where they need to be tamped down because they will be increasingly painful to unwind. I’ve been in favor, as I said, of “slow and gradual,” but I don’t want “slow and gradual” to become a stall.  And I am concerned that if we don’t act today, there will be very valid reasons that will emerge for not acting in December.  On the basis of all of this—and the fact that, near the effective lower bound, there is unlikely to be a good time to raise rates—I would prefer that we raise the federal funds rate 25 basis points today and emphasize, using the SEP that’s coming out, that the path of rates is likely to be historically shallow, and that the terminal rate is likely to be lower than has been widely expected.  I would emphasize that we intend to continue to be accommodative, and that future removals of accommodation will be done only in a gradual and patient manner. I am concerned about FOMC credibility in that—to my eye, at least—three- and six-month rolling job growth numbers are in the strike zone.  And the weaker ISM is a concern, but our own model suggests that the consumer is strong and will continue to be strong for the remainder of this year. Given that it appears we are not going to raise rates today, I would love to see us emphasize, as we’ve discussed, that the normalization process is very challenging, maybe more challenging than has been widely understood, due to these persistent headwinds, particularly aging demographics and the effects of globalization.  I would emphasize that we do not have a predetermined timetable, we do not intend to be bound by calendar considerations, we will move when conditions warrant, and we need to see continual removal of labor slack and some greater evidence that inflation will return to our 2 percent target in the medium term.  And I would   continue to emphasize that our tools are asymmetrical at or near the lower bound.  That is, it is much easier to tighten than to ease. Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 121.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative C.  With unemployment and inflation at or near their longer-run levels, removing some accommodation is warranted.  An increase in the funds rate is overdue, as I see it, and waiting for further evidence continues to unwisely discount future costs in order to reap perceived marginal benefits today. As I reflected on yesterday’s discussion, it may indeed be the case that historical experience and relationships will not serve us well today, and that this time may be different. I’m not persuaded that we should ignore the history, but, as others have suggested, I do think it’s essential that we talk about the risks associated with various policy options to understand the consequences.  Understanding the risk of overshooting full employment seems particularly important over the next year, especially if we continue a wait-and-see approach along the lines of alternative B.  Instead, if the majority of the Committee is truly convinced that r* is likely to stay extremely low for an extended time, alternative A may, in fact, be a more honest representation of the Committee’s intentions. We hurt our credibility by repeatedly projecting multiple rate increases in the SEP, only to stand pat in the face of tightening labor markets and inflation moving toward 2 percent. In addition, alternatives B and C have nearly identical descriptions of current conditions and the outlook, while one calls for acting at this meeting and the other signals a move is on the horizon.  This feels to me like a classic central bank trap of needing to move but not just yet in order to see a bit more information. The divergence between the current setting of the funds rate and prescriptions from simple policy rules also suggests that the Committee’s policy choices lean too much in the direction of discretion, even after accounting for the downward revision in the longer-term equilibrium real rate.  Since June 2014, the Board staff has marked down its assumptions regarding r* and longer-run growth.  The projections in the SEP have followed, and I, too, have marked down my assessment of r*. But if there is substantial uncertainty about the trend rate of growth or the value of r*, surely the Committee would be well served to ground its judgments with some kind of analytical instrumentation.  For example, my understanding of first-difference rules suggests that their use might fit well during such a time of uncertainty.  Here, too, according to the Tealbook, the Board’s version of a first-difference rule has been prescribing a move since March of this year.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 122.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I will support alternative B.  This year, financial turmoil, weaker incoming data, and a reassessment of the neutral rate of interest have pointed financial markets and the Committee toward a more gradual path of rate increases.  That path can and will be adjusted, either up or down, as events evolve.  I believe that the Committee’s patience through this period has paid dividends and will continue to do so.  Nonetheless, the labor market has continued to tighten, and the forecast is for output to strengthen and inflation to continue on its path of gradual increases.  If that forecast is broadly realized, then I believe that it will be appropriate to raise the federal funds rate soon. I’ve written down one rate increase for this year and two for next year. It is possible, as several here have pointed out, to wait too long to move.  This would put the Committee “behind the curve” and require more aggressive action, possibly risking a  recession.  That risk increases as the unemployment rate continues to move down and labor markets show increased signs of tightening. For me, the time for the overshooting argument is coming but is probably not yet here for a couple of reasons.  The apparent upside surprise in labor force participation suggests that we have more room to grow.  In fact, looking back this morning, labor force participation has now really been flat, in the high 62s, since late 2013, which represents a pretty significant three-year gain against our estimate of the underlying downward trend.  It does suggest that we may actually be using up a margin of slack, but it also suggests, yes, grounds for humility that, in fact, there may be more room to go. The economy is growing just barely above trend.  Inflation is below our 2 percent objective and has been every single month since the second quarter of 2012.  We’re making progress toward 2 percent inflation, and my baseline case that we can continue to do that.  But let’s face it—it’s happening at a snail’s pace. So, for me, the balance of risks continues to call for patience and a gradual path of rate increases, assuming the forecast is realized.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kashkari.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses support for alternative B and believes that a gradual path of rate increases is appropriate. However, they also acknowledge the risk of waiting too long to raise rates and suggest that the time for the overshooting argument may be coming. This indicates a disagreement or contention about the timing and pace of rate increases.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 123.
 MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I am comfortable with alternative B, but I lean toward alternative A.  I prefer alternative A because I would like to see evidence of rising inflationary pressure before tightening.  In particular, I’m looking for either a sustained upward move in core PCE inflation or evidence of rising inflation expectations or a substantial decline in the headline unemployment rate.  The discussion we had yesterday about workers coming off the sidelines—it’s not moving the headline unemployment rate.  The truth is that we don’t know how much slack is left.  It seems to me that there is still some more slack. I’d like to find out how much more there is.  Actually, I found President Evans’s comments very consistent with my own views. When I saw the Tealbook and its staff forecast of core PCE inflation of 1.6 percent for the rest of this year and for all of next year, I asked myself, “If that’s right, what would it take to get me to want to move.” I’d want to see inflation expectations climb, or I’d want to see the headline unemployment rate fall meaningfully, such that I had confidence that slack had actually been taken up.  Absent that, I’m starting to get persuaded by my neighbors here, President Bullard and President Evans, that I don’t see a strong case for raising rates.  Alternative A lays down a marker that we want to see meaningful progress toward our inflation target, and I think that that would be helpful. Alternative B isn’t terrible, but I’m a little nervous about the language, because I do think it signals to the market that a rate hike is coming. It may not come, and I think we all agree that every time we put out a marker that it’s about to come and then we don’t deliver, there’s a cost to us in terms of our credibility.  So I’m nervous about alternative B being too strong in signaling a December rate increase. Now, some say that we need to get going to raise rates so that we don’t fall “behind the curve.” I think each of us reads these optimal control simulations and takes what we want out of them, because I look at them and, even in the most accommodative scenarios, the overshoot is 2.2 percent inflation.  So if these things are valuable at all, I don’t see where the concern is.  If the worst-case scenario is 2.2 percent inflation, that’s less of an overshoot than we’re undershooting right now. Then there’s been discussion that, well, it’s better that we gradually raise rates because a shallow path and then steep at the end is somehow more recessionary.  My staff found a Board   memo of 2014, a background memo on potential implications of alternative approaches to the timing and pace of tightening.  This memo by Board staff suggests that it’s entirely unclear that a late and steep path of tightening is somehow more recessionary than a gradual path.  So I don’t find those arguments persuasive.  I’m not saying one is right and one is wrong, but it doesn’t appear to be clear that one is better than the other. In view of where economic growth is—it’s pretty slow—and that inflation is definitely below target, I think we should be patient and allow the data to come to us before we are anticipating inflation that may not come. The last thing I’ll say is, I know this makes me sound like I’m an uber-dove or a perma-dove.  I’m not. When the data reveal themselves—when inflation actually materializes or expectations change—I will be advocating raising rates. I just don’t see it yet.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kashkari states that he is comfortable with alternative B, but he leans toward alternative A. He prefers alternative A because he wants to see evidence of rising inflationary pressure before tightening. He believes there is still slack in the economy and is not convinced by arguments for raising rates. He also expresses concern about alternative B signaling a rate hike that may not come, and that a gradual path of tightening may not be more recessionary than a late and steep path. Overall, Mr. Kashkari disagrees with the idea of raising rates at this time.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 124.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I favor alternative B-plus or A-minus.  I’m not exactly sure which.  And the reason is, I have some measure of uncomfortableness with a couple of the elements of alternative B as written. First, the characterization of the risks as being roughly balanced doesn’t accord with my own understanding.  I think that shorter-term risks still are modestly to moderately on the downside.  While I don’t take too much signal on the basis of the retail sales numbers because, basically, that’s stuff from stores, a decreasingly important part of total consumption, the bouncing-around of housing permits and starts gives at least a little pause.  And, like Vice Chairman Dudley, I do put a little bit more weight on, or at least have a little bit more concern with, the nonmanufacturing purchasing managers’ survey, particularly because it’s a forward-looking indicator in the much larger part of the economy that’s relatively insulated from the effect of the stronger dollar. When coupled with the apparent softness in the total number of hours worked, as reported by the BLS, which was applicable in the service sector as well as the manufacturing sector, it indicates to me at least something to watch, but it’s a risk. It’s not a reality—it’s just a risk.  But I think that the “roughly balanced” is getting a little bit ahead of ourselves. Second, I am also a little uncomfortable with the language in paragraph 3 of alternative B because, as many have commented, it does lean forward—perhaps not as far as some would like—to a December rate increase. And as Presidents Bullard and Lockhart and others have noted, in and of itself, that may raise some communication problems, but it may also raise some issues for us of, what is it that we’re expecting to see.  However, it may be the best language that could garner a consensus,in view of the rather divergent views of people here.  But I did want to indicate that I am a little bit uncomfortable with it. I think, by the way, the problems that Presidents Bullard and Lockhart and others have referred to will only be exacerbated if everybody on this Committee runs out trying to influence market expectations about later increases, because then we’re going to get into another one of these wars of words, in which everybody goes out and gives their speeches and then sees how much the 10-year has moved to see whether they’ve given a good speech or not.  And I don’t think that’s been particularly useful for the Committee as a whole.  I feel like we’re stuck in a bit of a collective action problem here, and I don’t know how to get out of it.  But maybe the communications subcommittee—no, I’m only kidding, Stan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses discomfort with certain elements of alternative B and raises concerns about the characterization of risks as being roughly balanced. They also mention potential communication problems and divergent views within the committee.


Passage number 125.
 MR. FISCHER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: This cannot be determined as the passage is incomplete.


Passage number 126.
  Well, if you joined it, then—[Laughter] MR. TARULLO.  No.  I was on it briefly. For reasons I’ll explain in a moment, though, I’m not actually totally comfortable with alternative A, either.  I did want to say a couple of things about the discussion that’s gone back and forth, both in part of the go-round yesterday and today.  This is not exactly on the humility point, but we are in an environment in which there’s good reason to believe that the structure and dynamics of the U.S. economy are really quite different from what they have been in the relatively recent past and through much of the postwar period. And what I think that indicates is the possibility that tools and even analytic frameworks, such as various correlations among economic variables, that were quite useful for some period of time in thinking about and setting monetary policy may have more limited utility in the current circumstances.  What, of course, goes along with that is the idea that historical precedent becomes rather less useful, because the precedent just abstracts a couple of things and pulls them out of the broader context in which various more important secular forces are affecting the structure and dynamics of the economy. That first observation counsels more openness to the idea that things may be different and thus that you don’t take some things—whether it’s the Taylor rule or the traditional understanding of the Phillips curve or any number of other analytical frameworks—as your presumptive path.  From there—and, as I said, this is where humility comes in—we, as policymakers, don’t then want to jump to the conclusion of, “Ah, we now understand the way the dynamics and structure in this different economy are actually functioning, and thus we’re pretty confident about the way in which we will set policy.” So that is why—and I think a number of people, even though they haven’t used the language, and other people around the table have taken a similar approach—it seemed to me that we have to develop at least operating presumptions that allow us to make policy decisions from meeting to meeting.  But we need to be more open than usual to the possibility that something   different is going on than is reflected in that operating presumption. So that’s what’s led me to what I’ve described as a pragmatic approach. Just to be clear—and this is where my difference with alternative A comes in—what I’ve been saying is, I would like to see more evidence that inflation would be moving toward the 2 percent target on a sustainable basis. For me, that doesn’t necessarily translate into the inflation rate itself moving there, because I can imagine that there would be evidence of an underlying dynamic in certain parts of the economy that suggested pretty convincingly that, because of other things going on, inflation was going to rise.  So I think, again, one can be a little bit more open minded about what it is that would be evidence that would give reasonable certainty, to invoke a past phrase we used, that inflation will move back to target. And the second thing, obviously, that’s been important to me is what we discussed yesterday, which is the comparative longer-term risk framework. By the way, let me just say it explicitly today—boy, talk about a heterodox idea—it would be great to dispense with the economic go-round, as conventionally done, in November and just come in prepared to have a conversation about the set of issues that at least half a dozen or eight of us were discussing yesterday. But I haven’t consulted with anybody beyond Presidents George and Rosengren on this, and they didn’t even endorse it.  They just said, “That’s interesting.”  [Laughter] Let’s see. Finally—notwithstanding my reservations about some of the language in alternative B—obviously, when it comes to a vote today, I’ll vote for alternative B and do so with the understanding that either the evidence on inflation or my understanding of that comparative-risk framework may change between now and the next couple of meetings.  So, while I’m concerned about the degree of forward lean, I by no means foreclose the possibility that I will be there as well later in the year.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their thoughts and opinions on monetary policy and the current state of the economy.


Passage number 127.
 MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I, too, want to express my appreciation for the very thoughtful arguments that are being made on both sides, and I’ll try to provide my take on some of these arguments. First of all, I believe that our prudent risk-management approach has served us well this year, supporting continued gains in employment and progress on inflation while helping to navigate a number of risks.  Several have noted that the economy is not far from the forecasts of the Committee a year ago.  I would simply point out that this has been achieved only with a very substantial reduction in both the actual and expected policy rate path and the corresponding adjustment in broader financial conditions. Even so, actual progress on inflation still remains tentative, and there’s uncertainty about how close the economy is to full employment.  To me, it seems, therefore, appropriate to continue a fairly cautious approach and wait to see confirmation of further progress on inflation and tightening of resource constraints before removing further accommodation.  Of course, as many have noted, that policy stance contains risks.  In particular, if momentum in the economy is much stronger than the data now suggest and resource constraints start to bind more quickly than I currently anticipate, then inflation could rise more quickly than expected.  In such a contingency, we have tried-and-tested tools and ample policy space in which to react. Moreover, there are several features of today’s economy, today’s new normal, that might lead us to expect that the effects of such unexpected strength in demand on inflation, and on the economy more generally, will be somewhat more modest and require a somewhat more tempered policy response than in the handful of historical episodes that are frequently referenced. First, due to the experience, in particular, of the past year, it reminds us that it is possible material   resource slack still remains, and that full employment in the wake of the severe recession might look a bit different.  Second, the recent elevated sensitivity of the exchange rate to policy surprises suggests that an appreciating currency would play an important role in absorbing any excess demand and restraining inflation.  Third, because the neutral rate has been and likely will be persistently low, the distance back to a neutral stance is not as great.  And, finally, inflation expectations are well anchored to the upside.  Together, these factors suggest that the response of inflation to unexpected strength in demand will likely be modest and gradual, requiring a correspondingly moderate policy response and implying relatively slight costs to the economy. In the face of an adverse shock, however, our conventional policy toolkit is very limited, and thus the risk of being unable to respond adequately is greater.  The experience of the Japanese and euro-area economies should be sobering and suggests that prolonged weakness in demand is very difficult to correct, leading to economic costs that can be considerable. In short, in what I think of as today’s new normal, the costs to the economy of greater-than-expected strength in demand are likely to be lower than the costs of significant unexpected weakness. There’s another question that’s been raised that is important in this context that I wanted to address briefly address.  Some are asking whether there really is a cost to signaling that the Committee is comfortable acquiescing in underlying inflation remaining in the 1.4 to 1.6 percent range, which it hasn’t meaningfully exceeded over the past several years. In the “new normal,” in which the long-run neutral rate may well be 1¼ to 1½ percentage points below the canonical Taylor 2 percent, every ½ point reduction in our perceived inflation target reduces to an uncomfortably tight margin the conventional policy space we have in which to respond to a shock.  For that reason, I join others in thinking it’s extremely important that we defend the credibility of the target and make clear through our actions that there really is symmetry aroundpercent.  I agree that we would regret complacency on this front.  In short, the costs of entrenching a low-inflation, low-growth, low-expectations environment are considerable. The asymmetry in risk management counsels prudence in the removal of policy accommodation.  I believe this approach has served us well and will continue to do so.  When we look at the language, I must say that I, too, have some concerns about locking ourselves in to moving before the end of the year.  That approach hasn’t worked so well for us previously.  Nonetheless, I also recognize there’s a large diversity of views around the table, and I’m very comfortable supporting the Chair’s preferred formulation in alternative B.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses appreciation for both sides of the arguments and supports the Chair's preferred formulation.


Passage number 128.
 MR. MADIGAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  This vote will be on the policy statement for alternative B as included on pages 5 and 6 of Thomas Laubach’s briefing materials and on the directive to the Desk as included in the implementation note on page 9 of those materials.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 129.
 Chair Yellen Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes Governor Brainard Yes President Bullard Yes Governor Fischer Yes President George No President Mester No Governor Powell Yes President Rosengren No Governor Tarullo Yes MR. MADIGAN.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you very much.  Let’s see.  To wrap up, let me just say our next meeting is Tuesday and Wednesday, November 1 and 2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The individuals mentioned are simply listed as agreeing to something without any conflicting views or opposition displayed.


Passage number 130.
  There are boxed lunches that  should be available now in the anteroom, and there will, as usual, be a TV set up in the Special Library for anybody who wants to stay— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  For the extra entertainment.  [Laughter] CHAIR YELLEN. Yes, the live murder board.  I will do my best to present a balanced presentation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the availability of boxed lunches and a TV set for anyone who wants to stay for extra entertainment. The mention of "laughter" suggests a lighthearted tone, and the speaker, Chair Yellen, mentions doing her best to present a balanced presentation, but no argument or disagreement is present.


Passage number 131.
 MR. FISCHER.  Madam Chair, may I raise an issue. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fischer is asking to raise an issue, and Chair Yellen gives permission.


Passage number 132.
 MR. FISCHER.  For those who are going to be here four years from now, is it essential to set the meeting just before the election.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a question and seeks information rather than expressing a disagreement or arguing a point.


Passage number 133.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. You mean maybe moving it up a week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is simply a suggestion or inquiry about potentially moving something up a week.


Passage number 134.
 MR. MADIGAN.  We look at a lot of events and constraints in constructing the calendar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply describes the process of constructing the calendar by considering various events and constraints.


Passage number 135.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  The BIS, I think, is a constraint there, because the BIS meeting typically is going to be right in front of the election. So I think the BIS is a constraint there, Stan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not clearly present any contention or disagreement. It simply states a belief about the role of the BIS (Bank for International Settlements) meeting in relation to an election.


Passage number 136.
 MR. LACKER.  It does demonstrate our nonchalance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact about the demonstration of nonchalance.


