Passage number 1.
   July 31–Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on July 31–August 1, 2012 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, July 31, 2012, at 1:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, August 1, 2012, at 9:00 a.m. Those present were the following: Ben Bernanke, Chairman William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman Elizabeth Duke Jeffrey M. Lacker Dennis P. Lockhart Sandra Pianalto Jerome H. Powell Sarah Bloom Raskin Jeremy C. Stein Daniel K. Tarullo John C. Williams Janet L. Yellen James Bullard, Christine Cumming, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George, and Eric Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Richard W. Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, and Charles I. Plosser, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Minneapolis, and Philadelphia, respectively William B. English, Secretary and Economist Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel Steven B. Kamin, Economist David W. Wilcox, Economist David Altig, Thomas A. Connors, Michael P. Leahy, James J. McAndrews, William Nelson, David Reifschneider, and William Wascher, Associate Economists Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors  July 31–Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of Governors Jon W. Faust and Andrew T. Levin, Special Advisors to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors James A. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Seth B. Carpenter, Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Thomas Laubach, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Michael T. Kiley and David E. Lebow, Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Karen M. Pence, Assistant Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Elizabeth Klee, Senior Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Robert J. Tetlow, Senior Economist, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors David A. Sapenaro, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Jeff Fuhrer and Daniel G. Sullivan, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and Chicago, respectively Troy Davig and Christopher J. Waller, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City and St. Louis, respectively Reuven Glick, Group Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Todd E. Clark, Lorie K. Logan, Keith Sill, and Mark A. Wynne, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, New York, Philadelphia, and Dallas, respectively Robert L.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This passage simply lists the individuals present at a meeting.


Passage number 2.
 Hetzel and Samuel Schulhofer-Wohl, Senior Economists, Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond and Minneapolis, respectively July 31–Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on July 31–August 1, 2012 July 31 Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good afternoon, everybody.  Britt Leckman is going to take a few pictures; just pretend he’s not here.  Item 1 on our agenda is our special topic on policy rules.  You received the material for this.  Let me turn it over to Jon Faust.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply provides information about the agenda and participants of a meeting.


Passage number 3.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  That was a useful summary of some very interesting background work.  We thank you and the other staff for a very careful, interesting exposition.  The floor is open for questions or comments for Jon.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses gratitude and admiration towards Jon and the other staff for their work.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 4.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I compliment the staff for an excellent trio of papers providing an overview of a large subject.  I have two general comments in reaction to this.  The first one is that there were some findings that were quite a surprise to me, although they probably shouldn’t have been.  In hindsight, I probably should have expected this.  What I’m referring to is where the memo showed that the frequency distribution of liftoff dates is relatively broad and flat, covering a wide range of plausible dates. I think I was assuming that if you took a given model and a given rule—if you wanted to place a lot of confidence in one model and one rule—you’d have liftoff dates fairly tightly bunched around your modal forecast of a liftoff date.  Instead, the results showed that even with a given model and a given rule, you should be relatively agnostic about when it’s likely for us to lift off.  Then you back away from certainty about the model and the rule, and you’re going to get more uncertainty because you don’t quite know the model and you’re not sure which rule characterizes good policy, and so on.  This was a really striking finding to me—and I know we’re not going to talk about policy now, but it’s about policy rules.  To me, this suggests that the proponents of the forward-guidance language we have in the statement now really need to reconcile the certainty that is conveyed by the language in the statement with the agnosticism that the staff’s analysis suggests ought to  July 31–characterize our assessment of liftoff date. You might have some strong views, but you need some explanation of how you reconcile the staff’s results with that relative certainty that’s expressed in the statement. The second comment has to do with a couple of issues.  The memo describes circumstances in which first-difference rules are relatively attractive.  One is that the more that expectations are forward looking, the better first-difference rules do relative to alternatives. I would just point out in this context that over the last at least 10 years or so that I’ve been involved with the FOMC, I’ve seen the staff move decidedly in the direction of  adopting the approach of assuming expectations are more forward looking, both in their analysis of the economy and in their analysis of policy.  It’s obvious that the profession moved decidedly in that direction as well, although the timing might have been different.  To me this is an argument in favor of giving first-difference rules a little more weight.  The staff also points out that uncertainty about the natural rate favors first-difference rules, and, obviously, there’s a large literature on this—for example, Orphanides and Williams—documenting historical evidence that misjudgments about the natural rate can lead to pretty serious policy errors.  The only thing I’d add to this is that while there’s been research out there, I don’t think it takes on board necessarily the extent to which—and this is extra evidence here—that within the Committee, there’s a tremendous range of views about the natural rate.  And in this regard, you made a comment, Jon, that ignoring the level of the gap seems to go too far, and as I listen to you, I think you base that on two things.  One is that when the output gap is really large, we should care about it.  We do care about a large output gap.  And the other was that large output gaps tend to be persistent.  Well, there are estimates of the output gap based on DSGE models in which the output gap is smaller.  Moreover, that’s the welfare-relevant gap in those models.  The argument that we care   July 31–about large gaps is based on some less-than-agnosticism about the level of the gap; it’s based on some views about the gap.  And then I think it is true as well that in DSGE models, those gaps are less persistent than the ones based on a notion of potential that imposes a substantial amount of smoothness on the estimate of potential.  The argument seems to be, well, the first-difference rule is really good if you don’t know much about the output gap, but we do know enough to say you shouldn’t ignore the rule.  Those are my two comments about the rules, and again, I commend the staff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, expresses surprise at the findings presented in the memo and suggests that there is a contradiction between the certainty conveyed by the forward-guidance language in the statement and the agnosticism suggested by the staff's analysis. He also disagrees with the approach of assuming expectations are more forward looking and argues for giving first-difference rules more weight. Additionally, he challenges the argument that large output gaps should be taken into account in policy decisions based on estimates from DSGE models.


Passage number 5.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Do you want to say something, Jon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking Jon if he wants to say something.


Passage number 6.
 MR. FAUST.  Let me make a couple of comments.  I think that we were somewhat surprised about the dispersion of the liftoff dates under these rules, although I think a number of Reserve Banks that ran some simulations indicated there was dispersion.  We were surprised at the degree.  And just to get some intuition for why that’s true, we happen to have a baseline forecast that has the economy kind of moving slowly away from the conditions that warrant being at the zero lower bound. That means that the notional interest rate implied by these rules— I’m saying “notional” because it may be negative or below the bound—the notional value is lurking near the zero lower bound for about three years, and since it lurks near the bound for three years, any positive shock may lead you to lift off.  If the rule doesn’t have inertia, the next negative shock will also send you back to the zero bound.  And so it’s the fact that we’re lurking near the zero bound for a long time that leads to this result. President Lacker raised some important questions about whether the current forward-guidance language would be appropriate if we were following one of these rules, and, as he indicated, I think this evidence says it would be a bit problematic.  Now, that doesn’t mean that this dispersion characterizes how the FOMC is actually behaving; that’s a matter for you all toJuly 31–decide.  However, I think the memo suggests that you wouldn’t want to follow any of these rules, especially the jumpier ones—those that are more likely to lift off.  The other rules have a much later liftoff date that might well be consistent with the language that says “at least until” a certain point.  That’s for later consideration, tomorrow perhaps.  About the first-difference rule, there are some good cases for it.  When I say that the research suggests that it goes too far to eliminate the level of the output gap, that result comes from research that incorporated the empirical properties of historical measurement errors, and so it reflected the actual ignorance that we experienced and still found that putting weight on the gap was a good idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Instead, it is a discussion and analysis of the results of simulations and the potential implications for decision-making.


Passage number 7.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Can I add a couple of things to this.  First, one problem about the liftoff date that the Committee might want to think about in terms of forward guidance is that the liftoff date in some ways is a lousy summary statistic of what the relevant policy stance will be because it’s one point in time.  Going back to the simulation analysis in the memo, by strictly following a rule you can have episodes in which the liftoff date pops up for a quarter or two and then goes right back to zero.  In terms of what’s going to matter to the market and bond pricing, they’re really trying to guess the average level of the funds rate over time, and the distribution of that average level over time. That average level is a much less jumpy variable than the liftoff date you get from following a particular rule. Now, saying the Committee should think about forward guidance in terms of a path, that’s a much harder problem.  But you can lead yourself astray by focusing too much on the distributional statistics of the liftoff date and how meaningful that date is for what the average stance of policy might be and how sensitive the average stance of policy will be to economic conditions.  The third thing I’d say, and this is up to the Committee to decide, is that in interpreting the statement, it’s conditional. It’s a probabilistic statement about the liftoff date, because it says it’s “likely.” Looking at the market’s views about the  July 31–probable date of liftoff—what’s priced into options—you get a range of views.  I think everyone understands that there’s a considerable dispersion of views about possible liftoff dates as well as a considerable range of views in the markets about what the modal liftoff date would be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is providing additional information and perspectives on the liftoff date and forward guidance, without expressing any contrary opinions or arguments.


Passage number 8.
 MR. LACKER.  Could I follow up, Mr. Chairman. I agree that the liftoff date is a lousy summary statistic, as I think you put it, for our future policy, and what was surprising about the memo was the evidence that so strongly buttressed that view.  That’s how I read those graphs— that we’re more uncertain about the date.  I take the language in the statement to connote at least a 50 percent chance that we are not going to raise rates until then.  That’s what I take away from the “likely” language, and that seemed inconsistent with the simulations that the staff showed us.  If you say there are other rules that have later dates, then maybe this distribution should be a systematic part of what the staff reports to us going forward. It might be more informative than just the line drawings that show single modal outcomes under various scenarios.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by MR. LACKER, expressing agreement with the chairman's view and suggesting that the distribution of dates should be included in future reports.


Passage number 9.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. One can respond to that in a couple of ways.  One way is that what they find is a purely unconditional distribution; it isn’t contingent on what happens in the economy.  Of course, what we’ve been talking about is what we think economic conditions are likely to be and, therefore, how we will respond to those conditions.  So, first, it’s a conditional commitment, not an unconditional commitment.  Second, there’s no discussion here about the value of commitment.  You didn’t really talk very much about credibility and the possibility that by making a commitment to a certain policy, even if it’s not necessarily ex post optimal—that is, it may be time-inconsistent—there may be some benefits ex ante.  And that’s a question that could be posed.  But I would agree that we need to work as a Committee to try to find a way to characterize the future path more explicitly in terms of economic conditions, and I agree with you that that would be a better way to do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is mostly agreeing with the previous statement and suggesting additional considerations to be taken into account.


Passage number 10.
   July 31–MR. FAUST.  Let me add one comment.  There are rules that deliver a later date, and they’re in the memo.  The nominal income–targeting rule, as we know, comes close to approximating optimal control, which has a very late liftoff date and is fully consistent with the forward guidance; and the inertial Taylor rule has a later liftoff date. Remember, we were using the June baseline because we were running these simulations before the July baseline was available. If we had done it for the July baseline, the inertial Taylor rule would have had an even later date of liftoff consistent with the language.  Those inertial rules require some degree of commitment as we touched on, but could be completely consistent with the language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing additional information and clarifications about certain rules and their implications.


Passage number 11.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  And to buttress what Jon just said, one of the memos made the point that an inertial Taylor rule can incorporate a threshold for action—just because it’s 27 basis points you don’t lift off.  In one particular case that we considered, you wait until it is 75 basis points.  In that case, the distribution for the liftoff date is shoved way out into the future, and the modal liftoff point looks like it’s the first quarter of 2016.  My point is that there can be very mechanical rules with very mechanical responses that have certain types of inertia.  Those inertial rules are not going to respond to what just could be a transitory pickup in the economy, and as a result they push that distribution markedly out into the future in terms of liftoff date. Which one of these rules is in line with what the Committee is doing, I don’t know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is simply describing different scenarios and their possible effects.


Passage number 12.
 MR. LACKER.  I’m not sure we do either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing uncertainty about the situation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 13.
  [Laughter] MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  But the point is that you can even follow a fairly mechanistic rule and still have a probability distribution for liftoff that is even further out in the future than the statement might be interpreted as having.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting that even if you follow a specific rule, there is still a possibility that the liftoff will occur later than expected, contradicting the interpretation of the statement.


Passage number 14.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 15.
 July 31–MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First I want to thank the staff for their work on rules.  If we can agree to allow the robust and simple rules to provide at least first-order guidance for policy, I think there are important benefits to be derived for our policy choices, for providing some clarity about communications, and for the transparency of understanding our decisionmaking process. But I do want to take a couple of minutes to offer some thoughts about how we should go about or not go about thinking about evaluating these alternative rules.  Some of my points are consistent with what Jon has already talked about in his presentation. First and foremost, I do not think we should evaluate simple rules or robust rules based on how they perform at the zero bound on interest rates.  We should evaluate how the rules perform in normal times and select a rule or set of rules that help guide policy during those times.  However, this evaluation process might take into account, for example, the probability of a rule leading to hitting the zero bound under any proposed rule.  But that’s different from choosing a rule based on its performance at the zero bound.  In a zero-bound environment, important nonlinearities are present.  They will make it very hard to assess the performance or appropriateness of any given rule since most of the models and analytics we have aren’t well suited for such boundary constraints.  Instead we should be prepared to augment the baseline rules in a way that might be appropriate in the face of constraints posed by the zero bound.  For example, we might consider augmenting our interest rate rules with adjustments for balance sheet actions or some other mechanism for making adjustments.  Thus, comparing the implications of unadjusted rules at the zero bound seems to me to be the wrong way to go about selecting or evaluating the desirability of any particular rule. Why reject a rule that works well 95 percent of the time simply because 5 percent of the time we may have to figure out how to adjust it.  As I said, it would be informative, however, to get an assessment of how often a   July 31–simple rule in normal times might lead to us hitting the zero bound, as that might be considered an undesirable feature. Second, a lesson that is apparent in Keith Kuester’s memo is that optimal control policies derived in one model often lead to poor outcomes in another model.  An important motivation for a simple rule is to find one that is robust, that is, it performs well across a variety of models. Model uncertainty is pervasive in macroeconomics.  Thus, we need to keep in mind that FRB/US is just one of many competing models, and its optimal control outcomes are almost certainly far from optimal if the operating model is something different.  Consequently, we must resist the temptation to place too much weight on the optimal control scenarios in FBR/US or judge the value or merits of any particular rule by how close or how well it compares with the optimal control path produced by FRB/US.  If we do so, we can make some very big mistakes if FRB/US ends up being the wrong operative framework.  The idea of simple and robust rules is that they perform reasonably well across a range of plausible models.  I don’t believe that a good way to evaluate the robustness properties of these rules is to benchmark them against optimal policy in a single model or even assessing performance in one model. I’d also mention that in the Kuester memo, the so-called Taylor (1999) benchmark rule did not perform very well relative to some other robust muddles—models.  “Muddles” may be actually a better word.  I don’t know.  As President Lacker pointed out, it does particularly poorly, for example, in some of the models that rely on more forward-looking agents.  Thus, I think we should be cautious about what I see as a tendency to emphasize this rule as an appealing, robust rule over some of the others.  Indeed, consistent with the literature, he finds that, as we’ve been talking about, the first-difference rules tend to be somewhat more robust across models than ordinary Taylor-type rules. As I said, this is particularly the case for modelsJuly 31–in which agents are more forward looking.  Of course, as has already been mentioned, first-difference rules also have been advocated on the grounds of measurement error.  That issue is not taken up in the Kuester memo, but it is important when the natural rates and potential output are poorly measured. Thus, I would encourage the staff and others to evaluate robust rules in a variety of models, and I think we need to continue to pursue this as though there will inevitably be robust rules, and recognizing that there are occasions where they don’t work well or are never going to be perfect. But we shouldn’t be basing our rules purely against FRB/US or any other sort of unique model or in circumstances I believe in which the zero bound is particularly operative. The zero bound will be a case where we will make deviations from simple rules, and we should just acknowledge that and not let that be the guiding principle, at least until our theoretical models have better ways of dealing with the nonlinearities and constraints that a zero bound presents us.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Plosser is expressing his thoughts and opinions on how to evaluate alternative rules, but he does not present any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 16.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thanks. President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple expression of gratitude and does not involve any form of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 17.
 MR. EVANS.  Could I just ask a question of President Plosser.  I’m really puzzled over the logic behind why, at this point in the economic cycle, we would want to be carrying on an evaluation of these rules in terms of normal times when we are far from normal times. It’s akin to thinking that if I wanted to carry around a radio that is the best radio under normal conditions, I might choose a model that’s got lots of bells and whistles and really takes a tremendous amount of energy and drains the batteries quickly; but that’s okay because normally I can plug it in and recharge it or whatnot.  However, then I find myself on Gilligan’s Island where the transistor radio runs out of batteries within about two hours, and I want to make it last for however long it takes. It seems to me like what you’re describing is a perfectly reasonable approach to how we   July 31–would evaluate normal approaches to policy, but at the moment we want to think about the special features.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests a disagreement or contention between Mr. Evans and President Plosser. Mr. Evans is puzzled by the logic behind evaluating rules in terms of normal times when the current economic situation is far from normal. He uses the analogy of a radio to illustrate his point. His viewpoint contradicts with the approach described by President Plosser.


Passage number 18.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Well, I think, President Evans, the issue really is about how we establish and create our monetary policy or strategic framework for conducting monetary policy.  I don’t think you want to ignore both how you communicate that strategy and how you want to think about that strategy if you want to be transparent about that.  I don’t think any of us, or anybody else I know of, views any kind of robust rule as a mechanistic rule that we just never deviate from.  There will always be times when we deviate.  This may be one of those times that we deviate, but how we deviate depends on where you want the baseline in terms of what you think your strategy is, and you may have to adapt to that.  What I don’t want to do and what I think we should guard against is allowing the current unusual time to guide us in how we think about developing the strategy more broadly for how we conduct monetary policy.  I agree that there are times when you will deviate.  I’m not suggesting that you don’t, but it’s nice to be able to have a framework on which you choose to rest your laurels, so to speak, most of the time and recognize that at times you will deviate.  Then we can debate and argue about what is the appropriate manner for us to deviate from that rule.  That ultimately makes our communications efforts easier and more clear because then we have to explain why we’re doing what we’re doing.  I think that improves the clarity of our communications and the clarity of the monetary policy process.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily a statement of the author's opinion regarding the establishment and communication of monetary policy strategies. The author acknowledges that there may be times when deviations from the strategies are necessary, but emphasizes the importance of having a framework to guide decision-making and clarity in communication.


Passage number 19.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is because the phrase "President Bullard" only mentions a person and does not provide any information or context that can be disputed or disagreed upon.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 20.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to thank the staff as well for an interesting set of memos concerning policy rules. I do think this is a fascinating literature, and one that very much informs the debate here at the FOMC.  It’s one that I have tried to contribute  July 31–to myself, and I know many around the table have also done work on the topic.  I have several remarks on the memos. I’m just going to list them, and then I’ll expand on them a little bit.  The first remark is that it’s pretty clear that this literature is not mature enough to give good advice on the commitment of actual policymakers to a particular policy rule.  Accordingly, I think that the policy rules discussion has to remain a step outside the actual policymaking process, which is sort of how I view it now—that it’s informing the process, but the Committee does not actually commit to a particular rule.  The second comment is that much of the discussion and analysis has the flavor of lining up the adoption of a policy rule with the date of liftoff in the policy rate.  This echoes some of the earlier comments. I think that this is inconsistent with the idea that the reason the Committee is naming a potential liftoff date is to suggest a commitment to staying at the zero bound longer than would otherwise be called for by ordinary policy. I’ll expand on that a little bit in just a minute. The third comment is that in much of the analysis the ties to household utility are weak.  In my view, policymakers should not be free to choose objective functions arbitrarily as is done in parts of this analysis, but should be required to map policy actions back to the welfare of actual households inside the model.  Comment four is that I would suggest evaluating the rule somewhat more holistically based on long-run simulations.  Committing to these rules means committing to keep unemployment higher than it would otherwise be in some states of the world.  I’d like to see what those states are and how long they would last, and ask whether the Committee is willing to accept this feature of committing to a policy rule.  Number five is that in many models in this class, the worst policy is the so-called interest rate peg policy.  Such a policy inside the model allows many possible equilibrium outcomes.  The rules suggested here have the policy rate unchanged for years and years,July 31–approximating the interest rate peg policy. This could be viewed as an additional and much more virulent—Richard, is “virulent” a word.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Bullard, argues that the literature on policy rules is not mature enough to provide useful advice to policymakers and that the discussion of policy rules should remain separate from the actual policymaking process. This contradicts the belief of other participants that policy rules should be adopted and linked to the date of liftoff in the policy rate.


Passage number 21.
 MR. FISHER.  Yes, it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Yes, it is" is an agreement or confirmation to something previously said or asked.


Passage number 22.
 MR. BULLARD.  It is.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard simply responds by acknowledging that the statement or information given is true or accurate.


Passage number 23.
 MR. FISHER.  Wait a minute.  Let me check with Governor Tarullo.  [Laughter] Two confirmations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It only mentions a request for further information or clarification from Governor Tarullo, which is followed by laughter.


Passage number 24.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply shows gratitude towards President Fisher.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 25.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, if I heard your question correctly, I have spent enough time with Finn Kydland to do two things: One is to appreciate microbreweries because he has become quite good at it—and oddball wines—and the other is to appreciate the value of using a rule to develop a perspective on policy.  There is a strong theoretical case for developing a rule.July 31–The question is, how do we develop a rule for the world that we currently live in. My colleague just touched on this—not only are we at the zero bound, but we are post-crisis.  And one of the things I have had a problem with, and I have discussed at great length with John Taylor, is this whole issue of an output gap.  You and I have had discussions on this, but how do you define an output gap in a globalized world. Jim just referred to globalization.  I think that’s one of the issues that I’m not sure we properly take account of, and I wonder—and this is a question, again, not being as sophisticated as other people at this table—about the degree to which we tend to think in terms of a closed economy when we develop these rules, and how much we can possibly develop a rule, not just against a zero bound, but in the kind of world that we actually live in.  It’s just not clear to me if we can easily do that.  I think the subject should be pursued.  I thought Jon did a great job in his presentation.  I must say, I actually enjoyed reading these memos.  I thought the Philadelphia memo raised some very good questions, not only questions about a real-time data problem but also about the zero bound.  And it also hinted at—at least the way I read it—the concern about globalization.  So it is not clear to me that this is doable, but I understand the theory behind wanting to do it. Just two other quick points.  On page 12 of the longer memo there was a sentence that really caught my eye. It said, “An impairment of the transmission mechanism would call for more accommodative conventional monetary policy than that implied by the simple rules, all else equal.” I wonder about that.  To me, it represents just pouring it on.  And the question is, why not try to affect the transmission mechanism rather than increase the quantity of accommodation.  I know that’s not what we’re talking about here, but that did catch my eye.  The second issue I have is that none of this addresses whether these were the right outcomes. If you look at that exhibit 1, the rule may have led this Committee to lead to a very low interest rate   July 31–environment prior to 2005 and 2006.  Was it the right decision to raise rates as quickly as we did.  The reason I mention all of this—again from a less sophisticated perspective than President Lacker or our other two interlocutors—is that these are simple questions that I think we need to address in order to be effective.  And then, also constantly asking ourselves, does the rule lead us in the right direction.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker raises concerns about the usefulness and applicability of developing a rule for the current globalized world and questions the concept of an output gap. The speaker also questions the effectiveness of increasing the quantity of accommodation in monetary policy instead of trying to affect the transmission mechanism. Additionally, the speaker raises doubts about whether the outcomes of following the rule in the past were the right decisions.


Passage number 26.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  If you feel compelled to comment, raise your hand.  But otherwise, let’s hear everybody, and then Jon will make the final comments.  Okay. President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 27.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. However, it is essential to note that the given passage is incomplete, and it is not possible to provide a full analysis without the complete text.


Passage number 28.
 WILLIAMS. I would like to thank Jon and the Board, and the Philadelphia staff as well, for their thoughtful and helpful discussions on this topic.  Personally, I find monetary policy rules to be a useful guide for thinking about the appropriate stance of policy.  Importantly, they provide us with a straightforward way to think about monetary policy in terms of systematic, predictable responses to changing economic conditions.  Now, the background materials covered a lot of ground, so in my time I will focus on the issue of adapting policy rules to what President Evans calls the “Gilligan’s Island economy,” that is, situations where the zero bound does constrain policy.  And I have to say, President Plosser, that the prediction that 95 percent of the time we’ll be away from the zero bound, and 5 percent of the time we’ll be at the zero bound is optimistic to me—at least so far in my tenure, it has been zero.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing gratitude and stating the speaker's personal perspective on monetary policy rules.


Passage number 29.
  [Laughter] MR. PLOSSER.  Fortunately, we have a bigger sample than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses a positive sentiment by using the word "fortunately" and there is laughter indicated at the beginning, which suggests a light-hearted tone.


Passage number 30.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 31.
 WILLIAMS.  In my research with Dave Reifschneider on this topic, we drew two key conclusions that I think are relevant to our current situation.  First, when faced with the zero bound, we do not want to keep our powder dry for reasons I will explain in a moment.  Second, after you are stuck at the zero bound, it is important to keep monetary policy lower for longerJuly 31–than normal to help the economy recover.  So why not keep our powder dry.  When you’re approaching the zero lower bound, or any limit on what you can do with monetary policy, the fact that we may be constrained in the future gives us even more incentive to ease policy as quickly as possible.  This allows the available conventional monetary stimulus to be operative for as long a period of time as possible.  In contrast, if you keep the powder dry, then we are giving up on an opportunity to add stimulus, slowing the recovery.  Why do we want to keep monetary policy lower for longer than a standard monetary policy rule would prescribe.  Well, by promising to keep policy lower for longer, we are helping to keep longer-term interest rates low, and, in fact, closer to where they would be without the zero lower bound.  This is exactly the same idea as in the optimal commitment policy in the Tealbook.  Thus, in order to compensate for the presence of the zero lower bound, our analysis argues for being easier than a standard policy rule on both sides of the zero bound.  You want to be easier going in so as to put that policy easing in place for as long a period of time as possible, and you want to be easier coming out of the zero bound so as to keep long-term rates lower and closer to where they would be in an unconstrained world.  To make things concrete, based on my current economic forecast, the Reifschneider–Williams rule prescribes policy liftoff about three or four quarters later than a comparable unadjusted monetary policy rule.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author, Williams, is explaining the findings of his research with Reifschneider and presenting their conclusions about the importance of keeping monetary policy lower for longer in a zero bound situation.


Passage number 32.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thanks.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply contains a polite expression of gratitude towards Governor Yellen.


Passage number 33.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to thank the staff for providing us with exceptionally illuminating memos.  They reinforce my own long-held view that simple rules can serve as useful benchmarks to gauge the stance of monetary policy and to enhance the clarity of our communications.  I first promoted the FOMC’s use of rules for these purposes in a speech I gave in 1996 during my first stint as a Governor.  And a few of us encouraged the staff July 31–to conduct research on the use of simple rules in monetary policy analysis.  We have come a very long way and learned a huge amount, and Federal Reserve staff have contributed—and continue to contribute—very importantly to the impressive literature on this topic.  Meanwhile, the actual use of rules in policy has increased markedly. The staff memos highlight important design issues that need to be addressed.  Given our statutory mandate, the memos appropriately focus on rules that mirror our dual objectives.  A key design issue, therefore, concerns the relative weights assigned by the rule to stabilization of employment and inflation.  Given the commitment incorporated in our January consensus statement to follow a balanced approach in promoting these objectives, I think it is essential that any rule we use to inform our policy judgments incorporate a strong enough response to resource slack for the economy to move expeditiously back to full employment following a shock.  And for this reason, a rule like Taylor (1999) is much more consistent with a balanced approach than one like Taylor (1993), in my opinion. Although the Taylor (1999) rule doesn’t incorporate any policy inertia, I believe that a moderate amount of inertia is appropriate in normal times, like those we experienced during the Great Moderation.  Some inertia serves to enhance public understanding of monetary policy and the predictability of its future course. Given the noisy nature of incoming information, a moderate amount of inertia also allows policymakers to minimize the risk of reversals without being seen to be falling behind the curve.  The experience from the tightening episode during 2004 and 2005 suggests that market participants understood the commitment implied by inertial behavior.  In particular, investors correctly anticipated a prolonged sequence of fed funds target changes in the same direction. Rules that embed a much higher degree of inertia may come closer to approximating optimal policy under commitment, but the value of conditional July 31–commitments seems to have fairly limited importance in normal times.  Unfortunately, present circumstances are far from normal, and I found the memos particularly insightful in analyzing how simple rules can and should be modified when monetary policy is constrained by the zero bound. They dramatize that the gains from making conditional commitments are substantially greater, and, hence, the shortcomings of the Taylor (1999) rule relative to the optimal control policy are much more glaring in times like these.  They have convinced me that it would be inadvisable to use that rule as a guidepost for our current policy deliberations and communications.  In contrast, a highly inertial version of the Taylor (1999) rule does a much better job of approximating the optimal policy under commitment at the zero bound.  And I intend going forward to use it as a benchmark in making my own assessments of appropriate monetary policy. Finally, I would like to comment briefly on the links I see between this topic and our consideration of the consensus forecast initiative.  First of all, a consensus forecast will provide a context in which to explain the rationale for the Committee’s judgments about the appropriate path of policy.  I expect that these judgments can be informed by the use of simple rules as benchmarks, but mechanistic adherence to the prescription of any rule would be unwise.  There will surely be circumstances where deviations of policy from the prescription of any given rule will be warranted by the modal outlook or the balance of risks.  Second, we will need and want, as part of a consensus forecast, to convey the degree of uncertainty surrounding the modal outlook.  This can be effectively done using fan charts.  However, such charts are generally constructed using stochastic simulations, which in turn require the specification of a policy reaction function.  Thus, if the Committee decides to proceed further with the consensus forecast initiative, we will need to specify a particular reference rule and to consider carefully whether   July 31–that rule would be featured prominently—or, alternatively, downplayed—in our monetary policy communications.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

This passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is primarily a statement of the speaker's own views and opinions, as well as a discussion of the topic at hand. There is no indication of opposing viewpoints or debate among individuals.


Passage number 34.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply expresses gratitude towards President Kocherlakota without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 35.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to thank the staff, both here at the Board and in Philadelphia, for the three very useful memos.  I found them, as others have said, quite illuminating. I am going to deviate from the trend I have heard around the table and am going to actually have some questions for the staff, but it is useful to provide a little context for what my questions are.  My questions are going to be about LSAP adjustment.  And right now, in particular, a lot of the focus of the policy discussion around the table is about the use of LSAPs.  And President Williams and Governor Yellen just highlighted the difficulties of using standard rules when you’re at the zero lower bound.  But one of the benefits of large-scale asset purchases is they are able to offer stimulus, and in that way we are in some sense breaking the zero lower bound.  My questions are going to be about trying to use the insights from rules in order to understand how we should be adjusting this extra stimulus being provided by the large-scale asset purchases. My first question is a narrow one.  The second Board memo expresses some concerns about LSAP adjustment because there is a view that we should be making up for underaccumulation of past accommodation.  I think that the idea is that because of the perceived cost of unconventional policy the FOMC failed to provide sufficient accommodation in 2009, and that we should now somehow make up for that.  But my question is, why isn’t that mistake sunk.  Why should I be worried today in 2012 about underprovision of accommodation in the past.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing gratitude and stating their intention to ask questions.


Passage number 36.
 July 31–MR. FAUST.  Let me say a couple of things, and then I think Dave Reifschneider will want to comment.  One important point that we tried to make in the memo was that under certain assumptions that you guys have derived, you can make an adjustment that exactly and properly adjusts for the effect of LSAPs and allows you to mirror the outcome you would have had under the unconstrained rule.  And we want to emphasize is that there are a lot of other special factors going on at the zero lower bound that might make you want to be doing something else in the present circumstances.  The clearest example to me—but not everybody likes this one—is that fiscal policy in the current circumstance is behaving dramatically differently from how it behaved in almost all of the other recessions, the ones in which that rule was found to be a good thing.  We all think that the interaction of monetary and fiscal policy is central to understanding either one of them.  You don’t want to get only the stance of monetary policy right; you want to get the stance of overall macro policy right.  And so we would want to adjust for LSAPs.  We would also want to adjust for fiscal policy.  And I can list two or three other things where I can make a good case as well for making an adjustment.  So the answer to the first part of your question is that it would be great to come up with a fully and properly adjusted rule.  Adjusting for maybe one or two special factors, but not three or four other relevant things—that I am not so much in favor of. The second part of your question is about the references in the memo to filling the past policy accommodation hole. I will let Dave comment on that, if he wants to, because that is more his area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is mainly discussing the need for adjusting certain factors in policy-making and seeking a fully adjusted rule.


Passage number 37.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I will start by going back a little bit over the ground that Jon did because he raised a key issue, which is, what are the benchmarks against which you evaluate what is a good adjustment.  One way we would do it is to forget rules and just have a loss   July 31–function or something to represent what’s a good outcome.  As we pointed out in the memo, if you said, “I’m going to follow one of two rules.  I’m either going to follow a Taylor (1999) rule or I’m going to follow an LSAP-adjusted Taylor (1999) rule, we could ask which rule would be better in terms of better macro outcomes. The answer in the memo was that you wouldn’t want to adjust the rule because the adjustment would cause you to lift off from the zero bound earlier.  What you would want to do in the face of this big shock that had kept you trapped at the zero lower bound, is just be easier for longer.  That’s just another way of stating the point that John Williams made, which is that Reifschneider–Williams adjustments, we’ll call them, make up for the fact that you were stuck at the zero lower bound—that you were in a bad state—and if you were trying to get a better outcome you would do an adjustment to stay easier for longer. Now, a different way of looking at this issue is to say, “Well, I don’t know what loss function anybody has in mind, or anything else like that.” It wasn’t expressed so colorfully in this version, but I think how the March memo from John Roberts and Ed Nelson put it was, suppose you were a policymaker who just loved the performance of the economy under, say, Taylor (1999)—pick your rule; it doesn’t quite really matter—when you never were worried about the zero bound.  Then, you get into a really bad shock that sticks you at the zero lower bound, and the policymaker says, “Gee, I would really like to replicate the performance of the unconstrained Taylor rule.  How do I do it.”  What the Minneapolis note from April showed was that if you had been using asset purchases very aggressively, in fact so aggressively you essentially had made up for the fact that you were stuck at the zero lower bound, then when you are coming out and are no longer constrained by the zero lower bound, a policymaker who wanted to replicate the hypothetical behavior of the economy under an unconstrained Taylor rule should make those LSAP adjustments.  The formula that the Minneapolis memo had for July 31–adjusting the Taylor rule was exactly right in that world. But what the memo that we distributed this time went on to say—and the point was definitely made in the Minneapolis note, too—was that there is a condition for LSAP adjustments to be appropriate, and that condition was that the Committee had done enough LSAPs to make up for the shortfall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 38.
 MR. FAUST.  Before the current one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply mentions someone's name without providing any further context or information.


Passage number 39.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. Right.  In some sense, had you done enough with LSAPs to make up for the shortfall, so that when you are coming out finally, there is nothing in the past that you need to make up for, and the economy had been on that path that you would have wanted to have been on if you could have gone below zero.  But if you are not on that path, if the Committee hadn’t done enough, the question is, what can you do to get me closer to that path. The other way of putting it was, did doing the LSAP adjustment put you closer to that path or not.  And the answer was, no, it didn’t put you close to the path.  You would be better off not doing the adjustment.  These are the examples that we looked at. If one felt that the two LSAP programs and the MEP had basically managed to replicate what would have been possible under Taylor (1999) unconstrained and you are a policymaker who thought that that was just the right thing to do, then you would want to adjust.  But if you didn’t think that they had fully made up the gap, then you wouldn’t want to make the adjustments. It might be that those programs might not have made up the gap because you might have thought they were too costly a tool to use to make up the gap.  Alternatively, if you don’t care what Taylor (1999) says, you might be just asking yourself whether this is a good outcome for unemployment and a good outcome for inflation.  Alternatively, you can go ahead and make the adjustments, but there are more than offsetting adjustments you would make along the lines that President Williams was discussing a few minutes ago. I don’t know if that helps.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It is discussing different perspectives and considerations in evaluating the effectiveness of LSAPs (Large-Scale Asset Purchases) in achieving desired economic outcomes.


Passage number 40.
  July 31–MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Well, that is going to lead pretty nicely into my second question.  I thought that you and Jon hit on two separate issues, which are important to separate.  One is that the dynamics of the economy right now might well be different from what has been true in the past, and our policy reaction function might well want to adjust for it. Vice Chairman Dudley has highlighted this as well in one of his speeches, that there might be reasons to think that the natural real rate of interest right now is considerably lower than it was five years ago. Then, there is a separate point about the fact that interest rates are constrained by zero. If we are able to do an arbitrary amount of LSAPs—and we just got a memo from New York saying we can do a lot more than I thought—then we should be able, in principle, to provide as much stimulus as we could by lowering interest rates, whatever rule you want to use.  And then, there is a question of how do we do the translation.  And that leads into my second question.  LSAPs are not just another adjustment like fiscal policy because, unlike fiscal policy—which I watch and wonder at—we actually get to do something about monetary policy.  Tomorrow the Committee is going to be asked to think about alternative A versus alternative B. It is useful to have a monetary policy rule to serve as a guide to thinking about that choice.  How should I do that.  That’s my question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing different issues related to the dynamics of the economy, policy reactions, and monetary policy alternatives.


Passage number 41.
 MR. FAUST.  Well, let me say a couple of things.  First of all, on fiscal and monetary policy, it’s not a matter of who gets to actually implement it; it’s a matter of what the appropriate stance of either one is.  And that appropriate stance, in my view, is appropriately jointly determined.  If fiscal policy is operating very differently than at other times, the dual mandate doesn’t say, “Pretend fiscal policy is operating as normal, and then behave appropriately.” It is a joint determination.  Now, that is a separate point from the one you were talking about, and I agree that those should be separated.July 31–On your point about, what should we do.  I think a lot of people around the table have said that in light of the current circumstances—the person sitting next to you maybe has dwelt on it as much as anyone—the simple models—say, those in which the simple adjustment for LSAPs would be exactly right—are perhaps adequate in normal times.  I’m not sure they are so adequate now, and so to have confidence in those is kind of difficult.  That is why the staff has been attempting to provide information to allow lots of kinds of adjustments that would allow people to make judgments about where to go from there, whatever policy rule they like.  We are not against adjusting for LSAPs, but, rather, we are in favor of—and I think the memos support this—thinking about a lot of factors and how they call for different adjustments at present.  The presence of LSAPs is one such factor, but I don’t think it’s unique or special.  Finally, everybody around the table probably has their own view about whether the use of LSAPs so far has completely offset any effects of the zero lower bound.  Indeed, if we were all confident on this, I think we would have a simpler time around the table—our discussion might be quite different if we could just condition on the past use of LSAPs as being such that the effective lower bound has no implication.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is mainly discussing different perspectives and considerations regarding fiscal and monetary policy.


Passage number 42.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. What I would add to that goes back to the forecast targeting point that Jon was making in his presentation, and it links up to the consensus forecast discussion that you will have later in the meeting. One way to look at the issue is to say, “What does the Committee think is the most likely outcome for real activity and inflation going forward and how does that link up to the dual mandate.”  Suppose the Committee looks at the projected paths for, say, the unemployment rate and inflation conditional on what was in the statement last time, and determines, “Yes, that is consistent with the dual mandate.” Let’s say it’s balanced. Let’s say inflation was a little bit above 2 percent and unemployment was coming down to 5½ percent or July 31–something, which is the midpoint of the Committee’s longer-run normal range.  Then you might say, “Okay, that’s balanced; that’s fine; that’s an okay strategy.” If it wasn’t showing that, if it was showing inflation running persistently below 2 percent, and unemployment staying persistently above, then you might say, “Okay, that’s grounds right there for further policy action.”  Now, of course, the other complication with this approach is that when you are dealing with LSAPs or the MEP or whatever, you have to ask yourself how effective they are going to be and if there are costs associated with them.  There is a second cost-benefit analysis that you would have to do because it is an unusual tool.  But stepping back from that, I would first look, conditional on some policy, at the expected outcomes for real activity and inflation.  And then I’d ask, is that outlook consistent with the dual mandate.  Is that outlook satisfactory.  And if it isn’t satisfactory, do more.  Then the question becomes, do I have a tool with which I can do more and for which the benefits from using that tool outweigh its costs.  That would be how I would answer your question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining their perspective on how to analyze the projected outcomes for real activity and inflation and determine if they are consistent with the dual mandate. They also discuss the potential need for further policy action and the considerations associated with using different tools.


Passage number 43.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. As you’ll hear over the next couple days, I’m sympathetic to what you’re saying about the forecast-based approach.  One of the reasons we do like rules is that formulating forecasts of medium-term inflationary pressures is not easy.  One of the reasons we’re using models is to try to deliver forecasts, but different models might differ on that, and rules are maybe a little more mechanical way, but we hope a more robust way, to get at that.  So I think there is more of a give-and-take between the forecast-based approach and the rules-based approach, and the take-away that I heard from you is that you’re leaving policymakers on their own in terms of how to adjust rules for LSAPs.  Is that the right take-away.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses the advantages and challenges of using a forecast-based approach versus a rules-based approach, and expresses some uncertainty about formulating accurate forecasts.


Passage number 44.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. The point we made in the memo was that there are a number of unusual circumstances going on right now.  One of them is LSAPs, and that suggests we adjust July 31–the rules in a certain direction. Others are having been stuck at the zero lower bound for a long time and thinking that maybe unconventional policy didn’t make up for it.  Another is maybe we’re looking at a lower natural interest rate, and so on.  There are all sorts of unusual circumstances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any indications of contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating various factors or circumstances that may need to be considered or taken into account.


Passage number 45.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Right.  I have a choice to face tomorrow—or not me, but the voters do—of deciding whether or not to provide more of this particular kind of action.  And the question is: Is there a way to adjust a rule to provide some guidance about whether or not to take that choice or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that there is a choice to be made and questioning whether there is a way to provide guidance for that choice.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 46.
 MR. FAUST. Here’s the answer that I think is most appropriate to that.  The whole simple rules literature attempted to distill some truths that are out there across all the models and imbed them in a rule.  That’s great. Now, if we were in a position right now to distill some truths about current circumstances that we could all agree about—did we fill the hole with past LSAPs; are labor markets functioning in a standard way.—then maybe we could have a simple rule that would be appropriate.  But in my view, we get into a bit of a stone soup situation if we say, “I really like simple rules if we just adjust for A—and then B—and then better adjust for C and D.”  And then we’ve left the simple rule behind.  And from the standpoint of the staff, there’s a problem that if you come up with an adjustment that encompasses myriad factors, the appropriate response by the policymakers who would like help could be, “I don’t believe that.  What’s in that adjustment.”  And then we’d go back to discussing A and B and C.  It’s a complex situation, and maybe we should go back to Einstein here; it’s not amenable to a simple characterization. I am particularly reticent to recommend:  “There’s this one adjustment on which we have a bit of theory and that only holds in certain models.  It’s not robust across models, but at least we have some theory that tells us what that number would be.  Let’s goJuly 31–ahead and add that one in.  We’ll leave the other adjustments vague.”  That strikes me as particularly dangerous because you might attribute a false precision to a single adjustment.  You could goad the staff into providing more information about each of these things that we’re saying one needs to adjust for.  Well that’s we are trying to do; we’re working pretty hard on that, as are your staffs. It’s a complicated topic, and we’ll report back as frequently as we have something useful to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker is expressing disagreement with the idea of making multiple adjustments to a simple rule, stating that it can lead to a "stone soup situation" where the simplicity of the rule is lost. The speaker also argues against adding a single adjustment that is not robust across models, as it can lead to attributing false precision to the adjustment.


Passage number 47.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Were there short interjections.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there are no short interjections in the passage.


Passage number 48.
 MR. FISHER.  Judging from your expression when I raised both hands, I’m going to pass.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, is stating his own observation about the expression on someone's face. There is no indication of any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 49.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Nothing personal.  I’m just looking at the time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It includes a statement followed by a lighthearted comment, but there is no clear disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 50.
 MR. FISHER.  No.  I think we want to move on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher simply states that he thinks they should move on, without any argument or contradiciton.


Passage number 51.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "President Bullard" does not provide enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage. It could refer to any president with the last name Bullard.


Passage number 52.
 MR. BULLARD.  I appreciate everything you guys are saying on this topic, and there are lots of adjustments, but it wasn’t clear to me, and maybe it’s not clear to the Committee that that means that, “You shouldn’t do an adjustment and, therefore, I’m going to report some results for some unadjusted rules.” That leaves you open to everyone saying, “Well, you know, what about these other factors.” Maybe what you’re saying is it’s just inconsistent to talk about simple rules and then talk about lots of adjustments.  But it’s not clear to me that, therefore, you should look at unadjusted results and at these graphs of unadjusted rules and what they would imply because you know that that is, in some sense, not right unless all of those adjustments are offsetting in some particular way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is seeking clarification and expressing some confusion about the topic being discussed.


Passage number 53.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. What I would say is there are a number of adjustments that we can sign, and I think that almost all of them go in the opposite direction than the LSAP  July 31–adjustment.  That’s one reason we’re so queasy about the LSAP adjustment.  And, second, we can do some back-of-the-envelope calculations on things—which we have done—such as, if the equilibrium funds rate is not 2¼ but is 1½ or 1¾, and if the previous policy shortfall is a certain amount.  I think they can easily carry you from add-factoring up to add-factoring down.  And then we get back to Jon’s philosophical point that we’re definitely not using a simple rule any longer, and we are delivering other analyses, such as optimal control, which we can do in multiple models.  But if the Committee would like, we could do other analyses; we could put out an extended set of rules with all sorts of adjustments.  I don’t know if that’s helpful or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and offering to do additional analyses if needed.


Passage number 54.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The last person on my list is President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is simply stating the order in which President Evans appears on the list. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 55.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you.  I didn’t really prepare any remarks.  I think I followed some bad advice from Governor Tarullo last time when he said we shouldn’t come and have prepared remarks. I actually have more questions than comments. It does seem like there have been a lot of references to designing “the rule,” coming up with the best, simple, robust type of rule—or at least I heard it that way—and that certainly seems overly ambitious.  I thought this was really more about showing a collection of different possibilities.  I kind of favor this eclectic approach.  I have my own view, which is I would take the best-looking model that I think captures the data and think seriously about what the optimal policy is within the context of that.  But if I want to think about robustness, I would think of this as a collection of models, which then has to be evaluated, as the memo suggests, along the lines of forecast-based targeting.  That approach seems best aligned with being responsive to our mandated goals, and I wholeheartedly support that type of advice.  Now, that does raise a question, which President Plosser was sort of getting at.  The way I heard it was—and some others might have mentioned this, too—well, what if these policy rules are overly tuned to the July 31–characteristics of FRB/US, or a particular model, and what if that model is wrong.  And that’s a very interesting and important question to ask because it could be costly.  One question I immediately asked my own staff was, “Okay.  That’s fine.  How many alternative models do we want to contemplate.”  Because it’s not obvious how many we want to look at.  To some extent it’s a little ad hoc as to how many of these models or how much dimensionality do we want in the space of different viewpoints on how the economy behaves.  We have to take a stand on that.  I read the Philadelphia memo quickly, but my staff advised me that the Philadelphia memo was pretty careful in looking at a wide variety of models that, in fact, seem to fit the data pretty well. One question that I have is: Jon, did you find different prescriptions coming out of the Philadelphia model than what I heard in your own presentation.  I would have thought that as you expanded the models, you would see many of the same conclusions, but I’d be interested in any differences.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own views and asking for clarification, but there is no opposing viewpoint presented or any argument being made.


Passage number 56.
 MR. FAUST. It was very broadly consistent. The main difference really is that we didn’t address the probability of hitting the bound under the various rules, and including that was a nice addition.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that the main difference is the inclusion of addressing the probability of hitting the bound under the various rules, which they consider to be a positive addition.


Passage number 57.
 MR. EVANS. The days when I think of myself as an econometrician make me wonder whether, if you were going to bring these other models to the table and say a little bit about how the data speak to that, you would want to use something like method of moments to weight those that are most informative about the data and down-weight others.  Otherwise, it’s just completely uniform and ad hoc: I get to throw in some bad model projections, and that can distort how this comes out. And, Jon, I suppose that must be in the kind of work that you were doing.  You would let the simulations speak to that somehow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 58.
  July 31–MR. FAUST.  But there are papers, including by Andy and John, that do various things like taking a Bayesian approach to deciding which models are good and to coming up with a rule that performs well in some general sense.  The general conclusion that some of these rules do pretty well across a bunch of models comes not only out of an ad hoc approach to running the rules in a bunch of models and looking at the results, but also from more formalized approaches to computing robust policy rules.  Now, it is true that the results are sensitive to the collection of models you start with, and that’s very important.  And the models in the Philadelphia memo were all modern DSGE models with a little FRB/US thrown in, which is a little different than the classic academic DSGE model, I guess. I carefully didn’t say across all kinds of models.  I said across conventional models, but that doesn’t span the kind of diversity that you’d like to see.  All of these models don’t create financial crises.  All of these models still have pretty rudimentary financial sectors, labor sectors, et cetera.  So the robustness results carry across, but we’d like to have a wider range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of observations and opinions without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 59.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Do you have any summary comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It only asks for summary comments, without presenting differing perspectives or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 60.
 MR. FAUST.  Well, I think it’s a simple topic, as illustrated.  [Laughter] One of the papers I just mentioned by Andy Levin and John Williams on the robustness of simple rules says in the conclusion that because of the strength of the results, it should be easy for a group of policymakers that have different views of the economy but similar views on the objectives of policy to come up with a rule they all agree on.  And I really wanted to finish up with John providing some additional perspective on that quote from his paper, which I found more and more amusing as this process went on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is sharing a quote from a paper and finds it amusing.


Passage number 61.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 62.
 WILLIAMS.  As do I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage just states that Williams shares the same opinion as the speaker, without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 63.
  [Laughter]   July 31–CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, I think one basic point here is that we are in an unusual situation not only due to the zero lower bound, but also due to structural changes and large shocks to the economy that make it unlikely that a simple rule will reliably achieve all the results you want.  Nevertheless, it is useful to look at these benchmarks, and, again, I appreciate the staff’s good work.  Thank you.  Let me turn now to item 2 and welcome Simon Potter to his new role and ask him to present the report on financial market developments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 64.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Just quickly, on table 19, are those shares of total Treasury issuance or Treasury issuance with certain maturities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple request for clarification and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 65.
 MR. POTTER.  This is going to be in the 3-to-30-year sector.  Is that right, Lorie.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Potter is simply seeking confirmation regarding the length of something.


Passage number 66.
 MS. LOGAN.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states that Ms. Logan agrees or affirms something.


Passage number 67.
 MR. POTTER.  It’s in the 3-to-30-year sector.  So we’re excluding, remember, the 0-to-3-year sector where there’s a large amount of issuance of the next few years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the sector they are discussing.


Passage number 68.
 MR. FISHER.  But you had a footnote to that.  Excuse me, Mr. Chairman. You said at the end of your comment on 19, “We would end up owning 54 percent”—could you repeat that, please.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a request for clarification.


Passage number 69.
 MR. POTTER. That would be 54 percent of outstanding Treasury securities between 3 and 30 years.  That would include continuing with the maturity extension program, which, remember, is buying long-term securities as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement or fact about the percentage of outstanding Treasury securities.


Passage number 70.
 MR. FISHER.  And you gave a figure for MBS as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 


Passage number 71.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The word "yes" indicates that there is contention or disagreement in the passage. However, without the actual passage provided, it is not possible to determine the exact nature or context of the disagreement.


Passage number 72.
  That was— MS. LOGAN.  Forty percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a numerical percentage without any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 73.
 MR. FISHER.  Of outstanding MBS.  Thank you very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a polite statement expressing gratitude.


Passage number 74.
 MR. POTTER. Just to be clear, that’s a capacity including some of the things that would be hard to readily purchase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact or clarification.


Passage number 75.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher is expressing gratitude or thanking someone.


Passage number 76.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not provide any information or context regarding any questions or potential disagreement between individuals, so it cannot be determined if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 77.
 July 31–MR. LACKER.  How does the $100 billion average gross issuance pace compare with the recent past, and how much of that represents the Treasury’s avowed interest in extending the maturity of their issuance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It is a factual question and does not involve conflicting opinions or perspectives.


Passage number 78.
 MR. POTTER.  We’ve assumed that the issuance pattern stays constant going forward.  That’s a conditioning assumption we’ve been making for some time.  That’s been a good assumption so far.  It could obviously change going forward.  And if they decided to issue more in the 3-to-30-year sector, that would give us more purchasable capacity then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 79.
 MR. LACKER.  My recollection is that Treasury has announced an intention to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states Mr. Lacker's recollection about Treasury's intention, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 80.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes, but slowly over time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Potter simply agrees but mentions that the process happens gradually.


Passage number 81.
 MR. LACKER.  Slowly over time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The given passage does not mention any conflicting opinions or viewpoints. It simply suggests that something is happening gradually.


Passage number 82.
 MR. POTTER. The standard answer we’ve given—this question’s come up a lot—is this is a deviation relative to what’s already priced in that market participants expect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 83.
 MR. LACKER.  What’s a deviation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only presents a question without providing any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements.


Passage number 84.
 MR. POTTER.  Any kind of LSAP purchase that we would do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not show any sign of contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the potential action of doing an LSAP purchase without expressing any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 85.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Treasury is not adjusting to what we do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the Treasury is not adjusting to something without indicating any conflicting perspectives or arguments.


Passage number 86.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes.  It’s not adjusting to us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The speaker simply states that "It's not adjusting to us," without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 87.
 MR. LACKER.  No, I’m just wondering to what extent that average gross issuance reflects Treasury extending it.  So you’re saying it’s not.  It’s just a current pace.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification and asking for further explanation.


Passage number 88.
 MR. POTTER. Is that right, Seth.  It was the current pace. So there will be some slight increase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Potter, is simply stating a fact about the current pace and indicating that there will be a slight increase. There is no opposition or conflicting opinions expressed.


Passage number 89.
 MR. CARPENTER.  That’s right.  The staff forecast that is in these numbers is based on a variety of estimates based on everything that Treasury has been doing so far.  The numbers are   July 31–consistent with the Tealbook estimate that is based on historical Treasury issuance patterns and the CBO’s estimates of issuance.  The CBO is probably on the lower side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage explains the staff forecast and the basis for the numbers provided. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 90.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement present in the passage. The passage only mentions President Plosser without providing any further information or context for any potential contention or disagreement.


Passage number 91.
 MR. PLOSSER.  You mentioned that you had a new category that you asked about in the dealer survey, so-called “new tools.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a straightforward statement relaying information about a new category asked about in a dealer survey.


Passage number 92.
” MR. POTTER.  That’s correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not express any contention or disagreement as it simply acknowledges that Mr. Potter's statement is correct. It does not provide any opposing view or argument.


Passage number 93.
 MR. PLOSSER. I guess I have a two-part question maybe for you and maybe Bill English:  (a) in the dealer survey, did you allude to what new tools those might be.  You did mention in your comments that one thing might be some comparable tool to what the Bank of England instituted.  I’d like to know what was mentioned in the survey.  And (b) I’d like to know if, in fact, New York or the Board is exploring new tools, and obviously what things are under consideration.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a simple request for information.


Passage number 94.
 MR. POTTER. What we did is we took the exact phrasing in the June minutes—the exact phrasing, no words added or anything else—and then the dealers were free in the free response section to tell us a little bit what they thought the Fed might be doing, and that’s where they mentioned the Bank of England program.  I think the Chairman mentioned it in his press conference as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating what they did, with no conflicting views or opinions expressed.


Passage number 95.
 MR. PLOSSER. Is that under active consideration and study or are there other things that are being considered that would be classified as new tools.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification and information about whether the mentioned topic is being actively considered or if there are other new tools being considered as well.


Passage number 96.
 MR. ENGLISH. We have staff working on thinking about tools along the lines of the Bank of England program and other ways of potentially using the discount window to provide liquidity, to encourage lending.  That thinking is still at an early stage, but we’re certainly actively pursuing it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker's staff is reviewing the possibility of using the Bank of England program and the discount window to encourage lending.


Passage number 97.
 July 31–MR. PLOSSER.  Anything else other than the discount window-related lending.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 98.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I don’t think so.  It’s all tied into the discount window.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. English states his opinion that everything is tied into the discount window.


Passage number 99.
 MR. POTTER.  We could check if the dealers have sent us other ideas.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a suggestion to check if the dealers have sent other ideas. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 100.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage only mentions "Governor Duke" without providing any information or context about any potential contention or disagreement.


Passage number 101.
 MS. DUKE. In looking at figure 2, the Probability Distribution of First Increase in Federal Funds Target Rate, I’m curious about what rule we think the dealers are using to come up with their estimates of when we’re going to lift off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is not indicating any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker is curious about a particular topic.


Passage number 102.
 MR. POTTER.  That’s a really interesting question.  We’ve looked at the responses to this question to see if they make sense so we can convert them into a number of months until the fed funds target will be increased, and it seems to make sense, surprisingly.  This is pooled across the 20 assessments that the dealers make, and by now if you convert this into an expected time we’ll be at the zero bound, it’s the longest it’s been since we’ve been asking this question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses the results of analyzing responses to a question.


Passage number 103.
 MS. DUKE.  So do we then impute it back to some rule. I’m curious about the degree to which we think they’re being influenced by things like an expectation that Hilsensrath was right in his article or an expectation that this newsletter seems to have more insight than another, and kind of talking to each other about the rules that might apply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Duke, is expressing curiosity and asking a question about the potential influence of certain factors on the individuals mentioned. There is no indication of disagreement or contention between the speakers.


Passage number 104.
 MR. POTTER.  This survey is sent out the week before the pre-FOMC week, and we usually collect the data on the Monday of the pre-FOMC week.  So it’s usually not influenced by some of the reports that come out in the week before the FOMC meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states the schedule and timing of the survey collection and notes that it is not influenced by certain reports that come out before the FOMC meeting. There is no mention of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 105.
 MS. DUKE. Then would this imply really a significant downgrade in the forecast as they move that out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a statement or question being made by Ms. Duke regarding a potential forecast downgrade.


Passage number 106.
 MR. POTTER.  They move that forecast fairly similar to the Board staff.  So I wouldn’t say it’s a significant downgrade, but I think what they’re looking at is January, the last time that July 31–the forward guidance was changed.  Last time, the forward guidance lasted for about five months and was changed again. So they might be expecting something like that to happen.  How we separate out their interpretation of the forward guidance from what they view the economic prospects to be would be difficult to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the forecast and the potential duration of forward guidance.


Passage number 107.
 MS. DUKE. Would it be fair to say this is some guide of how they’re interpreting the relationship between the statement and the fed funds projections that are in the SEP and learning as they go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Duke is simply asking a question and seeking clarification about the interpretation of the relationship between the statement and the fed funds projections.


Passage number 108.
 MR. POTTER.  Possibly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 109.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses gratitude.


Passage number 110.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Those projections are highly correlated with the fed funds futures and other market indicators.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that "Those projections are highly correlated with the fed funds futures and other market indicators." This statement indicates agreement and correlation between the projections and the mentioned indicators.


Passage number 111.
 MR. POTTER.  That’s right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "That's right" suggests agreement or acknowledgement.


Passage number 112.
 MS. DUKE. I had two other questions.  The next one has to do with the gross issuance particularly in the MBS market. It would seem to me it’s easier to project the issuance in the Treasury market than it is in the MBS market, where I’m assuming that it will be affected by the capacity of originators, the refi programs, and then once refis are over with, just the pure purchases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement asking a question about the difficulty of projecting issuance in the MBS market.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 113.
 MR. POTTER.  I have confidence in the short run in the gross issuance in the agency MBS market being quite strong.  The memo was reasonably clear that in year two we have less confidence.  There is model error in the prepayment speed, we could affect the total that we’re buying because of the reinvestments, and the conditioning assumptions are more likely to deviate in practice from what we assume.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses confidence in the short run for gross issuance in the agency MBS market, but expresses less confidence in year two. They mention model error, reinvestments, and conditioning assumptions as factors that could affect their confidence. This suggests a lack of agreement or certainty.


Passage number 114.
 July 31–MS. DUKE.  Thanks.  And then my final question has to do with what I think I heard about the BIS when other rates went negative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply asking for clarification regarding the BIS and negative rates.


Passage number 115.
 MR. POTTER.  They were charging us minus 15 basis points.  So we withdrew that deposit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply conveys a fact about a business transaction without any conflicting perspectives or opinions.


Passage number 116.
 MS. DUKE. Interestingly, what I’ve heard about that is the reason they charged the negative rates was to make sure that they didn’t get all of the money that was coming through.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. Duke is simply stating what she has heard about why negative rates were charged.


Passage number 117.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes.  That would be one of the issues with the cut in the deposit rate that the ECB did.  For some investors, it’s hard to access accounts that are showing zero rates rather than negative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the potential issue some investors may have with accessing accounts that show zero rates instead of negative rates.


Passage number 118.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 119.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage provided, "President Fisher," does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It is simply a title or label without any context or accompanying statements.


Passage number 120.
 MR. FISHER.  Well, Governor Duke touched on something I was going to ask about, throwing out a phrase “new tools” without definition—but you have some examples.  We were referred to the discount window.  The Bank of England (BOE) has its Funding for Lending.  Even though there are vast legal differences and vast differences between the Treasury and the Exchequer and the relationship between the BOE and the central bank, it does make me wonder about the value of the probability of additional policy action when they don’t even define what new tools are.  It’s just a buzz word, and at least it leads me to question its value.  The other tools that we have are well known, and there’s a drift to what we do and an understanding, but that’s my comment. The question I have—and this is just something maybe for you to look at, Simon, or someone on your staff—relates to the equity markets.  As I look at the numbers, we’ve seen significant sales in domestic equity mutual funds. I’m trying to get my arms wrapped around theJuly 31–effect this has on savers and on the wealth function.  My sense is that trading is increasingly concentrated in lesser hands or being distributed to a lesser population base, but I’m not sure.  One has to look at the ETF market, for example.  How much is used for institutional purposes in hedging and are some substitutions taking effect between ETFs for the average citizen or the normal mutual fund holder.  Not now, but I wonder if you could give us a little briefing on that at some point, unless you wish to give it to us now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing his curiosity and questioning the value and definition of "new tools" in financial policy. He also raises a question about the equity markets and trading concentration, but there is no disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 121.
 MR. POTTER.  I know very little about it right now that would allow me to tell you anything about it, but we can look into it.  It might be quite difficult to be able to give you a satisfactory answer when the question has something to do with flows and who the ultimate investor actually might be, but we can characterize some parts of it, and there might be something interesting there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Potter acknowledges that he has limited knowledge about the topic but offers to look into it and provide some characterization.


Passage number 122.
 MR. FISHER.  I’m interested just because it helps shape my understanding of what the wealth effect is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, mentions his interest in understanding the wealth effect, indicating a willingness to learn and gain knowledge rather than engage in a debate or argument.


Passage number 123.
 MR. POTTER.  Completely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply states a name. There is no mention of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 124.
 MR. FISHER.  I’d be grateful.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fisher expresses gratitude and thanks in response to something.


Passage number 125.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement just mentions the title and name of a person without presenting any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 126.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, Mr. Chairman. A couple of quick questions about table 19.  I should know this, but what fraction of the 3-to 30-year maturity structure do we currently own.  So we’re going to go to 54 percent at the end of two years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of a speaker asking a question and requesting information.


Passage number 127.
 MR. POTTER.  Let me check.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Potter is simply stating that he wants to check something.


Passage number 128.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think I recall Brian saying it was 35; is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not reflect any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply seeking confirmation about a previous statement made by Brian.


Passage number 129.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes, it looks like that, but we’ve got it broken out by different sectors.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement from Mr. Potter, providing information about how something is broken out by different sectors. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 130.
July 31–MS. LOGAN.  It’s about 35 percent, and the 10-to 20-year sector is projected to go to 41 percent and 20-to-30-year to 36 percent by the end of the month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is stating projected percentages for different sectors without any conflicting information or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 131.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you.  And my next question/comment is that it would be useful to tell us something about how this hypothetical LSAP program would translate into projections for income for the Federal Reserve.  I didn’t see that in the memo that you circulated, but that would be interesting to think through.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses a request for further information.


Passage number 132.
 MR. POTTER. I think that most people around this table should be able to work it out a little bit.  Income will go up in the short run from a large LSAP and then will go down because we have to pay interest on a much larger amount of reserves.  And then the fine details of it are that if you went for the whole $2.5 trillion, it’s likely that that would produce a deferred asset toward the end.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Potter, presenting his perspective and analysis on the potential effects of a large LSAP (large-scale asset purchase) on income. There is no opposition or contradiction mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 133.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, I think, at least for me, it would be useful to have those kinds of quantitative details more fleshed out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses their personal opinion that having more specific quantitative details would be useful.


Passage number 134.
 MR. POTTER.  We can provide them for you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Potter is simply offering to provide something without any opposition or contradiction.


Passage number 135.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Have we done those.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question asking if a task has been completed or not.


Passage number 136.
 MR. POTTER.  We’ve done it for alternative A in the Tealbook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply describes a task that has been completed.


Passage number 137.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I had staff look into that for alternative A in the Tealbook, and the remittances to the Treasury are higher in the near term, as was said, and then decline, and trough at a little under $10 billion.  So the trough is lower than in the case without the LSAP, but still at a positive value.  Clearly, the cumulative amount increases some.  The larger the LSAP you take on, the closer you come to ultimately getting to zero remittances, and we’ll aim to provide more information on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating facts and discussing the potential effects of different options.


Passage number 138.
July 31–MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, I think knowing something about the risks of that would be not necessarily to argue that’s determinative in any way, but I think it’s a useful piece of information.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that knowing the risks is not necessarily determinative but considers it useful information.


Passage number 139.
 MR. ENGLISH. I agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that Mr. English agrees, indicating that there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 140.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude by saying "thanks," indicating a positive sentiment.


Passage number 141.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 142.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Mr. Chairman, it would also be helpful to have that information under different interest rate scenarios because obviously you’re making some assumption about where longer-term rates are going to be, especially in those out-years.  So it would be helpful to have some different interest rates scenarios.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In this passage, Ms. Pianalto expresses the need for information under different interest rate scenarios and questions the assumptions being made about longer-term rates. This indicates a disagreement or contention regarding the current assumptions about interest rates.


Passage number 143.
 MR. POTTER.  We are ready to do that, and we will present a full range there, both, I think, higher interest rates and lower interest rates in the sense that if we had a program that lasted for two years, that might be consistent with lower rates for longer, and we should look at that particular scenario as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting considering both higher and lower interest rates as part of a potential two-year program.


Passage number 144.
 MR. FISHER.  The income and price components as well, the capital loss.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The mention of income, price components, and capital loss does not indicate any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 145.
 MR. POTTER.  That is in the standard program that we produce, and so that would be if we marked the portfolio to market.  The footnote would be another place showing the fair value.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the standard program they produce includes marking the portfolio to market, and the footnote would indicate the fair value.


Passage number 146.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions.  [No response]  I need a motion to ratify domestic open market operations since June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Any other questions" is simply asking if there are any further inquiries, and the lack of response implies there are none. The following statement about needing a motion to ratify domestic open market operations is a separate request and does not involve any disagreement.


Passage number 147.
 MS. YELLEN.  So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "So moved" is a common expression used to indicate agreement with a statement or action.


Passage number 148.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Without objection.  Okay.  Thank you.  I understand coffee is ready.  We could come back at 3:20.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statements are polite and show agreement and understanding.


Passage number 149.
 [Coffee break]   July 31–CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Why don’t we recommence.  You have a number of handouts.  I’ll ask Bill English to describe what you have in front of you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 150.
 MR. ENGLISH.  We distributed four handouts during the break.  You should have one that says “Forecast Summary.”  You should have one that says “Consensus Forecast Exercise.”  You should have a single page of charts, and one that has a Class I FOMC cover on it.  That last one is some slightly revised versions of the policy alternatives that I wanted you to have for your reference. We have very small changes to paragraphs 1 and 2 in alternatives A and B, just to catch up with the BEA’s release on Friday.  So I wanted you to have those, and I’ll be working from this version in my remarks tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information about the handouts that were distributed during the break.


Passage number 151.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you very much. We are now at item 3, the economic situation, and I’ll turn to David Wilcox.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply thanking someone and transitioning to the next topic.


Passage number 152.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Questions.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists of three separate statements without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 153.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I have a question on food prices.  Can you give us some sense of magnitude of the increase.  And related to that, how does ethanol fit into this. If corn  July 31–prices go up, does ethanol get priced out of the market, and so more corn actually gets used for consumption for food.  I’m just trying to understand how this works if prices keep going up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for information and seeking clarification on the relationship between food prices and ethanol production.


Passage number 154.
 MR. KAMIN. Referring to your first question on the magnitude of food prices, at least one aggregate—the Commodity Research Bureau (CRB) aggregate of daily food prices—has gone up roughly 20 percent from early June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply provides information about the increase in food prices. There is no contention or disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 155.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I am trying to think about it more in terms of the dollar magnitude of the shock.  For example, think about it as we do oil prices where it’s a little bit over $1 billion per penny on gasoline prices.  So if corn prices double, what does that really mean for disposable income.  I’m just trying to get a sense of whether it is a big shock or a little shock, with an automatic equilibrating mechanism like ethanol production just evaporates because you can’t sell ethanol at really high corn prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply trying to think about the potential impact of corn prices doubling and is considering it in terms of the dollar magnitude of the shock and the potential effects on disposable income.


Passage number 156.
 MR. WILCOX.  I don’t know the answer in terms of dollar magnitudes.  What I do know is that we had much bigger run-ups in grain prices in 2010 and in 2008.  Although the level of grain prices now is higher than it was then, the jump from the level when the drought began to emerge to now is, at this point, smaller.  We are calibrating our projection off futures prices, so we are taking our judgment from those who are placing real bets on this.  We are also monitoring crop yield estimates from the USDA. The pass-through is pretty limited because in retail food prices the commodity share is a reasonably small part.  And the other thing that is important to keep in mind is that the pass-through occurs over a fairly lengthy period of time.  So this is not like crude oil prices getting into gasoline, which happens pretty quickly.  We think that the effect is going to show up in retail food prices toward the end of this year and in the early part of next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and explaining their reasoning without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 157.
 July 31–VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Does farm income go up, or does farm income come down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply a question asking whether farm income increases or decreases. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 158.
 MR. WILCOX.  We think that farm income is going to go up.  The elasticity of demand we think is less than one.  So prices are, we think, going to go up by more than quantities go down.  Those farmers who still have a crop to sell are going to do well, and, in the aggregate, the farm sector is going to have a positive boost to income.  We have raised our food price projection by just a few tenths this year, and by about 1 percentage point over the four quarters of next year, in response to these developments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 159.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So this is a pretty modest shock at this point in time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a straightforward observation without any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 160.
 MR. WILCOX.  As hard as it is for, obviously, millions of farming families in the middle of the country, at the aggregate level for retail food prices, at this point—with a lot of uncertainty still surrounding what the outcome will be—this is a reasonably modest development.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement about the impact of the current situation on retail food prices, acknowledging the difficulties faced by farming families while describing the development as reasonably modest.


Passage number 161.
 MR. KAMIN.  To echo David’s point, in terms of the effect on the foreign economies, again, what we have seen so far has not been enough to meaningfully lead us to nudge up our inflation forecast, nor have we translated that into strong implications for income abroad at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating that the current effects on foreign economies have not been significant enough to change their inflation forecast or have strong implications for income abroad.


Passage number 162.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage merely mentions President Lockhart, without providing any context or information that suggests contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 163.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  A question for David Wilcox.  If I understand your discussion of the fiscal cliff, you assume it will be avoided in the baseline, but you treat it as a risk to the baseline.  Are you picking up any indications that it is already here. That is to say, in terms of employment, investment, contract renewal, or procurement, have you seen any indications that there is a discounting of the possibility of it that is already affecting behavior in advance of the deadline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The question asked by Mr. Lockhart suggests that there may be some indication or evidence of the fiscal cliff already impacting behavior, while David Wilcox's assumption is that it will be avoided in the baseline. This indicates a difference of opinion or uncertainty regarding the potential impact of the fiscal cliff.


Passage number 164.
 July 31–MR. WILCOX.  We haven’t allowed for any of that. It might become increasingly difficult to maintain that assumption.  For example, I would note that this morning’s Washington Post ran a first-page article about the WARN Act indicating that there is a lot of controversy about whether employers will be required to send out notifications, I think it is 60 days in advance.  At the moment, we haven’t allowed for any sort of discounting back to now.  We have maintained the assumption that nothing is going to happen in advance of the election, and that producers and households will have that same assumption for the moment.  It is going to be something that we will have to evaluate on an ongoing basis. Let me just be really clear about what we assume in the baseline and what is in the fiscal cliff scenario.  We have a big step up in fiscal contraction, even in the baseline, because we have the 2 percentage point temporary payroll tax cut expiring, as under current law.  And we have the emergency unemployment compensation program expiring at the end of the year, as under current law. That’s quite a bit of current-law contraction going into force.  In addition, we have the automatic sequestration being replaced by an equivalent set of federal spending cuts that accrue over the period between now and, I think, 2022.  That represents a less abrupt restraint on aggregate demand on New Year’s Eve at the end of this year than would occur under sequestration, but there is quite a bit of spending reduction built into our baseline.  The most prominent pieces that are incremental to the spending reduction are the 2001 and 2003 tax cuts, which are scheduled to expire, and in our baseline projection we have assumed that those are extended.  To happen, that extension requires affirmative legislative action.  So if the Congress does nothing, those tax cuts expire.  There are a number of other pieces of fiscal restraint that occur, too, but the expiration of the tax cuts is the biggest single piece that will go into effect in the cliff scenario that isn’t already incorporated in our baseline assumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily provides information about the assumption being made in the baseline projection and the potential impact of certain laws and policies.


Passage number 165.
 July 31–CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is insufficient context or information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 166.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  A question for David.  And your forecast summary chart might be useful, if anybody has a follow-up question.  I thought you included some nice tables in the Tealbook this time on probabilities of particular events and risks that we could face.  A particular tabulation that I thought was very interesting was your calculation of the probability that inflation would exceed 3 percent.  That is pretty low in terms of risk, in the 5 to 10 percent range. I’ve got a different tabulation that I’m interested in, though, and it is related to looking at the constrained optimal control path—and Jon Faust’s discussion had it in his charts— where you could see that inflation tops out at about 2.3 percent.  And it is just convenient that that actually seems to be what your PCE prices forecast chart has as its upper bound.  Inflation is stochastic, it is not fully controllable, and yet I have trouble thinking about it and fully embracing what that really means. But it seems clear from this chart and your tables that the standard deviation of the inflation forecast is about 1 percentage point, which means that 2.3 percent is just about the top of this range of a 70 percent interval.  When we have an inflation objective of 2 percent, how likely is it that we would be able to avoid inflation above 2.3 percent. It is really not very well controlled, and we should expect to visit periods above 2.3 percent more often than we might really take on board.  When I look at the optimal control path and see 2.3 percent, I say, well, that has got a lot of perfect foresight embedded in it and it abstracts from uncertainty.  But that outcome is not that unlikely in a general distribution of inflation outcomes.  Or another way to think about this is if you wanted to mean adjust this process so that 2.3 percent really was at the top of a 70 percent interval, it would be a lot like the inflation projection that you have here. It would be more like targeting 1½ percent. Is that a reasonable way to think through some of those issues or tensions.  Any thoughts you have there would be welcome.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 167.
   July 31–MR. WILCOX.  I don’t have a lot to add to your observations.  The one important point that I would make is that the staff projection is constructed against a backdrop in which we need a mechanical assumption for monetary policy.  So we construct that using the estimated outcome-based rule.  And I think that is the central explanation for why, at least over the period that is shown here, our inflation projection is a little lower than is the case under the constrained optimal control simulation. I should note that there is no particular virtue in that specific rule, and my position has always been that if the Committee gave us some indication of an alternative rule that would better capture the center of gravity of the Committee’s thinking, we would be very happy to adopt that rule.  We could array for you exactly the same view about the fundamental underlying economic forces driving the macroeconomy using a different policy assumption, and we would show different projections.  These are conditional forecasts based on a particular specification of a rule to which I feel no special affinity or fidelity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the staff projection and expressing a willingness to adopt an alternative rule if suggested by the Committee.


Passage number 168.
 MR. EVANS.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage provided does not give any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude or thanks from Mr. Evans.


Passage number 169.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without further context. The mention of President Fisher alone does not provide enough information to make a conclusion.


Passage number 170.
 MR. FISHER.  Just to Vice Chairman Dudley’s question, I think food at home is about 7½ percent of PCE and about 8.6 percent of CPI.  And then, if you add food away from home, that’s another 5 percent, which is highly attenuated, as pointed out earlier, and takes a long way to work its way into the system. But what my private contacts are telling me is that, as you pointed out, rationing has not yet occurred; it is still not as extreme as it was before.  Should rationing begin to occur, you might have another 15 percent movement in prices.  The price movement has been very sharp, but, Vice Chairman Dudley, as far as the inflation impact—if that was your question—it is a lesser weight in the system.July 31–And on the energy side, I just wanted to point out to Steve Kamin that, for what it’s worth, my industry contacts aren’t as worried about the specific issue that you mentioned.  The issue they are more focused on has been the building of inventories.  We have about 1.6 billion barrels worldwide, according to the best estimates.  By the way, the best and only estimates you can really get come from the Exxon Intelligence Unit.  That is above the 1.1 billion barrels we had at the end of 2011.  The Chinese have been building their strategic reserve.  They are aiming for 300 million barrels.  They have 280 million, by the best intelligence that we can get.  We are chock full of oil.  Iran has about 40 million barrels floating inventory.  So the expectation in the industry, given that we have lesser demand; Chinese demand, which has been running about 400,000 barrels a day, has been to fill their strategic reserve, offset by the decline in consumption here and in Europe, so it is kind of a wash.  And setting aside the forward yield curve and the futures curve, the expectation in the industry is very little pricing power as these inventory builds run their course.  It is less concerned about what passes through the Straits of Hormuz, which is highly paid attention to by the media.  In terms of those that are planning their cap-ex, their refinery throughput, and so on, they are really looking at where the supplies may come from.  And there is a significant amount of supply relative to demand presently.  So for what it’s worth, again, these are just pixels in a broader picture.  They come from the actors on the scene.  There is a very low expectation of significant sustainable upward price pressure on oil.  Natural gas, we didn’t talk about.  We can defer that until a later conversation, but I wanted to point that out to you for what it’s worth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply providing information and opinions from industry contacts.


Passage number 171.
 MR. KAMIN.  No.  I think it’s useful, and it is actually consistent with what the futures markets are saying; the futures market curve is downward sloping.  And so the implication is that whatever factors have pushed up oil prices recently are temporary—more likely to be some kind July 31–of idiosyncratic, transitory geopolitical risks—and that going forward the anticipation in the markets is indeed that oil prices will settle back down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their own opinion and acknowledging that it is consistent with what the futures markets are indicating.


Passage number 172.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as only the name "President Plosser" is mentioned without any additional information or context provided.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 173.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have two questions.  One, I want to follow up on President Lockhart’s question about the issue of the fiscal cliff. I thought his question— excuse me for paraphrasing—in part has to do with the fact that if the data we see today already reflect a slowing economy because people are anticipating a fiscal cliff and changing their behaviors now, then there is a question of how you would interpret the current data versus add-on effects that would come when the fiscal cliff actually occurs.  I thought his question was, how are you parsing that assessment.  Or are you assuming that the fiscal cliff is irrelevant until it actually occurs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the way Mr. Plosser's question challenges or contradicts the assumption made by President Lockhart. Mr. Plosser suggests that the data may already reflect a slowing economy due to the anticipation of the fiscal cliff, while President Lockhart seems to imply that the fiscal cliff is not relevant until it actually occurs.


Passage number 174.
 MR. WILCOX.  The latter, for the moment.  But what I had tried to indicate to President Lockhart was that we are not going to be dogmatically dug in on the view that no matter what happens we are not going to assume any sort of fiscal cliff confidence effects or anything like that, until it happens.  It is a little hard, frankly, for me to judge, given that I live inside the Beltway and am subjected to orders of magnitude more discussion about this than I think businesses around the country and, to be sure, households are; it is hard to discuss.  Setting that aside for the moment, I still think ours is the best assumption.  But it is something we are going to have to watch.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining his perspective and acknowledging the difficulty of judging the situation. They also mention that their assumption is the best one but still something they need to monitor.


Passage number 175.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I guess the point is that if you believe there was already some anticipation or preparatory behavior occurring, then you might question whether or not that is leading you to draw your fundamental forecast lower than it might otherwise have been, and it could change the way the forecast profile looks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser is simply suggesting that if there was already some anticipation or preparatory behavior occurring, it might lead to a lower fundamental forecast and potentially change the forecast profile. There is no argument or clash of opinions present.


Passage number 176.
 July 31–MR. WILCOX.  I think it’s a fair question.  If it’s there now—this is just intuition—my guess is that it is a pretty subtle effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker is simply giving their opinion or intuition about a certain subject.


Passage number 177.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Yes.  I don’t have any idea.  I just wanted to clarify the underlying assumptions that are going into this and how changes in that might affect the forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any disagreement or contention. Mr. Plosser simply expresses a need for clarification and further understanding of the assumptions and their potential impact on the forecast.


Passage number 178.
 MR. WILCOX.  We are going to be open to doing the best that we possibly can to take on board any sort of evidence.  There is an epistemological question; I just don’t know exactly how we will measure that effect going forward.  But I think it is completely fair that that is something we are going to have to be sensitive to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Wilcox is stating that they are open to considering evidence and they acknowledge the challenge of measuring the effect discussed.


Passage number 179.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Yes.  It would be very hard to do, but it’s something we should think about.  Turning to my second question, one of the things I always find interesting in the Tealbook are the alternative scenarios that get played out.  I had a particular question about one of them.  In most of them, you talk about what the implicit assumptions are underlying the different scenarios, but the European Crisis with Severe Spillovers left me a little puzzled, so I’d like a little explanation of what went into that.  You’ve got a response where GDP is off something like 5½ percentage points and the unemployment rate is going up to over 11 percent.  At the same time, we know that we are unlikely to get that much effect just from trade channels.  What I am curious about is what your thinking is on that scenario. Were the results the model per se playing out, or were there add factors that you have played in, and, through what channels did you impose the spillover effects that led to these very sharp deteriorations in that scenario.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification and more information about the European Crisis scenario in the Tealbook.


Passage number 180.
 MR. KAMIN. You are entirely right that if you just took a standard kind of model where you put in the very most proximate effects of some shock, it would not necessarily give you the amount of spillovers, which are very severe, that you see in that scenario.  There is a question, how do you even start to model something so complex and so far-reaching.  And so we, like I   July 31–think most analysts in the business that are thinking about modeling this cataclysm, take our cue—some general guidance—from what happened during Lehman Brothers and its aftermath.  That is, in some sense, our model for how a severe financial shock can reverberate through the system. In practice, first of all, what we have done is put in extremely large shocks in Europe.  These are exogenous, upward shocks to the level of credit spreads in those economies, and that gives you a large contraction in output.  We have augmented that with confidence shocks in Europe that give you a further decline in confidence there.  In addition to that, we have an upward shock to the value of the dollar or, conversely, a downward shock to the value of the euro.  Those different shocks give you a very substantial trade effect from Europe on the United States because you have the contraction in European GDP as well as the increase in the dollar. On top of that, recognizing how well linked financial markets are in the United States and Europe—and that is something we also saw during Lehman Brothers—we have augmented the trade effects with substantial, although not as great, credit spread shocks in the United States that are offset, to a small degree, by shocks that reduce U.S. Treasury yields.  Plus, I believe, we have some additional, albeit smaller, confidence shocks in the United States.  And then, the rest of the model responses are indeed endogenous.  In sum, what you get is a scenario of the types of outcomes we would expect to see if things truly went adversely in Europe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the methodology and approach to modeling a severe financial shock and its potential spillover effects.


Passage number 181.
 MR. PLOSSER. To give me an idea, when you say you increase credit spreads by a large amount, (a) give me an idea of what the number is, and (b) across all securities or over certain types of securities.   I’m just looking for a ballpark.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no visible contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Plosser is simply seeking clarification and asking for specific details regarding the increase in credit spreads.


Passage number 182.
 MR. KAMIN. Yes.  For Europe it is a 400 basis point credit shock.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a fact about a credit shock in Europe without any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 183.
 MR. PLOSSER.  To sovereigns or corporates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 184.
   July 31–MR. KAMIN.  This is actually to corporate spreads over safe German securities.  Then, the German security lowers by 100 basis points, so you get a net of 300 basis points.  And then, in the United States, it is a 200 or 300 basis point shock to corporate spreads offset by a roughly 50 basis point downward shock to the Treasury yields.  The model doesn’t have separate channels for credit spreads versus equities, but it is assumed that the same shock to interest rates that we have just been talking about also basically increases equity risk premiums and leads to a comparable reduction in equity prices commensurate with the credit spread increase, both in Europe and the United States.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining the relationship between corporate spreads over safe German securities and the impact of changes in interest rates on credit spreads and equity prices in both Europe and the United States. There is no opposing viewpoint or disagreement present.


Passage number 185.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you.  That is a good answer.  I appreciate that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that the answer given is good and expresses appreciation for it.


Passage number 186.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 187.
 MR. BULLARD.  If I could just follow up on that question.  I have often wondered about these forecast confidence intervals and alternative scenarios.  And so in that scenario, the paths all go outside the 90 percent confidence bands.  There is only 5 percent on that side I guess, so does that mean that you are assigning less than 5 percent of probability to that event.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing curiosity and seeking clarification on the probability assignment to a specific event.


Passage number 188.
 MR. KAMIN.  David can correct me, but I would interpret that as meaning this is an extraordinary event that is well outside the typical stochastic bounds that we have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a possible interpretation of a statement.


Passage number 189.
 MR. BULLARD.  Well, just looking at the picture. It is actually so far outside that it would be at the 99.9 percentile, so it would be way outside.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing an observation and assessment based on the picture.


Passage number 190.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  The seemingly normal distribution.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating the observation that the distribution in question appears to be normal.


Passage number 191.
 MR. WILCOX.  I think that if you took our forecast track record literally, that interpretation would be correct.  I would also say that one of the things that we learned in 2007, 2008, and 2009 was that sometimes our imagination is not sufficiently rich to encompass  July 31–everything that can happen, and that these confidence intervals, which are generated over what period, the last 20, 25, 30 years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about the forecast track record and the limitations of imagination in predicting events.


Passage number 192.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. These are taking shocks from the 1968 to 2011 period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no mention of any disagreement or contention in the passage. It is a straightforward statement of information about the shocks being discussed.


Passage number 193.
 MR. WILCOX.  Okay.  I’d say that a lot of bad stuff happened over that period, but I’m not sure that the kind of cataclysm that’s involved here with the European crisis with severe spillovers is really well captured in the error track record.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and indicating that the severity of the European crisis may not be accurately represented in the error track record.


Passage number 194.
 MR. BULLARD.  I would summarize that as saying that a large part of the confidence intervals are constructed from the period of the Great Moderation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is summarizing a statement and reflecting on the period of the Great Moderation.


Passage number 195.
 MR. WILCOX.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 196.
 MR. BULLARD.  And, therefore, they’re going to look a little constricted compared with maybe the true amount of uncertainty that might be sitting there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The statement suggests that there may be a discrepancy between how much uncertainty is actually present and how much is perceived or acknowledged.


Passage number 197.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Actually I’d put it slightly differently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement by Mr. Reifschneider offering his perspective on something.


Passage number 198.
  Not to keep citing work that I’ve done with John, but a paper that we did— MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention between the speaker and John. It simply states that they have collaborated on a paper.


Passage number 199.
 WILLIAMS.  That’s okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 200.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  You’ll like it, yes.  This is a paper we did about a year or so ago in which we took six different models—two DSGE models, FRB/US, and three statistical models—and found that the episode that we are still in, but started in 2008, is way outside the probability bands that you’d get from a whole set of representative models.  And our conclusion from that was that the standard models that the whole profession has been using just underestimate the probability of extreme tail events.  Either that or we’re unbelievably unlucky, take your pick.  Well you can be both.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is presenting their findings and offering two possible explanations without any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 201.
  [Laughter] MR. LACKER.  Yes, in both cases we’re unlucky.  We’re unlucky to have the bad model.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with the statement and adds that they are unlucky to have a bad model in both cases.


Passage number 202.
 July 31–MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. The way I would put it is the confidence intervals that are in the Tealbook are very wide, but when you take into account some of these infrequent but really devastating, rare events, they’re probably too narrow.  It also comes back to the point that the Committee makes in part of its SEP assessment of risk of saying that risks are elevated.  Also, as I think Simon can say, it is what we do with the stress test and things like that. There’s a strong effort to try to get across the idea that risks are more elevated now than under ordinary circumstances.  That might be indicated by those sorts of error bands.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the idea that the confidence intervals in the Tealbook are too narrow when it comes to considering rare and devastating events. They also agree with the Committee's assessment that risks are elevated and efforts to convey that idea.


Passage number 203.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  Sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: , without the actual passage or context provided, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Please provide more information.


Passage number 204.
 MR. POTTER.  So the LSAP with greater duration is a little bit light in 3-to 6-year purchases.  It’s going to replicate the MEP in terms of the amount of duration it takes out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the LSAP with greater duration.


Passage number 205.
 MR. FISHER.  Sorry. It’s a little light.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. Mr. Fisher is simply stating that it is too bright.


Passage number 206.
 MR. POTTER. It’s a little bit light in the 3-to 6-year range.  It won’t be like LSAP2.  Is that right, Bill.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. Mr. Potter simply makes a statement and asks for confirmation from Bill.


Passage number 207.
 MR. ENGLISH. I believe that it is longer. The MEP buys in 6-to-30, but then there’s an adjustment because of the sales.  But it’s aiming to be similar in terms of duration removed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It presents a statement about the duration of something without presenting any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 208.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I apologize.  So the greater-duration program is like the MEP basically in maturity of purchases.  The shorter one is like LSAP2; it’s spread broadly across the entire range. I’d be happy to take any questions on this.  Let me just suggest a few things.  First, if you want to make reference to any of this in your go-round, of course, feel free but it’s obviously not required.  Tomorrow we’ll have a fuller discussion of this forecast process, in which we’ll do two things.  One is I’ll ask you, as we would in a real application of this, whether you are comfortable being described by this consensus forecast.  That would be part of   July 31–the discussion we would have if we were to use it.  The concerns or objections of those who are not comfortable would have to be described in the minutes or in the press conference.  And then the second thing we’ll do tomorrow is just have a general discussion of whether we want to continue the experiment, how we might change it, and so on.  But let me now take any questions just about the construction of this.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is purely informational and does not present any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 209.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  You may choose to defer this question until tomorrow, but my understanding from what you just said is, in steady state, the goal would be to have this consensus forecast be conditional on whatever policy choice has been made by the Committee in the given meeting, is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is simply restating the understanding of the speaker. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 210.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, at least within a reasonable range of the forecast made by the Committee.  That’s how you would explain what you anticipate happening, given the policy choices that you’ve made.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply suggests that there may be some variation in the outcome, but it is within a reasonable range of the forecast made by the Committee.


Passage number 211.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Okay.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 212.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any others.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage "Any others. President Lacker." This phrase does not provide enough information to suggest any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 213.
 MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman, I apologize.  I didn’t quite understand what you said about the extent to which the policy parts of people’s submissions are reflected in the weighting that you used in combining these.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker is simply apologizing for not fully understanding the Chairman's previous statement and requesting clarification.


Passage number 214.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Again, this was a one-time thing where we’re starting up using the SEP.  In the future we’ll start with whatever consensus forecast has already been developed.  But the question is the following:  Suppose, for the sake of argument, that there are N people who agree on the consensus policy path, and that they have a certain expectation about economic growth, inflation, and so on.  Now imagine someone who does not agree with that path and has a very different outlook for the economy conditional on their own view of appropriate  July 31–monetary policy.  It wouldn’t be appropriate to average that person’s outlook with the middle of the Committee because that person basically dissents from the whole forecast, but it’s academic because in practice it didn’t make any difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses a hypothetical scenario and acknowledges that it did not have any practical impact.


Passage number 215.
 MR. LACKER.  No, I understand.  But, I interpret what we say about the policy path as a forecast of our future policy setting, not as an assumption that we will hold to.  In other words, we’re not restricting it. I’m not restricting my forecast of GDP by assuming that all the shocks come out in a way that the policy equals one path.  I’m just giving an unconditional forecast of GDP and an unconditional forecast of policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker is simply clarifying his interpretation of the policy path and how it relates to his forecasts.


Passage number 216.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. But you’re not giving an unconditional forecast because you’re using your own view of appropriate monetary policy and that may differ from your own personal forecast of what the Committee will do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is acknowledging that the forecast is not unconditional because it is based on their own view of appropriate monetary policy, which may differ from the Committee's decisions. This statement is simply clarifying the methodology used in making the forecast.


Passage number 217.
 MR. LACKER. But I’m also using my own model.  Everyone is using their own model.  So everyone has their own equations in their head, and they’re forecasting a lot of variables.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact about economists using their own models and equations for forecasting variables. There is no indication of any conflicting opinions or disagreement among economists.


Passage number 218.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 219.
 MR. LACKER.  Setting aside policy, you wouldn’t throw out someone’s GDP forecast because they differed on core inflation, would you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MR. LACKER is asking a hypothetical question about the methodology of GDP forecasting, specifically about whether someone's forecast should be disregarded solely based on a difference in their prediction for core inflation.


Passage number 220.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Again, it’s a question of what policy you’re assuming.  There are two possible ways to do this.  One is to assume appropriate monetary policy.  If your view of appropriate monetary policy differs radically from the center of the Committee, then you will not agree with the forecast of the center of the Committee.  Another way to do this, which we might consider, would be instead to say, “Here are two or three different possible policy paths or policy rules.  What do you think will happen in each case.”  That’s a different way to do it, but given what I had, which was the appropriate monetary policy assumption, what you wrote   July 31–down for appropriate monetary policy presumably was not your best unbiased forecast of what will actually happen, or maybe it was, but it’s not the same issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining different ways to approach making forecasts based on different policy assumptions, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 221.
 MR. PLOSSER. Excuse me, Mr. Chairman.  Your exhibit 3 was an effort in part to sort of replicate what you might get if you came back to the Committee and said, “Okay.  Here are three scenarios of policy actions.  Give me back your forecast of GDP and inflation under the condition of those assumptions of policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 222.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, I think these pictures here basically accept the consensus forecast and show deviations from that forecast. It would be a different exercise by asking each person around the table, “Here are three or four different policies.  What do you think that would lead to.”  You wouldn’t get the same results.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining a different approach to forecasting and acknowledging that different policies may lead to different outcomes.


Passage number 223.
 MR. BULLARD.  Mr. Chairman, what would be released to the public. Is it table 1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 224.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We’re now getting into material we can discuss tomorrow, but I assume that what would be released would be only the forecast associated with the policy decision that the Committee actually took at the meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their assumption about what information would be released.


Passage number 225.
 MR. BULLARD.  And what about these fan charts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the topic of fan charts without expressing any opposing opinions or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 226.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  And the fan charts, yes.  The fan charts alone are worth quite a bit, in my opinion; they are good to have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses a positive opinion about the fan charts and states that they are "good to have."


Passage number 227.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  So the basic vision is that two things would go out.  There would be a table, and there would be some fan charts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply describes the basic vision of having a table and fan charts.


Passage number 228.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You would get the first lines of table 1, and you would get the fan charts in exhibit 1, and that would be it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states what information or data would be obtained without any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 229.
 MR. FISHER.  You wouldn’t send out exhibit 3 or exhibit 2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher is simply making a statement or inquiry about not sending out exhibit 3 or exhibit 2.


Passage number 230.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The passage is not presenting any contradictory information or opinions that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 231.
 July 31–MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple statement of gratitude.


Passage number 232.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Not unless the Committee actually chose one of those alternative policies.  Any other questions. [No response]  Again, tomorrow we will have a fuller discussion of this and how we will proceed.  We’re ready for our economic go-round, and I’ll start with Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any statements that indicate contention or disagreement. It is providing information and making plans for a future discussion.


Passage number 233.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As everybody knows, I’ve been an advocate of relying less on prepared remarks and more on fomenting a conversation in these meetings, and as you can tell from the discussion of rules earlier today, I’ve been fabulously successful in getting everybody to come around to that view.  Nonetheless, I thought that I should adhere to my own injunction.  So I figured the only way I could get away with using prepared remarks was to go first, and that’s what I’m going to do.  Specifically, though, I would like to try, probably quixotically, to frame at least some of the conversation for the rest of the afternoon by identifying very briefly five propositions about which I’m relatively certain and where I hope there would be wide agreement among the Committee, and then by posing four questions on which I’m a good deal less certain, but the answers to which I think would significantly inform policy decisions, in some cases sooner and others perhaps not until later.  My dual aim here is to see if we can establish at least a workable baseline for what most of us agree on and to help focus our collective attention and discussion on matters where there is significant disagreement and/or uncertainty. First, the four propositions, and I’ll preface them by saying they’re not particularly profound, but I think they’re still significant and would be an important starting point for thinking about policy were they to be widely agreed on.  First, the economy is bogged down.  It’s unable to develop enough self-generated momentum to attain sustained, above-trend economicJuly 31–growth consistent with recovery from the deep recession that technically ended more than two years ago. The occasional bursts of upbeat news during this period have likely been the temporary byproduct of maximum effects of monetary and fiscal stimulus or idiosyncratic factors, such as Okun’s law payback, rather than the beginnings of sustained, strong recoveries.  Second, notwithstanding this last point, the recovery has been further hindered by confidence and uncertainty effects from a number of additional factors, notably the European travails and more recently fiscal tightening, with the low but not zero possibility of fiscal strangulation looming toward the end of this year.  Third, the downside risks are substantially weightier than upside risks for the next several quarters.  The indications of improvement on important fronts such as housing prices and household deleveraging are in some cases still more in the nature of improvement in second derivatives.  Even where absolute improvement is detectable, it is both modest and not consistently distributed.  Factors such as the shadow inventory overhang of houses taken off the market until prices firm and the 13 million homeowners who still have underwater mortgages make it hard to tell a story of rapid pickup any time soon.  At the same time, the potential for serious adverse effects from Europe remains, well beyond the existing drag that the ongoing crisis may have placed on business confidence and expansion.  Fourth, these first three propositions combine to make the economy unusually vulnerable to external or political shocks, whether from the known unknowns such as the euro zone and the fiscal cliff or unknown unknowns.  And fifth and finally, as I already suggested but I think it’s worth stating more explicitly, a few good data points over the next seven weeks would not materially alter the significance of the first four propositions. Now for the questions I think are important for economic, including monetary, policy decisionmaking over the next year or two and on which I am somewhere between moderately   July 31–and very uncertain.  First, is a significant recovery in the residential housing market necessary and/or sufficient for a stronger general economic recovery.  Or putting the question in a slightly weaker form, are policies directed at accelerating improvement in housing the most effective use of limited resources available for recovery efforts. I’ve been struck by the amount of recent academic work that focuses on the particular effect of the collapse of the housing market— whether work from a macroeconomic perspective in qualifying the Rogoff–Reinhart hypothesis on the severity of the recession and slowness of recovery, as in the Bordo–Haubrich paper that builds on other studies, or from a microeconomic perspective in finding that homeowners with high levels of housing debt may reduce consumption even more than standard wealth effects would predict, as in Karen Dynan’s recent paper.  All of this has reinforced my sense that the failure to develop a comprehensive set of policies on housing and mortgages in 2009 and 2010 was, indeed, the policy error asserted by many at the time.  But I’m less certain whether, given all that has happened since, both in the housing market and the economy more generally, that treating mortgage and housing problems as a cause rather than a symptom remains the better policy. Second, what is the magnitude of the effect of my second proposition, that various international and political factors have made the path to recovery even muddier.  And this relates actually to the dialogue between Charlie Plosser and David Wilcox a few minutes ago.  That is, how much faster do we think the economy would be growing were the dark clouds of the euro zone problems and dramatic fiscal uncertainty to disappear from the horizon.  My intuition is no more than two- or three-tenths of a percentage point, which is a significant amount given actual rates of economic growth because that amount takes us so close to stall speed—to shift my July 31–metaphor in an intermodal way—but is not so much as to suggest that all would be well in the counterfactual case. Third, how likely is it that household saving and spending patterns have been changed by the persistence of sluggish economic growth, low interest rates, high unemployment, and other factors.  We all expect saving rates to bounce around quite a bit, particularly in uncertain times, and they have.  So it’s very difficult to develop an empirical basis for modifying conventional models.  But at a purely anecdotal level, which includes both conversations with people thinking about their own investment decisions and conversations with economic policy types, I have heard quite a few muse aloud as to whether people need to change their assumptions about the returns they can expect on their 401(k) accounts over the next decade or two and, thus, whether the time has come to increase savings regardless of present wealth levels. Fourth, to what extent has the last few years inflicted structural damage on the U.S. economy such that growth potential has been reduced.  This may be the most important question of the four over the longer term, but it’s also the one on which I, at least, am least certain. I still don’t see much evidence of structural harm in labor markets.  In fact, I’m a bit surprised there is so little, though it’s nice to have at least one pleasant surprise through all of this.  At the same time, some Board staff and others have been edging toward the conclusion that the behavior of the unemployment rate over the past couple of years may best be explained by at least a small reduction in growth potential.  Again, intuition readily provides some possible explanations, but there is a big gap between plausible intuition and at least an arguable, empirical case. I certainly don’t mean for these four questions to be exclusive.  They are just the ones that keep posing themselves to me over the last several months, and I would look forward to a discussion of these and similar questions either today or going forward.  More immediately, I’d   July 31–be interested in whether there are dissenting or qualifying views on the earlier propositions, which I stated as a matter of relative certainty. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply the speaker outlining their own views and posing questions for discussion.


Passage number 234.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude from President Lacker.


Passage number 235.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Heterogeneity is unobserved, so how do you identify that interpretation versus the pure duration dependence.  Do you have data on skills or something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and seeking clarification or additional information.


Passage number 236.
 MR. LACKER.  It’s a long story, but it is exactly identified.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 237.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 238.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude from someone named President Pianalto.


Passage number 239.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The circumstances we face today remind me of those that we faced this time last year. Last August, we were facing a range ofJuly 31–disappointing reports on the economy, including a significant downward revision to the history of GDP with the annual update of the NIPA.  There are certainly some similarities to the developments of a year ago, but I also think there are some important differences, which suggests that we may be in a little better shape than we were a year ago.  As an example, GDP growth has faltered less in the first half of this year than it did in the first half of last year. Drawing, in part, on this broader context, the news of the intermeeting period has caused me to make modest, rather than substantial, downward revisions to my near-term forecast for GDP growth, and a small upward revision to my forecast for unemployment.  Consequently, my forecast for economic growth is stronger than the baseline forecast of the Tealbook and slightly stronger than the proposed consensus forecast.  With the stronger GDP growth in my forecast, the unemployment rate declines to 7.7 percent in 2013 and 7.4 percent in late 2014.  My forecast for inflation is a little above the Tealbook path and very similar to the consensus forecast.  While I see reason to continue to expect a pickup in growth in the second half of this year, I believe that the data coming in over the next couple of months will be telling.  Continued weakness in the incoming data would likely corroborate the Tealbook’s judgment on the outlook and would lead me to revise my outlook to be closer to where the Tealbook stands today.  But at this point, I think the Tealbook’s weaker economic growth is not the most likely scenario.  I will use the remainder of my comments to explain why my outlook is more optimistic than the Tealbook and just a little more optimistic than the consensus forecast. Broadly, there are three reasons that I expect a pickup in the pace of recovery this year.  First, the auto sector, which plays such a large role in business cycle fluctuations, appears to be holding up rather well.  Inventories remain lean relative to sales, based on the average inventory-sales ratio, and anecdotes from my District auto dealers suggest some desire to rebuild   July 31–inventories.  For the nation, both auto sales and production rose solidly in June, and a wide range of small- and medium-sized manufacturers in my District report that their businesses are still seeing decent orders, spurred in part by the strength in the auto industry.  The second reason I expect a pickup in the second half is that the housing headwind that has been holding back the pace of recovery does seem to be abating.  We are now seeing steady increases in housing construction and reductions in inventories.  Importantly, it also looks as though prices may have finally really hit bottom, based on the indexes ranging from CoreLogic to Zillow. While a modest pickup in housing won’t directly add much to GDP growth, it will help with consumer sentiment and spending, which will provide more important support to the economic recovery.  In fact, one of my directors recently commented that with unemployment and home prices now stable, consumers are more confident about replacing their aging vehicles.  My third reason is that the availability of credit to both businesses and consumers has been improving, which will support an increased growth rate of spending.  C&I loans and consumer credit have both been increasing.  Perhaps more importantly, the July Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey generally showed that banks continue to report easing their lending standards for most types of loans.  So it looks as though we are seeing some abatement of the financial headwinds to the recovery. Turning to inflation, the recent news on consumer prices points to a stable rate of underlying inflation of 2 percent or a bit less, depending on the measure.  The median CPI rose a little less than 2 percent in the three months ending in June.  While this rate represented a slight decline from the preceding three months, my staff found that the distribution of inflation rates across all the non-energy components of the CPI were quite stable this year.  They saw no signs of anything like the disinflation we observed in 2009 and 2010.  So I have left my inflation forecast largely unchanged, with core PCE inflation just slightly below 2 percent.  July 31–Overall, while my forecast for economic growth, unemployment, and inflation is a little more optimistic than the proposed consensus, the differences don’t seem to be large enough to be very meaningful in light of the uncertainty surrounding the outlook.  My forecast is very similar to the version of the consensus forecast that includes an extension of the forward guidance on the federal funds rate to mid-2015, which means that with my forecast we do make progress on reducing the unemployment rate without additional policy accommodation.  As I just mentioned, though, I realize that the uncertainty surrounding my forecast is considerable.  In light of some of the recent weakness in the data, and with the potential for a fall off of the fiscal cliff or a meltdown in Europe, the risks to my forecast are to the downside for economic growth and to the upside for unemployment.  I think the next couple of months will shed some much-needed light on these risks and the pace of the recovery for the remainder of this year and next.  The risks surrounding my inflation forecast remain balanced.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Ms. Pianalto is presenting her own forecast for economic growth, unemployment, and inflation. She acknowledges that there are some similarities to the developments of a year ago, but also highlights some important differences that suggest the current situation may be better. She explains her reasons for expecting a pickup in the pace of recovery and discusses the availability of credit and stability of inflation rates. She acknowledges the uncertainty and risks to her forecast, but overall, there is no clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 240.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context that suggests contention or disagreement. It simply consists of a polite thank you message from President Evans.


Passage number 241.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a polite remark expressing gratitude towards President Fisher.


Passage number 242.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I took a different approach with my CEO contacts and with my board of directors. I must say, after listening to President Lockhart and President Evans, what popped into my mind was that very old song by Johnny Nash, “I Can See Clearly Now.” I don’t think anybody could argue that they can see more clearly now than they did before.  It is not going to be a bright, sunshiny day. I asked the following question of every contact I spoke with, “As you understand monetary policy, is there anything further the Federal Reserve can do that would impact your desire to expand domestic cap-ex or payroll.”  And to a person, from a 32-employee-sized company to one with over 1 million employees, the answer was “no.”  And let me just quote the CEO of Wal-Mart.  “We need to be able to expand certainty of our costs.  The only thing we know for sure is that fewer people will cost us less.” Let me quote a 32-employee firm. “Additional federal regulations from health care laws and other agencies, and a very negative federal tax situation, have caused us to change our hiring policy.  If overtime is not able to meet production needs, only temporary employees will be utilized.”  President Lockhart pointed out a question about the efficacy of additional monetary stimulus when it was applied.  And it is very hard for me to find, with regard to our dual mandate, a single woman or man who runs a company who feels that we are the problem.  One very important point, Governor Tarullo, is that it is not so much fiscal tightening as it is the demon of all decisionmakers, which is uncertainty.  And one thing we need to take into account is that a one-year fix of the fiscal situation—however that might stem the political concerns in this town and have some immediate impact—does not July 31–help business planners.  Business planners plan cap-ex and payroll expansion over three-year cycles; they don’t plan it on one-year cycles.  Whether they are little or medium-sized or large, they have to take a longer-run view.  And, again, to a person, regardless of size, around our board table, I am continuously hearing that what is of major concern is this massive uncertainty—and it seems to be intensifying—and that the issue is not access to capital. Someone else just pointed out—I think it was Sandy, in what I must admit was a brighter-eyed outlook than I share—that we have seen an expansion of C&I and other loans.  I don’t hear complaints about the cost of capital, nor do I hear concerns about the availability of capital. As anybody can see looking at me, I have no prepared statement to make today.  I have spread papers all around. I will omit, by the way, what I had prepared, which is to point out that of course Texas continues to outperform the rest of the country—that existing home sales are up 18½ percent year to date, that single-family permits rose at a pace of 35 percent through May in my District.  This is despite the negative from our external balances, which I think is the most important point, because we are the leading exporting state.  Our exports were down 2.8 percent for the first half of the year. So, in macroeconomic terms, I don’t expect a lot of “umph” to come from our net exports, nor do I expect to see businesses make decisions, even if we see a little bit of clarity with regard to the fiscal cliff, as we like to think about it.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 243.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 244.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage consists of a thank you statement and a mention of President Rosengren, but it does not present any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 245.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In January when we adopted the end of 2014 language, the full SEP range for real GDP for 2012 was 2.1 to 3 percent.  Six months later, and with additional easing through the MEP, the revised consensus growth rate for real GDP in 2012 is 1.8 percent—weaker than any of us thought last January and with more accommodative monetary policy than many of us submitted.  In retrospect, the economic data have come in much softer than any of us thought.  How likely is it that we are repeating this mistake.  I am concerned that while the consensus forecast has been written down from the June SEP, the consensus forecast for this year remains too optimistic.  The July employment report produced only 80,000 jobs, and real final sales rose at only a 1.2 percent rate in the second quarter.  The revised consensus forecast expects real GDP growth to be 2 percent in the second half of this year.  With 2 percent growth in the first quarter, this would imply the weakness of the secondJuly 31–quarter was an anomaly. An alternative viewpoint would be that concerns about Europe and the fiscal cliff intensified in the second quarter, causing households and businesses to retrench and that the second quarter to be much weaker than the first. What is the likelihood that businesses and households will believe that the fiscal cliff or European problems will be of less concern very soon.  My conversations with a wide variety of businesses and financial market participants suggest that they believe the problems will likely intensify in the second half of this year.  They are not anxious to hire or invest until there is much clearer resolution of both problems.  In particular, few on either side of the Atlantic seem confident that Greece is on a sustainable path, or that adequate firewalls exist. Furthermore, I don’t know anyone who expects a quick resolution of the fiscal cliff.  I, unfortunately, agree with this assessment, and, thus, I am concerned that the consensus forecast is too high.  Without substantial additional accommodation, we will once again be underestimating the likely persistence of recent weak economic data. While we can do little to resolve problems in Europe or to address the fiscal cliff, it does not imply there is nothing monetary policy can do.  Mortgage rates have come down as a result of our actions and the flight to quality.  There are tentative signs that this is having an effect on the housing market, which, as several people have noted, is beginning to improve.  I am particularly heartened that we are seeing some regional variation in housing markets, with stronger markets, such as Boston, experiencing housing price appreciation.  Not only prices of single-family houses, but also condo prices are increasing in Boston, and, interestingly, many Realtors are reporting a surprising number of all-cash sales.  Given the improvement in sentiment, and the low interest rates for creditworthy borrowers, it is interesting that cash sales seem to be on the rise. With apartment rents rising in many markets, and real estate prices   July 31–improving in many markets, now would seem to be a good time to clearly generate a self-sustaining domestic housing recovery, by looking for ways to convince people that both the costs and availability of financing makes this a propitious time to buy.  Even if the cost and availability of credit is not the cause of the current slowdown, it can help prevent the slowdown from becoming more severe. I fear that monetary policy has been assuming we are the Roadrunner and that our momentum will carry us over any short-term chasms. In reality, we risk being more like Wylie Coyote as we once again realize that we have paused without solid ground beneath us.  The Roadrunner accelerates across the chasm; the coyote does not. It is time to mimic the Roadrunner.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses concern that the consensus forecast for real GDP growth is too optimistic, while also suggesting that monetary policy can help prevent the economic slowdown from becoming more severe. This indicates a difference of opinion on the effectiveness of monetary policy and the outlook for the economy.


Passage number 246.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided in the passage to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 247.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without having access to the specific passage. Please provide the passage for further analysis.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 248.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  At our last meeting, I downgraded my economic growth outlook based on the weak incoming data and the increased strains in Europe.  And since then, the disappointing news has continued to accumulate.  It is clear that the economy has less momentum than it originally appeared.  And as a result, I have downgraded my near-term forecast yet again. The song remains the same: The economy continues to be weighed down by household sector deleveraging, tight credit, and fiscal consolidation.  In addition, the looming fiscal cliff and the European financial crisis are undermining confidence and pose significant downside risks to the outlook. Regarding fiscal policy, I expect—or, maybe more actually, hope—that some kind of agreement will be reached to prevent us from driving off the cliff.  Even so, many of my contacts continue to tell me, as others have said, that uncertainty about government spending and taxes is already restraining hiring, spending, and investment.  Moreover, the nation’s broader long-term fiscal problems are unlikely to be resolved no matter what agreement is reached later this year orJuly 31–early next year. I’m echoing here a comment President Fisher made; the sad truth is that the best that we can hope for is that Washington kicks the can down the road.  And that approach hasn’t worked so well in Europe.  I also want to think about this option-value argument.  It is hard for me to imagine that in January of 2013 we are going to have significantly less uncertainty, given the fact that we are talking, really, about kicking the can down the road on the Bush tax cuts and a lot of other things.  Maybe uncertainty is getting worse and worse right now, but I don’t see it really becoming that much less next year. For its part, the European crisis is damping our exports, squeezing corporate profits, and unsettling financial markets.  European authorities have made some promising moves recently to support Spanish banks and establish a single euro-wide banking supervisor.  And my forecast, like the Tealbook, assumes that the European crisis won’t spin out of control, and the euro area will experience only a relatively mild recession this year.  However, while my heart wants to believe that European policymakers will act decisively when the time comes, my mind reminds me that previous declarations and promises brought only temporary relief. In the future, the euro area now seems to hinge on whether Spain and Italy are, if I may use the expression, too big to fail.  Alternatively, it could be that they are too big to save.  The fact is that a concrete, comprehensive, and credible—those are three C’s—solution to the European problem is still out of reach.  That leaves Europe at a risk of a longer, deeper recession, which would undoubtedly intensify financial and economic strains in our own country. These, then, are the hurdles the economy must surmount—relatively little underlying momentum, a looming fiscal cliff, and a protracted European crisis.  Together, they are offsetting a significant portion of the monetary accommodation we are providing.  This can be seen by a variety of private-sector and Federal Reserve financial condition indexes. Many of the variables  July 31–in these indexes are forward looking, and as a result, the indexes can provide useful signals about future GDP growth during periods of stress, such as the one that we have been experiencing. Although these indexes show a clear improvement in financial conditions since the depths of the 2008–2009 crisis, they indicate relatively little additional progress since late 2010. More importantly, the recent readings are generally nearer their long-term average levels despite the dramatic increase in monetary stimulus that we have introduced. By my staff’s estimates, current financial conditions point to, at best, only moderate economic growth. Since our June meeting, I lowered my real GDP forecast for 2012 by about ¼ percentage point.  I now forecast 1¾ percent growth this year and 2¼ percent in 2013.  This moderate pace of economic growth is somewhat higher than the Tealbook projection, but that is only because I assumed considerable additional monetary stimulus.  In particular, I assumed that the fed funds liftoff is in the first half of 2015.  I also assume further expansion of the Fed’s balance sheet through open-ended purchases of mortgage-backed securities.  Absent this additional stimulus, my forecast would foresee no progress on our employment mandate until 2014.  Even with this added stimulus, I expect only modest progress on closing the unemployment gap over the next two years. Finally, let me turn to inflation.  The recent data have come in more or less as expected, and I haven’t changed my medium-term inflation forecast much. I expect overall PCE inflation to come in below our 2 percent target, both this year and next, reflecting subdued compensation costs, as we saw in the latest ECI, and import price inflation. In terms of commenting on the consensus forecast, given the assumed policy path in the consensus forecast, my forecast would be more pessimistic about economic growth and the unemployment rate and would have lower inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement and contention in this passage. The speaker, Williams, expresses a more pessimistic outlook on economic growth, fiscal policy, and the European crisis compared to the consensus forecast. He also mentions that previous declarations and promises from European policymakers have only brought temporary relief, further highlighting the uncertainty and disagreement surrounding the issue.


Passage number 249.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude towards President George.


Passage number 250.
   July 31–MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The 10th District economy has continued to expand at a moderate pace.  Consumer spending has been stronger than expected because of stronger auto sales, and energy activity continued to fuel the District economy with higher energy prices leading to an uptick in crude oil drilling.  The recovery in residential real estate markets strengthened further with stronger home sales contributing to increases in housing permits and the value of construction put in place. The District’s manufacturing sector expanded only modestly in July, but contacts were more optimistic about future levels of activity.  Expectations for future production and shipments held steady, and the expectations for new orders rebounded after falling the previous month.  Some manufacturers noted that they would hire more employees and increase capital spending over the next six months. Given the importance of agriculture to the District, I wanted to say just a couple of things about the drought.  Almost half of the U.S. corn and soybean crop and cattle production is in regions experiencing severe drought.  Livestock producers are going to suffer the brunt of these losses as high feed costs strain profits.  For the crop producers, however, rising crop prices and an expanded use of crop insurance payments is likely to stabilize incomes in that sector.  Similar to past occurrences, the effects of the drought on food price inflation should emerge in two waves, with those waves dissipating over time as the weather improves.  Rising crop prices will boost the prices for cereal and bakery products in the near term.  By contrast, meat prices are more likely to rise in future months as herd liquidations cut meat supplies for 2013.  And, of course, as Steve Kamin noted in his report, similar to last year, rising food prices are a bigger burden on poor households in the United States and globally that spend more of their household budget on food. July 31–At the national level, we have seen a number of signs of softening in economic conditions consistent with last week’s GDP report that showed deceleration in growth.  And while bumpy, the housing recovery continues to progress, which is an encouraging sign. Dissecting the causes of this deceleration in economic growth is difficult.  The combination of unusual weather, seasonal adjustment problems, and some payback for the robust rebound in auto sales following supply chain disruptions, is likely one cause.  But I also hear numerous anecdotes related to uncertainty and caution, from risks to the outlook coming from Europe and from U.S. fiscal policy.  Businesses in particular, but also households to an extent, seem to be acutely aware of these risks and are, therefore, acting cautiously.  In terms of the outlook going forward, I have reduced my growth outlook for this year a bit in light of recent data, but I continue to expect a gradually building recovery ahead.  As such, I see modest improvements in the unemployment rate at a bit faster pace than in the Tealbook, and I expect inflation to remain near our 2 percent long-run target over the forecast horizon.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing an update on the state of the economy and discussing various factors that are impacting growth. There is no indication of conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 251.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Bullard.


Passage number 252.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude from the speaker, addressing President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 253.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  There’s been a lot of previous remarks that I feel compelled to respond to, but the first one is, of course, David Wilcox’s attack on dressage.  [Laughter] I will just say that if it was in my household, and the FOMC meeting was trying to complete against dressage, the FOMC meeting would lose big time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making a lighthearted comment in response to a previous remark about dressage.


Passage number 254.
 MR. WILCOX.  Precisely my fear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 255.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Thank you" and the statement "Vice Chairman" do not imply any sort of conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 256.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists of a thank you and a title, it does not express any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 257.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Who is Qvigstad.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a simple question asking for information about someone named Qvigstad. There is no contention or disagreement implied.


Passage number 258.
 MS. YELLEN. He is the deputy governor of the Norwegian Central Bank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact about the position of the person being referred to.


Passage number 259.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a polite statement expressing gratitude to Governor Duke.


Passage number 260.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am going to take just a minute or two to also engage in dialogue with Governor Tarullo about his propositions and his questions.  But knowing how difficult it is for Governor Tarullo to sit still during all of these discussions, I bet that if I spend long enough he won’t ask any questions next time.  [Laughter] First of all, I would say on the five propositions that I would agree that the economy is generally pretty cruddy, and I would emphasize the importance of low confidence and high uncertainty.  I would also agree with the Vice Chairman that improvements in the financial condition of the financial institutions, of businesses, and of consumers have made the recovery a little less fragile and more sturdy and resilient to shocks. As to the questions, on the first one, I don’t think anybody would be surprised to know that I believe that a significant recovery in housing is necessary for our economy to recover.  I   July 31–am not certain that it is sufficient, and I am certainly pleased that Governor Yellen now at least sees some signs on the horizon of a recovery in housing. On the second, what is the magnitude of drag from potential fiscal and euro shocks. While I think there is a question of the magnitude, for me, the other question is the timing of when these headwinds finally dissipate.  I think that if you go back and look at forecasts over the last couple of years, and you read the narrative, a lot of the forecast misses have to do with assumptions about when these headwinds would be reduced, much more so than they do about policy or the efficacy of any policy we employed. Even in the current Tealbook, the narrative assumes that the Europeans figure it out in another year or 18 months, and then the sun comes out.  I don’t know whether that is going to happen. As to the third question, whether household spending and saving patterns have changed fundamentally, I am not sure that is the case, but I do believe that access to credit has been changed fundamentally by the regulatory response to the crisis, particularly with credit cards, home equity, and mortgages.  I don’t think that is something that is going to change.  And I don’t, frankly, have an opinion on structural damage, so that’s the end of that piece. As to the consensus forecast, I wouldn’t necessarily take exception to the baseline forecast, but I would lean closer to the lower values in the second half of this year that are in the baseline forecast of the Tealbook.  The reports from the banks are that there is a lot of caution out there, and the reasons vary from stresses in Europe to China slowing to the fiscal collapse. But, regardless, there seems to be a growing reluctance on the part of businesses to make any long-term decisions until after the election, which to me seems to make sense.  Certainly, our own forecasts are heavily dependent on assumptions about fiscal actions.  And although David Wilcox talks about the tyranny of having to write something down, all we really need to do is  July 31–assume a dollar value.  For most businesses, the relevant assumptions are some very specific choices about tax rates, tax deductions, spending categories, specific programs, et cetera. So I am beginning to believe that the effect of everyone hitting the pause button until after the election will slow the economy even more than the fundamentals might suggest through the end of this year.  More broadly, when I think about the evolution of forecasts over the last several Tealbooks—and as I just said—the timing of when underlying economic growth starts to show through to better results seems to depend importantly on judgments about the resolution of problems in Europe.  And I’m at a loss as to when and how they will resolve, so I think the Tealbook assumptions are as good as any. On a more positive note, signals of improvement in the real estate market are more widespread.  I wouldn’t call the improvement strong yet, but it seems to me likely to be sustainable.  In my conversations with bankers, those who were in markets or had business models that were more heavily influenced by real estate activity were the most upbeat.  And those who were focused more on manufacturing or agriculture were more cautious.  Loan growth and demand is still centered in C&I lending to large companies and auto lending to consumers.  Still, several bankers cautioned that even this demand seems to be flattening recently. Banks with mortgage origination businesses reported record volumes and earnings with refinance volumes dominating.  For these banks, mortgage revenues are helping to offset the steady decline in interest margins.  For all banks, asset yields are steadily coming down as maturing assets are replaced at lower rates, and deposit costs are down to remarkably low levels as CD portfolios shrink and funds move to money market or transaction accounts.  Indeed, the total cost of funding for the industry, which includes deposits and wholesale funding, is down to 58 basis points.  One very large bank reported deposit costs of 19 basis points.July 31–While the level to which banks have been able to push down their deposit costs is encouraging, it also raises some caution flags.  First, there is not much room to lower deposit costs much further.  And, second, while banks still consider most of these to be stable core deposits, the bunching up into overnight accounts indicates that they may be poised for flight— into CDs, into investments, a change of banks, under the mattress.  It’s really hard to tell. Right now, banks are also looking to expense reduction to offset these lower margins.  After interest, the largest bank expense category is people, so this means reducing head counts.  Larger banks with bigger footprints are looking at ways to move jobs from high labor cost markets into lower-cost locations.  In addition, many banks are trimming branch networks and reevaluating their products and their business lines. All of this is to say that I don’t see much change in the outlook since our last meeting, except for a more pronounced damping of activity in the second half of this year as businesses wait for clarity.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 261.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage as it only consists of a polite expression of gratitude towards Governor Raskin.


Passage number 262.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My outlook for the economy hasn’t changed much since the last time we met. I’ve been concerned for several months that the pace of consumer spending wasn’t sustainable.  So the bad news we received on that front—that PCE growth slowed considerably in the second quarter—wasn’t particularly surprising to me. In my view, the economy will continue to be characterized by unacceptably high unemployment and below 2 percent inflation for quite some time. Because my views about the most-likely outcome for economic activity haven’t changed much, in my remarks today I’d like to mention some slow-moving forces that could continue to hold back growth.July 31–First, the economy as looked at from the perspective of real GDP is weak. Of course, real GDP growth bounces around from quarter to quarter, so I wouldn’t want to take too much signal from it. But an alternative indicator of the state of demand is private domestic final sales.  This measure strips out government spending, net exports, and inventories, not because they aren’t important components of spending, but because they can be pretty noisy and misleading.  Unlike the relative bounciness of real GDP quarter to quarter, the growth of private domestic final sales shows quite a bit of persistence from quarter to quarter.  Significantly, this measure slowed appreciably in the second quarter, falling to its lowest growth rate in nearly two years.  To me, this doesn’t bode well for the state of the recovery.  With demand rising this slowly, businesses might start to find themselves with an unwanted accumulation of inventories and need to pare back production.  At the same time, weak demand for their products will likely make them even more reluctant to hire and expand capacity than they already seem to be. Typically it is just these kinds of dynamics that bring on recessions, and once this negative cycle gets under way, of course, we get slowing incomes and even weaker demand.  The slow pace of growth in demand in the second quarter seems dangerously close to the growth rates we often see as the economy stalls out just before it turns down.  I consider this outcome to be a quite salient risk to my baseline projection.  If the economy did tip into a recession, it probably wouldn’t turn into a particularly deep recession because we don’t seem to have the same kinds of imbalances and overbuilding that we often do before a deep downturn.  However, with the unemployment rate still above 8 percent, any nontrivial weakening of the economy would obviously be devastating.  Moreover, if we’re vulnerable to stalling out right now, it seems pretty unlikely we could weather any negative shocks, such as a fiscal cliff or more weakness from Europe.   July 31–Of course, in the baseline forecasts of most of this Committee we’re expecting some controlled acceleration over the next couple years.  I am not sure exactly what the source of such momentum would be, but it seems likely that once the uncertainties hanging over our heads right now dissipate, there will be some modest improvement in economic growth.  In that case, the positive momentum, which is just the reverse of the story I just described, might take hold.  But in my view, the acceleration is doomed to be very gradual and subpar because I think there are slow-moving forces in our economy that will continue to keep momentum from developing.  I think of these forces as more persistent than temporary headwinds, more as elements that require significant attention by particular groups of policymakers to mitigate. One example of a slow-moving force is the pace of reform in Europe, which of course, we’ve been discussing for years.  Another is the existence of deteriorating state and local government finances. In addition to the cuts in spending and jobs that have resulted from cyclically low tax revenues, many cities and counties increasingly are finding themselves in the midst of some stresses that have been brewing for years.  These stresses include soaring pension, Medicaid, and retiree health-care costs.  Indeed, a number of big, local government entities have declared bankruptcy. To conclude, we seem to be at a point where the potential for significantly enhanced economic growth in the quarters and even years ahead is limited and doubtful.  Moreover, in my view, remaining at such a low level of growth exposes the economy to further setbacks.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting their outlook for the economy and explaining their concerns and views on the state of the recovery. They also mention slow-moving forces that could continue to hold back growth.


Passage number 263.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply expressing gratitude to Governor Stein.


Passage number 264.
 MR. STEIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m coming to appreciate the challenges of my place in the rotation in terms of being able to say anything blindingly novel about the outlook at this point in the discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude and acknowledging the difficulty of contributing something new to the discussion.


Passage number 265.
 July 31–MR. POWELL.  Tell me about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests that Mr. Powell is asking for information or an explanation about something.


Passage number 266.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists of a short thank you message from someone called Governor Powell. There is no indication of any form of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 267.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will make just a couple of comments on Governor Tarullo’s five propositions and four questions, which I found to be enormously useful. July 31–Quickly, I agree the economy is “stuck in the mud,” and I see it as continuing to try to get out, but being turned back because it’s so vulnerable to shocks.  In my model I’m not impressed particularly by evidence and arguments that there’s a lot of structural damage. I see the economy as capable of returning to above-trend growth and closing the gap over a period of two or three years.  But for me the euro-crisis cycle is big and, therefore, I might disagree as well with your answer to question number two.  The timing seems to me to line up pretty well with our repeated attempts and failed attempts to reach escape velocity, and therefore, I disagree with proposition five, which is the proposition that a little bit of good data wouldn’t impress. Maybe I’m just new enough to put some stock in a lifting of the gloom around Europe and a few months of good data. Moving on to my comments, I see the economy’s performance since the last meeting as having been a little bit weaker on balance than expectations, with a handful of positives, mainly housing and autos, and a greater number of negatives, including government spending, household spending, and significantly weakness in the industrial sector.  I see the employment sector, the June employment report and the six unemployment claims reports, as being slightly lower but broadly consistent with the lower end of expectations.  In fact, if I look across the whole range of data since the last meeting, I see an economy performing at the lower end of the range of expectations as they stood on June 20.  Taking that in, I see the likely path for activity for the rest of 2012 to be a bit stronger than the amended Tealbook and pretty much in keeping with the proposed consensus forecast.  That means continued slow growth, around 2 percent, which I expect will strengthen as the year goes on despite the likelihood of periodic shocks from Europe, Washington D.C., and maybe the Middle East.  I note that neither the Tealbook nor the consensus forecast materially reduced their medium-term forecasts, and I think that’s the rightJuly 31–approach.  I continue to see U.S. inflation, at 1.8 percent, as low and under control.  I see us as running just below 2 percent, but I wouldn’t characterize that as missing the mandate. While the broader economy is moving along with moderate economic growth, that is not the case in the industrial sector.  My contacts in the industrial sector anecdotally confirm what many around the table have said and the Tealbook suggested—that the weak numbers are not just due to special factors, but rather to a fundamental weakening in conditions.  Since our previous meeting a substantial number of industrial companies, about 10 of which I have spoken to, have experienced or publicly reported further weakening in June and July.  Forecasts for growth and profitability have come down for some.  Forward-looking indicators for the sector point to continued weakness.  I should point out that there is very little light vehicle manufacturing in my sample, so that’s a positive that’s missing.  Also the companies that I talked to that are in housing are feeling real strength there.  When industrial companies see themselves missing plan, they take cost actions to protect profitability, and that means hiring freezes and layoffs.  You see a number of announcements around the second-quarter end to that effect, and that trend will certainly strengthen if the poor indicators going forward prove accurate.  So far, there’s no sign of it in the claims data, but at a minimum, this sector seems unlikely to be a source of job growth for the time being.  Uncertainty comes up in every conversation, and it revolves around the direction of the economy and Europe.  In my small sample, there’s less discussion of the fiscal cliff except for companies with defense exposure.  That could change easily as the year goes on. Investors that I speak to are also very conservatively positioned—to generalize, they are long the dollar, long fixed income, underweight or short equities and short most commodities.  They report low liquidity and little conviction in the markets, a very tough environment.  Rather July 31–than be chased by low rates into taking more risk, some are happy to stay in cash.  Again, uncertainty about the economy, Europe, and the fiscal cliff come up a great deal. Intermeeting events caused one investor to volunteer that he saw a 50-50 chance of an attack on Iran by the end of the year, and that was before the recent visit to Israel by one of the presidential candidates and related comments.  So that risk may be working its way back onto the list and into energy prices. In conclusion, I see things as broadly consistent with the picture at the time of our previous meeting, although modestly weaker, and I think that the next couple of months will be important in clarifying the direction of the economy and the question of whether the Committee should do more.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 268.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Thank you all.  This will be a good time to adjourn. I’ll start tomorrow morning at 9:00 a.m. with my summary. There are drinks and dinner options on the terrace.  See you in the morning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information and a friendly farewell.


Passage number 269.
 [Meeting recessed]   July 31–August 1 Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody. ALL.  Good morning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a simple greeting or exchange of pleasantries between individuals.


Passage number 270.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Everybody had a good rest.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that everybody had a good rest, indicating that there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 271.
 MR. LACKER.  No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: No.


Passage number 272.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Mr. Chairman, I have one question—could you explain your use, earlier in your remarks, of the phrase “households are using debt to finance necessities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that Mr. Plosser has a question about a phrase the chairman used in his remarks.


Passage number 273.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Someone made that comment, I thought.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 274.
  July 31–MR. PLOSSER.  Given that consumption was down and savings were up, I was trying to square that phrase with the data showing that saving rates are rising.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is indicating that they are trying to reconcile or make sense of two pieces of data that seem contradictory.


Passage number 275.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Whoever made the comment can jump in if they want, but I take it to mean that some consumers, the ones who are more financially stressed, are doing that, not that it’s an average.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply explaining a different interpretation of the comment made by someone else.


Passage number 276.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Not an aggregate statement.  You may want to qualify that, the way you put it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements that indicate disagreement or contention. It instead suggests a suggestion or recommendation for further clarification.


Passage number 277.
  MR. BULLARD.  Mr. Chairman, modern monetary theory is based on sticky prices.  And I think one of the things that we’ve talked about around the table, maybe at cross-purposes, is that if a big shock hits the economy and prices are flexible, unemployment is going to go up July 31–and output is going to go down.  But because prices are sticky, you’re going to get a little bit different reaction on those variables than you would otherwise get, and according to the theories I know, it’s that gap that’s supposed to be the important one for monetary policy.  We don’t seem to want to do that.  I don’t understand why we don’t want to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 278.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Do what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage "Do what." This is a fragment and does not provide enough information to indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 279.
 MR. BULLARD. Look at that gap, analyze that gap, use modern macro theory to make our policy decisions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard is simply suggesting to examine and interpret the gap using modern macro theory to inform policy decisions.


Passage number 280.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  What would we look at to make that decision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply asks a question and does not present any conflicting points of view or disagreement.


Passage number 281.
 MR. BULLARD.  It’s the gap between where you think the economy would be under flexible prices and where you think the economy is under sticky prices.  If there was no gap of that sort, according to the theories we like to cite, there would be no rationale for what we’re doing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making a statement and discussing the theories they believe in without any opposing viewpoints mentioned.


Passage number 282.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, I’d welcome an analysis that tried to put that together. I think the historical evidence is that there’s a pretty smooth component in unemployment.  It does, obviously, vary over short periods, but in the medium term it tends to come back to a relatively smooth trend.  And it’s not clear what’s different in this case from those cases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their willingness to consider an analysis and stating their belief that historical evidence shows unemployment tends to follow a smooth trend in the medium term. They also highlight the lack of clarity regarding any differences in the current case from previous cases.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 283.
 MR. BULLARD.  I think we flip between sometimes using the arguments that come out of Woodford and his coauthors, which are based on what I’m talking about, and sometimes going to just straight empirical evidence that might be kind of distant from what that theory is talking about.  And that creates confusion around the table.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage mentions that there is confusion around the table because of the use of different arguments and empirical evidence, suggesting some disagreement or contention.


Passage number 284.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think it boils down to asking the question of whether, given that the recession started almost five years ago, there are identifiable reasons why mismatch or other such issues are persisting.  Again, my sense of the research that’s been done isJuly 31–that most of it—not all of it, but most of it—finds that that gap, or a reasonable approximation of that gap, is still pretty big. President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of the author's opinion and does not include any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 285.
 MR. EVANS.  Could I just say that, as I listen to this discussion, I don’t think there’s a tremendous disagreement between the two of you on this.  Mr. Chairman, you cited Solow growth, where you had the opinion, which I agree with, that technology explanations for reductions in potential output are unlikely to be very large.  Labor issues could be a part of that.  But the construct that President Bullard is talking about in terms of output in the flexible-price economy is roughly going to be related to precisely those same issues when the economy is well functioning.  And then in the sticky price economy, there are going to be impediments to achieving that.  That’s what the gap is about.  Empirically, I agree with you that it seems to be very slow in adjusting.  The real question is, why is the slope of the Phillips curve as flat as it is. Or why is inflation determination in these models, or any economic analysis we look at, heavily dependent on intercept terms like inflation expectations.  Those are the kinds of puzzles that you’re talking about, which I think have challenged everybody’s explanations.  But I don’t really see a lot of disagreement between the two of your explanations.  All of those things are fundamental in our own DSGE analysis in the Chicago Fed model, and they’re explained in the context of that theory.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 286.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Did you have something, David, on this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking David if he has something to add or contribute to the discussion.


Passage number 287.
 MR. WILCOX.  Yes.  I just thought I’d offer that we inspect a variety of tools, both statistical and more theory based.  One of the pieces of evidence that we look to is evidence on shifts in the matching function, which is based on research by Andrew Figura and Regis Barnichon.  That shows an increase in the NAIRU of 1 percentage point or a little more. Another statistical framework that we use is a state-based model due to Charles Fleischman and   July 31–John Roberts, and that yields estimates that are broadly similar to what we have built into the staff forecast.  We do have, and carefully maintain and invest a lot of resources in, a DSGE model.  And so I thought, to be response, Michael Kiley could just say a word about what that DSGE model shows because it is based in the sort of optimizing framework that President Bullard is referring to and it’s among the stable of pieces of evidence that we look to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information about different tools and models that are used for analysis.


Passage number 288.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Michael.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage because it is not specified. The passage is not provided, so it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 289.
 MR. KILEY.  We maintain a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model with sticky prices and sticky wages and a number of financial frictions.  That model has a particular model of the labor market that does include unemployment, and so there is a natural rate of unemployment that corresponds to the flexible price natural rate.  When we look at that, it’s really quite smooth, consistent with other research like that of Galí, Smets, and Wouters, where it looks like the natural rate of unemployment is quite smooth, and you can attribute most of the fluctuations in the unemployment rate within a DSGE framework to fluctuations in “aggregate demand,” although within the DSGE framework, people don’t use that kind of language very often.  I would also note that in a framework like that, it’s exactly true that when there are only sticky prices and wages and not much dynamics and not too much capital, the social welfare function basically has in it the output gap that President Bullard described. In a more complicated world, though, other factors may be involved.  For example, our DSGE model takes into account the fact that there are different sectors of production, that the prices in different sectors might be different, that there might be different wages and different wage adjustment processes in those different sectors, and that there may be financial frictions. In all of those distortions, the world is just not the same as one in which welfare is maximized simply by closing the output gap.  For example, research at the Cleveland Fed shows that you want to take  July 31–into account impediments in the credit system—that those lower welfare and those enter the social welfare function.  So I do think that the analysis we have—and it’s only one model; other models would provide different answers—is perfectly consistent with the view that a modern macro model would have a reasonable unemployment gap in it.  And that theory is consistent with the view that, like you do around the table, you want to take into account many factors in thinking about how to achieve social welfare.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage discusses different models and factors that may affect social welfare, indicating some disagreement or differing perspectives on the topic.


Passage number 290.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Any other questions. [No response]  Okay.  Well, I guess that sets us up for the policy discussion, and I’ll turn it over to Bill English.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply transitions to the policy discussion.


Passage number 291.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Questions for Bill.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply expressing gratitude and stating that there are questions for Bill. It does not indicate any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 292.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  I have a question on alternative A.  We had some very good memos on market functioning, but I’d be curious to know your view of the effect of reversing the numbers between Treasuries and mortgages and to hear you quantify a little bit more what the market functioning argument would be, particularly if we’re successful in bringing rates down and presumably there’s more refinancing and other opportunities for dealing with the flow of mortgages.  Could you talk a little bit about how those numbers were chosen and, if we reversed the numbers, what you view the costs of that to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 293.
  July 31–MR. ENGLISH.  I think the numbers were chosen to roughly match the total purchasable amounts that we found in the memo that showed the capacity for purchases, which showed that there was greater capacity on the Treasury side than on the MBS side. It seemed natural to have a purchase program that included a larger Treasury component than MBS component.  But I think if you were buying $1 trillion and wanted to shift that more in the direction of MBS, it would be feasible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is merely discussing the rationale behind choosing certain numbers for a purchase program.


Passage number 294.
 MR. POTTER.  The issue would just be the reinvestments as well.  At 45 plus 25 to 30, that’s getting—if you go to the Desk briefing from yesterday—quite high as a percentage of the gross issuance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. It is presenting information about reinvestments and their percentage of gross issuance.


Passage number 295.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not provide any context or information about Vice Chairman that would suggest contention or disagreement among individuals or groups.


Passage number 296.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You might also want to alter this proportion over time.  The MBS flow might be pretty high at first as rates are pushed down, and then the MBS flow might be somewhat less later on.  So is it fair to say that the optimal division might not be fixed over time, that you might want to shift it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests that the proportion of MBS flow may need to be altered over time. There is no conflicting viewpoint expressed.


Passage number 297.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I think that’s right.  The idea was that these are the numbers you would be starting with, but over time, as issues arose with regard to market functioning or there were changes in the flow of new MBS or whatever, there would be the opportunity to make those adjustments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their understanding of the idea being discussed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 298.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Just to follow up, I like the idea of having a little more flexibility between mortgages and Treasuries.  If the constraint is the ultimate capacity—let’s say if you’re doing $1 trillion—would there be any reason not to start with more heavily weighting the mortgages at the outset and then, if there were issues that were cropping up, to reduce the amount of mortgages over time. Alternative A has fixed proportions over time, but would it be  July 31–beneficial to have a more flexible program that focuses more on mortgages at the outset and then, as problems crop up, if they do crop up, to alter that allocation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Rosengren, is suggesting a more flexible program that initially focuses more on mortgages and then adjusts the allocation if problems arise. This suggests a disagreement with the current approach described as "Alternative A," which has fixed proportions over time.


Passage number 299.
 MR. ENGLISH. Certainly that would be feasible. I think it’s up to the Committee, in some sense.  I know there are some on the Committee who have strong feelings about buying MBS versus buying Treasuries, but I don’t think there’s a technical reason to not do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While Mr. English acknowledges that there are some on the Committee who have strong feelings about buying MBS versus buying Treasuries, he does not express any disagreement or contention himself. He simply states that he doesn't think there's a technical reason to not buy MBS.


Passage number 300.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 301.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think there’s an issue of what actually gives you the most bang for buck.  On the one hand, you could argue that buying Treasuries gives you a bigger bang for buck because of the longer-duration asset.  On the other hand, you could argue that agency MBS gives you more bang for buck because you’re working on two margins—not just the level of long-term rates, but also the spread between mortgages and Treasuries—and it’s more directly related to the housing market.  I think there are two separate issues here.  One, what’s the magnitude of bang for buck for Treasuries versus agency MBS.  And then, two, what are the capacity constraints, and how quickly do you run into the market functioning issues.  My personal opinion—I was going to save this until my comments later, but I think it’s probably germane to say it now—is that I would like the staff to do a little bit more work on these issues of what gives you the most bang for buck and what are the cost–benefit tradeoffs as you push further down in terms of the potential risks to market functioning.  I look at the alternative A numbers as a little bit of a placeholder until we do some additional work that will allow us to have a deeper discussion about what that split should be and how much flexibility there should be as it evolves over time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker presents two different arguments, one in favor of buying Treasuries and another in favor of agency MBS, suggesting that there is disagreement on which investment option provides the most value for the money. Additionally, the speaker expresses their personal opinion and suggests that further analysis is needed to determine the best approach, indicating a lack of consensus on the issue.


Passage number 302.
   MR. ENGLISH.  If I can add just one further complexity, it matters which Treasuries you’re buying as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any form of contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is one more complexity to consider, which is the type of Treasuries being purchased.


Passage number 303.
July 31–VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes, sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage provided.


Passage number 304.
 MR. ENGLISH.  This, I think, came up yesterday.  You can get potentially more bang for buck by buying longer Treasuries relative to buying more smoothly over the yield curve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states the opinion of Mr. English regarding the potential benefits of buying longer Treasuries.


Passage number 305.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But then you run into market functioning issues in those issues faster.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It simply states that there are market functioning issues that arise quickly in certain situations.


Passage number 306.
 MR. ENGLISH. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context that indicates any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 307.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only provides the name "President Fisher" without any accompanying information or context, so it does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 308.
 MR. FISHER.  May I follow up on that point.  I just wanted Simon to clarify because, if I recall correctly, when we went through your exhibit 19 yesterday, the Chairman asked for clarification of the numbers.  We would, at the end of this program, own 54 percent of the outstanding Treasuries between 3 and 30—is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 309.
 MR. POTTER.  That’s our estimate including the MEP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Potter is simply stating a fact, providing an estimate that includes the MEP.


Passage number 310.
 MR. FISHER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 311.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  So that’s the MEP plus the two-year program.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states the MEP and the two-year program together.


Passage number 312.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes. That’s the way we did the calculation, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply confirms that the calculation was done in a certain way.


Passage number 313.
 MR. FISHER.  But to go to Bill’s point, between 6 and 30, would there be a higher concentration.  And what would that concentration be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question seeking clarification.


Passage number 314.
 MR. POTTER.  Do you have the numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement. It simply states a question being asked.


Passage number 315.
 MS. LOGAN.  For which program.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 316.
 MR. POTTER.  The 6 to 30.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. This can be inferred from the use of the words "Mr. Potter" which suggest a conversation or interaction between multiple individuals, indicating the possibility of differing opinions or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 317.
 MS. LOGAN.  The 1 trillion or the 2.6.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 318.
 MR. FISHER.  For both. Let’s stick with the apples to apples, which is the two-year program first because that’s what I asked about.  I think we discussed this a little bit yesterday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply suggesting that they focus on discussing the two-year program first and mentioning a previous discussion from the day before.


Passage number 319.
July 31–MS. LOGAN.  I don’t have the distribution of the two-year program for 2.6 with us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage is a simple statement without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 320.
 MR. FISHER.  And for the program under alternative A for both.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 321.
 MR. ENGLISH. Okay. Under alternative A, we stop the MEP and we buy $1 trillion, and with that assumption, we get to about 35 percent of Treasuries over 3 years and a little over 40 percent beyond 10 years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information and hypothetical scenarios without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 322.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The phrase "Thank you" does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement. It is simply a polite expression of gratitude.


Passage number 323.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 324.
 MS. DUKE. I think it is important to maintain some flexibility about how this is structured between Treasuries and MBS because the gross issuance number may actually fluctuate a bit. There are some indications right now that the originators are at capacity, and there have been announcements that would indicate that some of those originators are further reducing capacity. At the same time, FHFA announced yesterday that Freddie is going to move toward more HARP refinancing.  And then the third piece is, as the rates come down, you have some risk that the serial refinancers are the ones that are back using the available capacity, and these higher-rate HARP refinances get crowded out.  So I think it makes sense to really pay attention to gross issuance and maintain that flexibility and move slowly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing a balanced and nuanced perspective on the importance of maintaining flexibility in the structure between Treasuries and MBS. They consider the factors of fluctuating gross issuance, originators' capacity, FHFA's announcement on HARP refinancing, and the potential crowding out of higher-rate HARP refinances. The speaker does not express disagreement with any specific point or bring up any conflicting views.


Passage number 325.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only mentions the name "Governor Stein," but does not provide any information or context that would indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 326.
 MR. STEIN.  Yes, more on the same theme of being attentive to market spreads.  Obviously, we want to worry about capacity, but to me, a situation in which the Desk’s execution on an intraday basis is eroding would be much less troubling than, for example, one in which Treasuries seem to just detach from the rest of the curve.  We might have plenty of liquidity in the market, but if we fool with just pulling Treasuries and not getting much pass-through to spreads—this is essentially consistent with what President Rosengren was saying— July 31–we would want to start moving on the other spreads instead.  It’s a little harder to conceptualize and to measure, maybe, than the really narrow market functioning stuff, but I think it’s ultimately more important from a macro kind of perspective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and stating that they believe focusing on the spreads of Treasury bonds is more important than focusing on the execution of the Desk's intraday basis.


Passage number 327.
 MR. POTTER.  That was Vice Chairman Dudley’s point as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges and agrees with Vice Chairman Dudley's point.


Passage number 328.
 MR. STEIN.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is yes. The presence of the word "Yes" suggests that there is contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 329.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 330.
 MR. POWELL.  Further to what Vice Chairman Dudley was mentioning, I’d like to understand better how much of a bang for buck from buying MBS we think is in the housing market through lower rates and how much of it is just from removing duration, as though we were buying Treasuries. I don’t know if you have that now, but if not, then during the intermeeting period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a request for clarification and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 331.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I don’t have specific numbers, but I think the point is that the housing market is now very small, and so the benefits from narrower spreads through mortgages to the housing sector are probably not that large relative to the broader effect of just pushing down longer-term rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. English is stating his opinion and explaining a point without any indication of disagreement or contention. He is simply providing analysis and speculation about the housing market and the potential impact of narrower spreads through mortgages.


Passage number 332.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  The passage simply states that someone named Mr. Powell is expressing gratitude. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 333.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Of course, there are house price effects and other channels.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states that there are house price effects and other channels without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 334.
 MR. ENGLISH. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 335.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions for Bill.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if there are any additional questions for Bill. Mentioning Governor Raskin does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 336.
 MS. RASKIN.  I just want to make sure whether the outcomes for the alternative A LSAP that were shown on page 1 are 3, or are we looking at 3′.  And given that there is just one path here, are we to assume that there is no difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is seeking clarification and asking for confirmation about the information presented.


Passage number 337.
July 31–MR. ENGLISH. Because these were calculations done for the consensus forecast, they aren’t exactly alternative A, but basically a $1 trillion purchase program.  You could think of it as either 3′, just the stock version, or the flow version, but it happens that you bring it to a close in the fall of 2013 because the unemployment rate has fallen by, I think, about 0.4 percentage point by then, and you declare that to be enough of a move in the unemployment rate that it’s time to bring your purchases to a close.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 338.
 MS. RASKIN.  Okay.  I imagine that when we do our policy go-round, we will probably want to elaborate on differences between 3 and 3′. This suggests that there aren’t any, but I’m not sure analytically if that’s correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging that there may be a need to discuss and clarify the differences between two options (3 and 3'). The speaker also expresses uncertainty about the correctness of her analytical understanding. However, this does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 339.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I think the question is, when would you choose to end the flow of purchases under the flow version.  If the hurdle for bringing that program to a close is more substantial, so it would be in place for longer, then it would be a bigger purchase program and you’d get a bigger kick on the economy.  I think we didn’t know exactly what threshold you would want to apply, and so we tried to write down a $1 trillion purchase program as something that plausibly might be roughly in line with paragraph 3.  The other thing to keep in mind is, beyond what the purchases are expected to be at the outset, there is the thought that the flow version may provide greater reassurance that the Committee is going to keep buying until something good happens. If there’s a negative shock, then the amount of purchases could be increased in a flexible way in order to potentially provide greater confidence effects, aside from the amount of purchases that people anticipate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing potential strategies and considerations for a purchase program.


Passage number 340.
 MS. RASKIN.  Right, but we don’t see that confidence reflected here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, MS. RASKIN is making a statement about the lack of confidence reflected in a certain situation. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 341.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Absolutely—quite right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that Mr. English agrees with a statement. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 342.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard, question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only mentions President Bullard and does not provide any information or statements that indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 343.
  July 31–MR. BULLARD.  Yes.  On page 1 of the handout, I guess there could be confidence bands around the unemployment rate and PCE inflation.  How confident can I be that these are statistically different, these two lines.  That’s one question; I have another question, but go ahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Rather, it seems that Mr. Bullard is seeking clarification and asking a question related to statistical differences and confidence intervals.


Passage number 344.
 MR. ENGLISH.  On the confidence bands, we know the confidence bands around these things are very large.  This is our best estimate.  We haven’t calculated correct confidence bands given the nature of the exercise. But presumably these are not big effects relative to the uncertainty around our estimates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining that they do not have accurate confidence bands, but they believe the estimated effects are not significantly large compared to the uncertainty surrounding the estimates.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 345.
  MR. BULLARD.  Could I map some of the confidence bands that are around, say, the consensus forecast exercise. Could I put those on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The use of the word "could" suggests that there is a desire or request to do something, while the lack of a clear response or agreement from another party implies a potential disagreement or contention.


Passage number 346.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I don’t think so because those are, in some sense, unconditional confidence bands.  Those confidence bands would be relative to all sorts of shocks that could play out over the next few years.  This is saying, this is, in effect, the outcome, given a particular way that the economy plays out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is offering their opinion and explaining their perspective on the matter, but there is no direct disagreement or debate happening.


Passage number 347.
 MR. BULLARD. Okay. So we’re not putting them on the picture, but we think that they’re pretty wide.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 348.
 MR. ENGLISH. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any evidence of contention or disagreement between the speaker, Mr. English, and any other individuals.


Passage number 349.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  If you apply this methodology not to the two individual paths but to the difference and ask the question whether there was a positive effect, the methodology would guarantee that it would be a very small confidence band because the same shock hitting with or without the policy would give you exactly the same differential.  It would be independent of the shock.  I’m not saying that’s truth. I’m just saying that that’s what the model would give you if you did this methodology in terms of the difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement explains how the methodology would guarantee a small confidence band when applying it to the difference between the two paths. The speaker clarifies that this statement does not represent the truth but rather reflects what the model would produce using that methodology.


Passage number 350.
July 31–MR. BULLARD.  I have one more question.  On the unemployment path, one of the things I mentioned yesterday is that because of long-run neutrality there should be payback periods so that unemployment is temporarily lower, but then later it must be temporarily higher—these often don’t show up in this picture.  It does seem as though it is going to show up here starting at about 2020.  Is that a fair way to think about this—that, yes, you can temporarily lower unemployment, but you can’t permanently lower the path of unemployment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement and question posed by Mr. Bullard regarding the concept of long-run neutrality and the impact on unemployment levels.


Passage number 351.
 MR. WILCOX.  I don’t think that is correct, because the unemployment rate throughout the adjustment period is above the NAIRU, and so if we were driving unemployment materially below the NAIRU, it would have to come back up ultimately to the NAIRU.  But are you suggesting that there would be some sort of a stock of payback.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of a personal opinion and a question for clarification.


Passage number 352.
 MR. BULLARD.  This looks like a permanent effect on unemployment.  Is that what we’re seeing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply making an observation and seeking confirmation or clarification.


Passage number 353.
 MR. WILCOX.  No, I don’t think so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a direct statement by Mr. Wilcox.


Passage number 354.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  The simulations go out through 2075 [laughter], but we’re not showing you those.  They’re all converging.  The unemployment rate is converging to 5½ percent just a few years after 2020, and inflation is going to 2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply presents information about simulations and their results without any conflicting viewpoints or contradictory statements.


Passage number 355.
 MR. WILCOX.  And there’s no permanent effect. It’s 5½ percent either way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is no permanent effect and that the percentage is 5.5% in either direction.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 356.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Yes. The policies in both cases are designed to cause the economy to settle down at the assumed equilibrium, which is an unemployment rate of 5½ percent and inflation at 2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "The policies in both cases are designed to cause the economy to settle down at the assumed equilibrium" suggests agreement, but the mention of "assumed equilibrium" implies that there may be differing opinions or alternative viewpoints on what the actual equilibrium should be.


Passage number 357.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  So you’re saying there’s monotonic convergence. Is that what you’re saying. It’s all monotonic convergence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: 
The passage simply restates what the speaker is asking, without expressing any disagreement or contention. The speaker is seeking clarification and confirmation, rather than expressing disagreement.


Passage number 358.
July 31–MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. Is there any wobble.  The wobbles, I think, are what you’re talking about.  There are wobbles past 2020.  They are very tiny; they’re irrelevant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker states that there are wobbles past 2020, but describes them as very tiny and irrelevant. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 359.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  The model is built to not change the natural rate of unemployment so that there’s no permanent tradeoff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It states a fact in a straightforward manner.


Passage number 360.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Sure—yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Reifschneider agrees or says "yes" to something without any conflicting opinions being expressed.


Passage number 361.
 MR. BULLARD.  So this means that if you provide a more aggressive policy in some phases of the business cycle, you can have higher unemployment in other phases of the business cycle than what you would otherwise have if you did not provide that.  The business cycle would go like this, the unemployment rate would go like this, and then you would attenuate that cycle, and that’s how you get the same average over a long time. So we must be attenuating the cycle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is explaining the concept of how a more aggressive policy in certain phases of the business cycle can lead to higher unemployment in other phases, but ultimately results in the same average over a long time. There is no contention or disagreement presented in the passage.


Passage number 362.
 MR. WILCOX.  No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 363.
 MR. BULLARD.  If you’re not, then you have a permanent tradeoff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement by Mr. Bullard is a conditional statement suggesting that if someone is not willing to make a tradeoff, they will have a permanent disadvantage or limitation. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 364.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No.  You’re filling in the gap.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 365.
 MR. WILCOX.  You’re simply filling in a gap along the adjustment trajectory.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wilcox is simply stating a fact or observation.


Passage number 366.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Yes, I think it really is just faster convergence back to potential.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply agrees with the statement that there is faster convergence back to potential.


Passage number 367.
 MR. BULLARD. I’d like to see longer-term simulations of the model, and you show me how the economy would behave, say, under poor policy or something and then under a better policy, and show me the unemployment dynamics over a very long period of time where the average doesn’t change but the business cycle is attenuated through our policy.  That’s what I’d prefer to see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing a preference for longer-term simulations of an economic model and wanting to see the effects of different policies on unemployment dynamics.


Passage number 368.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I can send those to you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement indicating that the speaker is able to send something to the listener.


Passage number 369.
 MR. BULLARD.  That would be good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is expressing a positive sentiment, suggesting that something would be good.


Passage number 370.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. President Lacker, you had a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply giving a turn to President Lacker to speak.


Passage number 371.
   July 31–MR. LACKER. It was just a comment on the exchange you had with President Bullard.  I think you were right to point out that the relevant confidence band isn’t around any one of these two forecasts, but it’s around the marginal effect.  Now, I would just point out that the intermediate steps in constructing that would involve crucially this estimate of the effect of an LSAP on longer-term yields.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker is simply offering support and agreement with the previous comment made by President Bullard.


Passage number 372.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Of course.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 373.
 MR. LACKER. It wasn’t my impression that those were estimated terribly precisely, and so I’m not sure why we’d suspect that the error bands would be very tight around these differential effects.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and stating their lack of understanding regarding the estimated precision and tightness of error bands.


Passage number 374.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I was just making a narrow comment.  You don’t take into account coefficient uncertainty, right. So in the methodology used here, given the coefficients, you are just hitting the equations with shocks.  Then that uncertainty you are referring to, which is real, would not be captured in that exercise—that’s all I’m saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement clarifying a point and expressing agreement with a previous statement made about coefficient uncertainty.


Passage number 375.
 MR. LACKER.  Right.  Well, the coefficient uncertainty in the model is yet another source of uncertainty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It presents a statement about coefficient uncertainty in a neutral manner.


Passage number 376.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Of course.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 377.
 MR. LACKER. This key delta—how many basis points an LSAP gives you—is imprecisely measured as well, and that’s the linchpin to these effects.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement made by Mr. Lacker, discussing the imprecise measurement of a key delta and how it affects certain effects.


Passage number 378.
 MR. WILCOX. I think there’s more agreement here than meets the eye. The relevant confidence intervals are around the policy multipliers, not around these particular trajectories. And I think that’s the point that we’re all struggling to articulate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating that there is more agreement than what is initially apparent and that the focus should be on confidence intervals around policy multipliers rather than specific trajectories.


Passage number 379.
  July 31–CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Not seeing other questions—have we finished the policy go-round yet.  [Laughter]  Why don’t we start with our policy go-round, and I’ll call on President Lockhart to begin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking if the policy go-round has been completed.


Passage number 380.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B at this meeting. On the question of the extension of the funds rate forward guidance, I accept that there is a valid rationale.  Most here have downgraded their outlooks, and a move to mid-2015 could be justified based on the revised outlook or perhaps on consistency with the logic of the January move.  That said, I prefer holding off on changing the guidance until the September meeting. I see benefit in making any change in the forward guidance bundled with other policy actions if it turns out that that’s the Committee’s decision in September. I agree with the staff assessment that such a change in isolation might actually undermine public confidence in the outlook.  I’m prepared to support the change in language from the June statement in paragraph 4, the language that notches up the policy bias, and I’ll add a comment in support of that in a moment. I feel strongly that this is not the meeting to take the step of adopting one of the LSAP options outlined in alternative A.  I much prefer full discussion at this meeting and consideration of that option at the September meeting.  Apart from the benefit of full discussion and the usefulness, in my view, of accumulating more evidence of the economy’s path, I think a move of this magnitude needs to be complemented with the use of the arsenal of communications tools, including the Chairman’s press conference. In my thinking, there are a number of reasons to discuss now and act then if deemed appropriate by the Committee.  As of this meeting, my policy position is captured well by some of the points in the case for alternative B in the Tealbook.  Despite the weak incoming data, my outlook has not worsened materially since the last meeting. I continue to expect some strengthening in economic growth over coming quarters.   July 31–I expect a gradual reduction in the rate of unemployment and little inflationary pressure. There is certainly a risk, and maybe a material probability, that the conditions we’ve seen recently might not improve or could become more pronounced.  So I’m comfortable with the forward lean signaled in the alternative B language. Because the change to paragraph 4 will increase the expectation of policy action at the next meeting, I think the policy options in alternative A should be the focus of discussion in this round.  Obviously, either of the two options of LSAP, or QE3, is a significant action. In my view, the decision to undertake another LSAP is a momentous one and requires a careful weighing of benefits versus costs.  On consideration, I would expect the ultimate tradeoff between benefits and costs to boil down to one of limited benefits opposite uncertain costs, but in most respects, manageable risks. I currently prefer the open-ended option because I think the commitment to keep applying accommodation until satisfactory conditions have been achieved is the stronger and more flexible of the two approaches. I think it has the better chance of producing meaningful results.  I also think it’s possible that it will involve expending fewer resources.  That said, we should have restrained expectations for another LSAP round.  Lower interest rates and more liquidity are unlikely to move the needle much.  A boost to risky asset prices would likely be mood enhancing for some period but won’t alter fundamentals, in my view.  Outcomes such as lower rates and higher risky asset prices will probably help and will probably produce improvement of economic conditions over what would have transpired in the absence of further stimulus.  As of this time, I’m not projecting inflation so measurably below our target as to view a new LSAP as similar in purpose to LSAP 2.  At the same time, I see the costs as mostly contingencies in the form of longer-term risks. If the risks were to materialize as actual costs, they are unlikely to be apparent in the near term.  If the Committee decides to  July 31–implement a new LSAP program, I see value in communicating clearly that the program would be ended early if the effects are judged to be smaller than expected or if the associated costs look to be more substantial than originally thought. Regarding the option to cut IOER, I also think there are reasons to be cautious at this meeting and hold off.  I’d like to have more confidence that the move will not disrupt the functioning of money markets with spillover into the economy.  I doubt that reduction to 15 basis points—or to zero, for that matter—will encourage more lending.  I think there is a chance that banks would move to replace lost income by raising charges to customers, and I’d like to have some time to watch the European experience, even if just for a few weeks. Overall, I don’t see this as a powerful tool in and of itself.  With more certainty on some of these concerns, I could see including an IOER move in a bundle of stronger actions. Finally, even though the circumstances calling for additional policy actions seem to be becoming more evident, I expect that the outlook will be murky at the next meeting; we will still be guessing.  Another LSAP is a big decision.  I’m not yet fully convinced it will be the right decision to pull the trigger in September, but my mind is not closed on the matter, and I hope the Committee will use this meeting for full discussion and take up the question of action in September. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 381.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 382.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 383.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I strongly favor alternative A, and, like President Lockhart, I am going to use my time to talk about alternative A, because I do think that getting the wording right is important.  At our last meeting, the situation called for action, and we took a step in that direction.  The news since then confirms that progress toward our policy goals will likely remain stalled unless we take further, more-significant action. In the Tealbook, theJuly 31–unemployment gap remains sizable and does not close for the next two years.  And all the while, inflation remains below our 2 percent target.  Simply put, such an outcome is inconsistent with appropriate monetary policy.  We need to be on a path that brings us measurably closer to our goals over the forecast horizon.  To accomplish that, we should take the strong actions described in alternative A, including further asset purchases and extending the forward guidance to mid-2015; I also favor lowering the interest rate on reserves to 15 basis points. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed two counterarguments.  One is that we should wait for conclusive confirmation that the economy has lost momentum, and the second is that we should keep our powder dry, saving it in case we go over the fiscal cliff or Europe implodes.  But I find neither argument for inaction compelling.  As I mentioned in our discussion of policy rules, the key lesson from research is the need to act quickly and aggressively in situations where we have limited firepower remaining.  Delay is costly because the opportunity to add stimulus may be lost.  The same logic equally applies to the use of asset purchases. Furthermore, the memo on capacity constraints indicated that if another big negative shock hits, we still have room to do quite a bit more.  Even if we act today, we will still have plenty of powder left in reserve. Turning to the specifics, I, too, support the open-ended option in paragraph 3.  This approach has a number of advantages.  Given all of the uncertainties we face, we cannot be sure of how long we’ll need to keep buying assets until they get the economy on track.  Therefore, pre-announcing the total purchase amount could be counterproductive.  In addition, the open-ended approach allows us to apply a more rule-like structure around the asset purchases, as President Bullard has argued.  On a small detail, I prefer the final sentence in 3′ to the final sentence of 3.  Everyone knows that there are potential costs to LSAPs and their effects are July 31–uncertain.  That’s why we move cautiously.  But publicly fretting about that in the statement diverts attention from our main message, which is that we will do whatever it takes to make measurable progress on our goals. In sum, I’m convinced that further action is needed at this time.  I can go along with pushing this off until the next meeting, but I worry that our delay is only making matters worse. In terms of alternative B, I prefer keeping the “late 2014” language for now, if we’re going to go with alternative B. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 384.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement mentioned in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Bullard.


Passage number 385.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude towards President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 386.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude for President Lacker.


Passage number 387.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 388.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 389.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative A today wholeheartedly.  I agree with the views that President Williams expressed.  I also agree with President Kocherlakota and his comments about how emphasizing our balanced approach to our monetary policy strategy would really enhance the effectiveness of alternative A.  I think that that wouldJuly 31–be very helpful as well.  That’s what our strategy says we’re supposed to be doing, after all.  I prefer the flow version of the asset purchases with a clearly stated economic conditionality.  That seems most consistent with analyses indicating that strong accommodation is beneficial today. The composition of any asset purchases is important, but frankly, for me, the signaling component that it adds to our forward guidance is where I see the maximum benefit from a policy action like that.  I think they’re highly complementary.  I would not unduly delay any actions today in order to study the composition effects, and I do favor flexibility in the percentages of the purchases. Frankly, I think the best defense that we have against adverse shocks that may be coming our way is to have the most resilient economy possible; we don’t have that today.  We’ve seen a host of, I think, very credible analyses saying that more-aggressive accommodation of various forms would yield a better outcome.  For example, this is clear in the trial-run consensus forecast’s analyses that the Chairman discussed yesterday.  Comparing outcomes under the consensus policy assumption with those under alternative A, we see that the latter are clearly better outcomes.  Alternative A would bring unemployment down to the range that we’ve judged to be sustainable, but it would come down at a significantly faster rate, and, it seems to me that it would do so with no worse of an inflation outcome.  Instead of running a couple of tenths below our target, inflation would run a couple of tenths above that target.  Because we’ve said that deviations around the target are to be evaluated symmetrically, it’s a wash when it comes to inflation. And on the point that President Kocherlakota mentioned about how there’s an inflation price for bringing unemployment down, I agree with that.  But I would state it more in terms of, we really need marginal utility pricing against these policy goal variable developments, and so we need a policy loss function.  When the unemployment rate is 8.2 percent, a reduction in theJuly 31–unemployment rate is unbelievably valuable.  The marginal utility of that’s very high, but when inflation is very close to its goal variable and it doesn’t change in relation to its goal, the policy cost is much lower.  I would think the cost–benefit analysis would run that way. I believe that someone asked yesterday whether, if we were doing the consensus forecast exercise for real today rather than as a trial run, we would be showing the public the forecast under the alternative policies.  And I thought I saw a sense of relief from some in the room when you, Mr. Chairman, said, “No, we would not be doing that.” But why would that be.  For me, I think it’s because, if the public saw the two outcomes side by side, it would be very difficult to defend the consensus outlook with no additional actions relative to alternative A. These are good analyses and viewpoints that should be communicated publicly, and I once again thank Governor Yellen for publicizing such views to some extent in her speeches.  Of course, anyone unsympathetic toward embracing alternative A may feel that the Board staff analysis underlying the projected outcomes for that alternative is somehow lacking.  That’s understandable.  Humility is very important, of course.  There have been some times over the years that I thought I might have had a better take than the Board staff on some particular issue. I personally have found the Board analyses to be among the very best I’ve ever seen. There’s a lot of accumulated macroeconomic wisdom, as well as cutting-edge technique, embedded in these forecasts and analyses. As a result, the Board staff has a pretty good track record relative to other forecasters—Romer and Romer have written papers on that, and other analyses have documented that as well. It seems to me that most alternative views are more of the nature of opinions and discretionary judgment; it seems to me that there’s not really a good paper trail for these alternative analyses.  I go back to our discussions about structural unemployment, where we had  July 31–lots of hypotheses that were floated, but then when we sat down and looked at hard analyses, we found there to be a lot less than many of us expected going into that. Finally, there’s a great temptation to stop doing anything right now—do nothing more.  After all, our balance sheet is very large.  Surely history will credit the Fed with being the smartest policy player in the game today.  We did as much as anyone thought we could; that’s all we could do.  But the paper trail of analyses, to me, is long in telling us that more accommodation is necessary and appropriate.  For policymakers entrusted with great responsibilities—and without a compelling alternative view—personally, I think we would imperil our credibility by doing less.  I favor alternative A. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, expresses his support for alternative A and agrees with the views of President Williams and President Kocherlakota. He also praises the Board staff analyses and expresses his belief that more accommodation is necessary and appropriate. There is no opposing viewpoint presented in this passage.


Passage number 390.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Did you have a comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states gratitude and asks if there is a comment.


Passage number 391.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Just a quick comment on the pricing issue for inflation.  I agree that marginal utilities have to be taken into account.  I was trying to do that by thinking about the comparison of relative prices with the slope of the objective function, but you could do it the way you were doing them in terms of just weighting things by marginal utilities. I think it is not as obvious what a balanced approach would imply for marginal utilities when the unemployment rate is as high as 8.2 percent, but I think this is exactly the kind of conversation we need to have. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging and agreeing with the previous comment, and expressing the need for further discussion on the topic.


Passage number 392.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude from President Rosengren.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 393.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Several people have alluded to their concern about how we prepare for when we will have significant clarity about the outlook. I don’t think that’s the issue that we have right now.  Given the very substantial downside risks, I think we should be preparing to avoid a wake.  While I support alternative A, as does President Evans and President Williams, it appears the Committee needs more time. However, with a July 31–forecast that misses on both elements of the mandate, there should be a strong presumption that we implement alternative A at the next meeting. I am concerned that alternative B is still too restrained.  I would change the language from “late 2014” to “mid-2015.”  Failing to do so would indicate that we are impervious to the fact that six months have elapsed and the outlook is worse than when we implemented the “late 2014” guidance. I also support lowering the interest on reserves.  With three-month Treasuries much lower than 25 basis points, I see no reason to maintain such an elevated rate.  As was highlighted in the staff’s comments, the ECB’s reduction of their deposit rate has not generated severe dislocations in money markets in Europe. In terms of the asset purchases, I would prefer a heavier weighting toward mortgage-backed securities.  As Governor Stein mentioned yesterday, we should be focusing on programs where spreads remain wide. I would support paragraph 3 in alternative A if it was clear that we currently expect the program to last at least a year.  The LSAPs will not be effective if the markets expect that the action could be quickly reversed.  Finally, I would consider how we could utilize the discount window to more clearly signal a desire to increase Main Street lending. It is becoming increasingly difficult to explain that we still have tools but we are not using them despite a weakening forecast and missing on both elements of the mandate. Given the strong possibility of further weakening, I am concerned that a shock from Europe not only places us in danger of continuing to miss on both elements of the mandate, but also raises questions about whether we can credibly hit either element of our mandate. The least-credible central bank in the developed world right now is Japan—not because of too much inflation; not because they didn’t increase their balance sheet, as the balance sheet has increased significantly.  They’re not credible because they did too little too late.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker expresses concern about the Committee's decision-making and suggests alternative approaches to policy. They argue for implementing alternative A at the next meeting, changing the language about the timing of actions, lowering interest on reserves, focusing on mortgage-backed securities, and utilizing the discount window. They also criticize the credibility of the central bank's actions and compare it unfavorably to Japan's approach.


Passage number 394.
July 31–CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Thank you" indicates gratitude rather than any conflicting opinions or disputes.


Passage number 395.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I expect only a modest improvement in the rate of growth for the remainder of this year in the face of an ongoing European sovereign debt crisis and our own fiscal issues.  These headwinds are factored into my forecast, and unless they worsen, I expect that economic activity will likely improve in 2013. With subdued economic growth and elevated levels of unemployment, the impulse to take action seems natural, and I do consider carefully the cost of inaction.  I remain cautious, however, about creating expectations that further accommodation can have a meaningful effect on employment or speed recovery.  The future cost of more accommodation and an extended period of exceptionally low rates concerns me in terms of the potential unintended consequences related to financial market distortions and mispriced risk. As the Committee considers further asset purchases, I think about how longer-term measures of inflation expectations or breakeven inflation appeared to respond strongly to past LSAP announcements.  Given that longer-term breakeven inflation measures are currently consistent with our stated 2 percent goal, I’m concerned that another LSAP program could push longer-term expectations above a level consistent with our objectives. If this were to occur, I think that we would face a very difficult tradeoff between allowing longer-term expectations to drift higher, which could bring into question the Committee’s commitment to the 2 percent goal, or risking a reversal of course by reducing the size of the balance sheet.  Either option, it seems to me, would be damaging to the real economy and to our credibility.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement made by MS. GEORGE expressing her concerns and considerations regarding economic growth, unemployment, and the potential impact of further accommodation measures. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 396.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you. President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude towards President Pianalto.


Passage number 397.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  The incoming data since our last meeting have been weaker than expected and led to some small downwardJuly 31–revisions to my forecast. It turns out that for the first time in my almost 10 years on this Committee, I have one of the more optimistic forecasts. I still expect the pace of recovery to improve in the second half of this year and next year.  With my outlook, I believe this pace of recovery will yield some progress on the unemployment rate while preserving price stability.  And taking into account the costs and benefits of further action, I believe that the current stance of policy is appropriate.  I would prefer to leave the forward guidance on the path for the federal funds rate unchanged for now.  In general, in the absence of large changes in the outlook, I think that it is better to wait for an SEP meeting to change forward guidance. My preference for holding off on further action until we see a more significant downgrade in the outlook reflects my current judgment of the potential benefits and costs of the tools available to us.  At this point, I am concerned that the risks and costs of further LSAPs could be higher than they were in previous instances, making the cost–benefit comparison less favorable. One reason is that further LSAPs could have more adverse effects on market functioning than did previous LSAP programs, because the Federal Reserve’s purchases would become a somewhat larger share of the market than a year or two ago.  I worry that many risks to market functioning identified in the memo from Board and Desk staff on LSAP capacity may not be as manageable now as in earlier LSAPs.  Another reason that costs may be higher now than in the past is that the size and composition of our balance sheet, after completing the LSAP program proposed in alternative A, exposes us to risks that we could incur larger capital losses and we may not be able to make remittances to the Treasury at some point in the future. That may be an acceptable risk to this Committee, but before deciding to pursue another LSAP program, I think it would be helpful to see an analysis of the effects on our balance sheet—as we talked about yesterday—of adding an additional $1 trillion LSAP program under a variety of   July 31–interest rate and economic growth scenarios—essentially updating and extending the analysis that was prepared at our April FOMC meeting. I am also concerned about the potential risk to financial stability that would be associated with a protracted period of very low interest rates. We are in territory, as others have said, where we have never been before, and I would like to better understand the risks and costs that we could be facing. Based on my current view of the costs and benefits and my forecast of gradual progress on the unemployment rate consistent with price stability, I believe that it would be better to hold off on any further action to see if the outlook for economic growth and inflation deteriorates significantly more. If my forecast does materially weaken in the next few months, I would become concerned about the chances of a lost decade and permanent structural damage to labor markets.  Still, I would like to gain more comfort about the risks we are facing, including balance sheet risks, if we take further action. To me, gaining more comfort will require a careful Committee discussion of the potential longer-term risks and costs of policy actions that are contemplated in alternative A.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: In this passage, Ms. Pianalto expresses her support for alternative B and explains her reasoning behind it. She discusses her forecast, the pace of recovery, and her concerns about the risks and costs associated with further LSAPs. While she presents her own viewpoint and preferences, there is no indication of contention or disagreement with others.


Passage number 398.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude to President Fisher.


Passage number 399.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher, I know we put a lot of value on anecdotal reports around this table, and often to great credit.  But I do want to urge you not to overweight the macroeconomic opinions of private-sector people who are not trained in economics. In particular, in the case you gave, the company may not be impressed by lower interest rates to invest more, but it pays dividends.  Dividends are personal income; that could lead to more spending.  A lower dollar could lead to more export orders.  More spending by consumers because of higher stock prices could lead to more orders.  I think all of these firms have shown a willingness to respond to higher demand.  So I just ask you to please keep in mind that they may not understand all of the channels through which monetary policy works.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is an individual urging President Fisher to consider not giving too much weight to the macroeconomic opinions of private-sector individuals who are not trained in economics. The individual is offering their perspective and asking for consideration.


Passage number 400.
 MR. FISHER.  I think that is certainly good, clear, and understandable logic for those who have access to stocks and mutual funds, which is about 50 percent of the households.  These people are much more sophisticated than we give them credit for, Mr. Chairman, but you and other Governors have reminded me on various occasions that we can’t place too much stock in anecdotal evidence. Having said that, I’ve always referred to these as pixels that are part of a broader picture, and I offer them only because I think they’re important to take into consideration.  Second, I think we have to be very careful.  Whether they’re little or large,July 31–whether they’re public or private, these are the people who are on the battlefield creating jobs. What I am asking them is what their plans are in terms of budgeting, and I am relaying it to the Committee.  Obviously, this is anecdotal, and I always preface my comments by saying, “For what it’s worth.”  So let me conclude my comments by saying that for what it’s worth, that’s my opinion.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and acknowledging that it is anecdotal evidence, but they are not disagreeing with anyone else's perspectives or arguments.


Passage number 401.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Their plans are quite interesting. It’s just the analytical part that I’m questioning.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their curiosity or skepticism about the analytical part of the plans, but there is no indication of any disagreement or conflict.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 402.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I’d just reinforce the point that I think the channel of the cost of capital affecting business fixed investment is actually probably one of the weaker channels, as opposed to one of the more powerful channels.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: In this passage, the author presents their opinion that the channel of the cost of capital affecting business fixed investment is a weaker one. However, there might be people who disagree with this assertion and believe that it is a powerful channel. Therefore, there is contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 403.
 MR. FISHER.  So what are we doing, Bill. We’re lowering the cost of capital, correct. We’re providing plentiful capital.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple conversation discussing the act of lowering the cost of capital and providing plentiful capital.


Passage number 404.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That works through many different channels.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any form of disagreement or contention. It simply states that something (unspecified) works through many different channels.


Passage number 405.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Many, many different channels.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that there are many different channels.


Passage number 406.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  And the cost-of-capital channel is probably one of the weaker ones.  That’s all I’d say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presented as a personal opinion ("That’s all I’d say") without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting arguments.


Passage number 407.
 MR. FISHER.  Well, again, I take very seriously our charge in terms of the dual mandate.  With regard to job creation, I’m talking to the job creators.  And I’m not seeing the response that I was hoping to see because of other blockages, and that has to do with the incentive to put to work the funding and the cheap capital we’re making available.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing their disappointment about the lack of response from job creators regarding the availability of funding and cheap capital.


Passage number 408.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Yellen.


Passage number 409.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  I anticipate moderate economic growth over coming quarters and no meaningful improvement in the labor market.   July 31–Moreover, I see very substantial downside risks to this outlook from European developments and the impending fiscal cliff. Looking ahead to the September meeting, I fervently hope to see economic conditions improve.  I’ll be particularly looking for a markedly more positive tone in the two employment reports we’ll receive during the next six weeks.  But barring such improvements, I think we should definitely take action along the lines of alternative A. The consensus forecast document, as I mentioned in my economic remarks yesterday, provides a compelling case for these actions, and I fully agree with the way in which Presidents Evans and Kocherlakota and others have elaborated that reasoning. A forecast that envisions almost no meaningful progress in lowering unemployment over the next few years, while inflation consistently runs below our objective, is not balanced and just cannot be a satisfactory outcome. I think the new language in paragraph 4 of alternative B is sufficiently forward leaning to indicate our intention to act unless we do see significant improvement, without locking action in.  Alternative B offers an option to extend our forward guidance to at least mid-2015 today, but I would much prefer, when we extend that guidance, to adopt the more positive language from paragraph A(4), and that militates in favor of waiting until September.  Governor Raskin and President Kocherlakota have both articulated a strong case for a change along the lines of A(4).  And I agree with the detailed explanation of that reasoning that President Kocherlakota just offered. Importantly, our forward guidance acts as a tool for providing additional accommodation only insofar as it signals a commitment on our part to hold the funds rate at exceptionally low levels for a longer period than we would if policy were not constrained by the zero lower bound.  In other words, extending our forward guidance provides additional support to the recovery most effectively when it is not interpreted as merely reflecting a deterioration in the Committee’s economic projections.  Extending our forward guidance in September could   July 31–have a more powerful market effect if the Committee is able to clarify its role as a policy tool, and indeed, this is something I would urge the Chairman to consider articulating at Jackson Hole. Short of a very substantial improvement in the economic outlook, I would also strongly endorse the launching of an open-ended LSAP program at the September meeting along the lines described in paragraph A(3).  An open-ended approach would clearly convey that we are determined to see conditions in the labor market improve, and that we will do what it takes. Moreover, the proviso at the end of paragraph A(3) would allow us to ramp up the pace of purchases in response to a deterioration in the economic outlook or a widening of risk spreads.  Conversely, we would also have the flexibility to scale back or even halt the program if it became apparent that the purchases were proving ineffective or having substantial adverse effects on financial market functioning or financial stability. But “we will do what it takes” is a powerful message, and I believe that such a program would provide meaningful support to the recovery.  I think an important design element of the proposed LSAP program is that it would restart our purchases of agency MBS.  Doing so should provide additional support to the housing sector, even though those effects may be attenuated given the impediments in the mortgage market. I recognize, and agree with President Fisher, that lower borrowing costs may have only a minimal effect on investment spending, precisely for the reasons that you’ve given—that businesses at this point are preoccupied with uncertainty, weak demand, and excess capacity and don’t see their inability to borrow on reasonable terms as an impediment to hiring or spending.  But I also want to emphasize my agreement with the point that the Chairman and Vice Chairman Dudley just made.  The implication is not that this program would not have a meaningful effect on the economy.  The staff estimates that around two-thirds of the impetus to spending from   July 31–LSAPs results from wealth effects on consumer spending due to higher equity prices and the favorable influence of a weaker dollar on net exports.  Those two channels of the monetary transmission mechanism remain alive and well, and I absolutely think that businesses will respond by hiring more and investing more when they see a significant and meaningful increase in their sales that they can feel confident about.  Moreover, while the confidence-building effects of an open-ended program are difficult to capture in a conventional macro model, I believe that those benefits of an open-ended program could be very substantial.  Although I can see a strong case for initiating such a program at this meeting, I think that here, too, we can enhance the effectiveness of our action in September through our communications during the intermeeting period.  We could, in particular, explain that an open-ended program affords us greater flexibility to respond to the evolution of the macro outlook as well as to changing assessments of the costs and efficacy of the program. I agree with President Williams that it would be a mistake for us to delay the initiation of a new LSAP program beyond September in an effort to keep our powder dry.  Should a severe adverse scenario materialize, such as an escalation of the European debt crisis, then safe-haven flows into Treasuries would likely push yields down a lot, even without any policy action on our part. At the same time, overall financial conditions would be markedly tighter due to the widening of risk spreads.  In such a situation, further LSAPs might have little or no effect, whereas right now I believe they can provide significant further stimulus through lower longer-term interest rates. There is no point in saving our ammunition if, in the end, the ammunition would lose its potency.  Another reason I think we need to use our ammunition soon is precisely because we have so little left beyond that.  Fostering a stronger recovery by providing additional   July 31–stimulus now would not only promote more-rapid improvement in the labor market, but would also improve the resilience of the economy should it be buffeted by some large adverse shock. The two staff memos pertaining to LSAPs highlight that our capacity to conduct asset purchases is not unlimited, and there may also be limitations on just how far we can credibly extend forward guidance. In view of the substantial downside risk to the outlook, it’s therefore important for us to study what additional options we might have if more stimulus turns out to be needed. I see considerable value in studying whether it might be possible to develop discount window programs to stimulate lending in the spirit of the Bank of England’s Funding for Lending Scheme. I found the box in the Tealbook describing that approach very helpful, and I’m glad that Governor Raskin is leading the efforts here at the Federal Reserve Board to think about how to design a program that might work in our own institutional environment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement of the speaker's support for alternative B and their views on the economic outlook.


Passage number 410.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of a polite expression of gratitude towards Governor Duke.


Passage number 411.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I have every confidence the staff will deliver—[laughter]— that speech.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The laughter following the statement indicates that it was made in a light-hearted or joking manner, but it does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 412.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s up to you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply states that the decision is left to the reader. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 413.
 July 31–MR. TARULLO.  Okay. If it’s up to me, then I’m done.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 414.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 415.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As the economic data have, for the most part, continuously weakened over the course of the year, we publicly have sent the signal that we’re waiting for some clarity about whether there really is slowing under way. Now that we have revised Q1 GDP data and a look at Q2, as well as six months of employment data, it seems clear that the economy has indeed slowed appreciably since the second half of 2011.  With that additional clarity, it seems to me that it isn’t the data that is the rationale for not doing more to ensure that we’re making progress toward achieving either leg of our dual mandate.  The data are probably as clear as they will ever be.  What is unclear to the public is the efficacy and calibration of our tools and how we intend to use them.  And so I think the public might benefit from a shift in the conversation. Indeed, the economy might benefit from a shift in the conversation away from the prospects of poor prognosis and toward an explanation of what particular actions are intended to do. This is no small task.  Obviously, central banks react to economic conditions.  They have extraordinary capacity to do this in an apolitical way if they’re structured with both independence and accountability.  But in the realm of the unconventional, the zero lower bound, and constrained policymaking, the effectiveness of our actions also depends on fuller explanations of our tools.  Without such full explanations, the public and markets are confused and act in ways that counter the rationale for the policy tools.  This may not be a weakness in the tools, but a weakness in our communication to the public of what these policy tools are intended to do.  To me, the case for forceful and effective action is clear, but the necessary discussion is how to maximize the power of our communications before taking new action.  There may not be July 31–much to be gained from waiting, in terms of improving our insights into how the economy is evolving.  We’re always uncertain about the state of the economy, and I think it’s as clear as it can ever really be that the labor market isn’t improving on its own anytime soon.  I also don’t see January 2013 as some magical island from where the view is better and uncertainty has dissipated.  Moreover, I’m convinced by the work of the staff in their memos that we have plenty of capacity in the markets to take more action without impairing market functioning.  I don’t think that market functioning is a reason to hesitate, but of course, I look forward to further work in this area.  On the contrary, I think communication of these findings could set the stage for more forceful and effective action. I think the case for waiting can be made if it can improve our communications about new policy actions to economic participants.  In other words, can we make good use of the intermeeting period to introduce new or newly packaged monetary policy tools. Here, I’m reminded of my previous attempts at rolling out new dinner items to the family. I can throw together what is in the back of the refrigerator—the leftover chicken, salad, and potatoes—or I can attempt the never-before-tried seafood bouillabaisse à la Provençal.  But whichever route I go, let there be no doubt that an a priori explanation will be demanded.  Similarly, there’s a risk that announcing a new, bold policy tool or a package of less aggressive policy options without describing the thinking behind them may be interpreted by markets as a sign that we think the likelihood of an even worse economic outcome has significantly increased.  And without speeches from the Chairman and others to explain how such a new tool or package of old tools would be effective, we could confuse the public and get less of a positive effect than we otherwise could.July 31–In my view, an important part of the communication should be to make it clear that we’re not taking this bold move because we think that the economy has significantly weakened.  On the contrary, we should indicate that this is the right policy to take because we are doing what it takes to get where we want to be and to get there sooner than we would otherwise.  This would be a different content to communication than what has been usual here, and for me, if done correctly, justifies the lag in acting more quickly and decisively.  Therefore, if it’s the decision of the members of this Committee that we should go with alternative B at this time, that’s a decision I can support.  My support wouldn’t be without reservations, because I think the signal that we may be sending to the public now will be that we’re not concerned about meeting our mandate or that we think we don’t have the ability to do so.  Neither of those are messages that I want to send.  If we go with alternative B, I hope that members of this Committee will begin to clearly talk publicly about the possibility of and rationale for the type of action in alternative A so that we have laid the groundwork for enacting that policy the next time we meet. More important, I hope the policy action is characterized to the public as one that will be forceful and effective. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The author is expressing their opinion and discussing the need for clearer communication of policy actions.


Passage number 416.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing gratitude towards Governor Stein. There are no conflicting opinions or arguments present.


Passage number 417.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of thanks followed by addressing someone as "Governor Powell."


Passage number 418.
   July 31–MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like some others and unlike some others, I hope that the next intermeeting period will be helpful in clarifying the direction of the economy and the potential need for further action by this Committee.  We announced the extension of the MEP six weeks ago.  Developments in the economy in the meantime have been modestly worse than anticipated, and I don’t see that there’s been a material departure from the facts on June 20 that would call for a new trillion-dollar LSAP now.  So I have been an advocate for letting time pass. I therefore support alternative B, although the lean language, if you will, is a little stronger than where my thinking is.  And I would propose, at the right time—maybe that’s now— substituting the word “if” for the word “as” so that it would read, “The Committee will . . . monitor”—et cetera, et cetera—“and will provide additional accommodation if needed,” as opposed to “as needed.” To get a little into the thinking, I see us as mandate consistent on inflation, as I mentioned yesterday. I identified significantly with the Chairman’s analysis at the beginning of this morning, which is to say that I find aggregate supply explanations unpersuasive, and it is my view that there’s a material output gap.  I don’t know whether it’s 4 percent or 2 percent, but it seems highly likely to me that it is material and that we’re not making progress toward closing it. That means that we are missing on the employment side of the mandate to a high likelihood.  If this were a matter of cutting the funds rate, I, too, would see it as an easy call.  That’s not where we are, so it does come down to the cost-and-benefit analysis that so many others have talked about.  And for me, I think that the bar for another large LSAP is high and not yet met.  As far as the benefits are concerned, I would say that I suspect that our ability to increase employment by lowering rates is very limited at present; I’ve got real doubts about efficacy.  I don’t question the efficacy of earlier rounds—which, as Governor Tarullo pointed out, most academic observers   July 31–have found to be meaningful—but I suspect that the channels that we’re using now, which principally are asset prices, may not be working at all as well as our models say.  And I use the word “suspect” advisedly because I hold that view with substantial uncertainty. On the list of potential costs, I would include inflation, the difficulty of exit, the risk of creating expectations we can’t meet, the prospect of capital losses, market function, and the grab bag of stability issues. The point was well made, I thought, by a couple around the table that a number of these risks are not going to manifest themselves now, but over a long period of time.  So that’s worth considering.  While I take all of these risks seriously—and it would take a long conversation to do any single one of them justice—I am coming around to the view that they are manageable. I also take great comfort from the new language in alternative A that says that “the Committee will regularly review the pace and composition of its securities purchases in light of the economic outlook and its ongoing assessments” of their efficacy and costs, which I think helps quite a lot.  One issue I want to focus on today is that I am very wary of taking steps that will significantly increase the probability that a few years down the road, the Federal Reserve System might undergo an extended period of negative net worth on a mark-to-market basis. It is pointed out to me when I say this that we don’t mark to market, and my personal sample suggests that in excess of 95 percent of economists agree that the metric is irrelevant, and I’ve no doubt that it is.  But we’re a government agency—I get that. I still believe that it could matter a great deal for this institution if it comes to pass.  I don’t think it’s a dispositive argument, but I look forward to seeing the analysis that we work up on the effect of a large LSAP in the intermeeting period.  Net-net, my modal outlook for a large LSAP would be modest to little benefit, accompanied by risks that will bear close watching but that are probably manageable, and I would see the distribution of outcomes around that to be fairly evenly balanced. July 31–Regarding the options for further action that are on the table, A(3) and A(3)′, I admit to being a long way from having my mind made up on this.  I would say that as far as the open-ended LSAP is concerned, I think we will immediately need to clarify what we mean by “sustained improvement in labor market conditions” and to put some kind of a price tag on it.  I do understand the desire to put something out there that’s more aggressive, and I think this accomplishes that, but I don’t think we’ll get very far from this meeting without having to say— or the media will say it for us—how big this thing is. Is it $1 trillion.  Is it $2 trillion. What are the assumptions, and what do we mean by “sustained improvement in labor market conditions.” I suppose I do—without really understanding the answers to those questions yet—favor a smaller version of 3′.  But I also understand that tradeoff between pre-commitment and flexibility that Governor Stein was talking about, and I remain very open minded about this during the intermeeting period.  In terms of other ideas that are on the table—IOER—I think we should wait and see what happens further in Europe.  I’m not persuaded at this point that the very modest benefits clearly outweigh the risks.  In particular, we’re not at the point now where we’re getting two-by-fours mailed to us the way we were 30 years ago, as many will recall, but if we pick a fight with every small saver in the country, it’s a big step in that direction, and that’s what you’re doing when you’re going to negative deposit rates.  In terms of 2014 versus 2015, I’m okay either way.  I think I’m persuaded that it’s better to wait for the SEP.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and views on the economy and potential actions by the Committee, but there is no indication of strong disagreement or argumentative language.


Passage number 419.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude from the Vice Chairman.


Passage number 420.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I read this morning that a gaffe is when a policymaker actually speaks the truth in public, unfortunately.  Okay.  Thank you, all, and thank you for your patience. It’s a long session, I know.July 31–Everything has been said.  I think there’s a good case for accommodation for reasons I described.  And I think there’s some risk to not doing accommodation now; namely, much of it will be in the form of criticism of the Fed for not fulfilling its mandate. I also think that there are some good reasons for waiting, and they’ve been mentioned.  We just took action with the MEP, and it will still be in place.  A number of our colleagues expressed a desire to see more data, and it is true that we will have two labor market reports and other data between now and mid-September. I would say that there was obviously a good bit of lack of clarity in terms of exactly which program we would use—the details, how would we communicate it, and what would be the effects on market functioning.  I think all of those things need to be laid out very carefully and discussed carefully.  These are, obviously, very important details, and I don’t think we quite have gotten through them yet.  And as Governor Raskin and other people pointed out, there is also a communications effort that needs to be developed as we consider how we’re going to go forward if we do decide, in fact, to go forward.  So I do, with some mixed feelings, recommend waiting until September, and I recommend alternative B. In terms of language, et cetera, there was a pretty clear preference for leaving the “late 2014” forward guidance as it is and not making that change.  So you should strike the “mid-2015” option.  By the way, I’m not quite sure when the SEP adds 2015, but I think that it would be important for the SEP to add 2015 in September, just so we will get information on this issue. In terms of other language, Vice Chairman Dudley was the only person to talk about the fiscal policy point.  Again, the idea here was to mimic the treatment in my Humphrey–Hawkins testimony. I think the time to take it out would be when the fiscal cliff is resolved, whenever that might be.  But are there strong views on either side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their own thoughts and recommendations, as well as mentioning the opinions of others, but there is no open disagreement or argument taking place.


Passage number 421.
   July 31–MR. TARULLO.  I hadn’t thought about it, Mr. Chairman, but I found Bill’s arguments persuasive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker states that they found Bill's arguments persuasive, indicating agreement rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 422.
 MR. BULLARD. I agree with Vice Chairman Dudley and Governor Tarullo on this question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker explicitly agrees with the statements made by Vice Chairman Dudley and Governor Tarullo.


Passage number 423.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "Okay. President Fisher" is a simple response or acknowledgement and does not indicate any disagreement or conflict.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 424.
 MR. FISHER.  Obviously, I disagree.  We all talk about the fiscal cliff and the uncertainties that derive from it.  It’s a reality, and you made the message yourself, Mr. Chairman, as you said.  I would include it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher disagrees with something that has been mentioned, specifically "the uncertainties that derive from" the fiscal cliff.


Passage number 425.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any others.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 426.
 MR. FISHER.  By the way, it may be in there for the next 20 years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 427.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Well, I think a number of voters here expressed concerns, and so I think we’ll take that out and keep the language there—“Furthermore, strains in global financial markets continue to pose significant downside risks”— exactly identical to last time.  Then there were two comments about the “closely monitor” sentence.  President Kocherlakota suggested removing the words “and financial.” I think what we had in mind there was European developments, et cetera.  Are there others who have views on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a discussion about making changes to the language used in a statement, but there is no disagreement or argument being presented.


Passage number 428.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think it should stay in just for that reason.  I think people will construe that as a European reference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It only states the speaker's opinion about including something for a specific reason and their prediction about how others may interpret it.


Passage number 429.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 430.
 MR. LACKER.  Are they not economic developments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states "MR. LACKER. Are they not economic developments" without any indication of disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 431.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, yes—personally, I don’t feel super strongly about this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a personal opinion, indicating that they don't feel strongly about the subject being discussed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 432.
 MR. LACKER.  I agree with President Kocherlakota.  I’d take it out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker states that he disagrees with President Kocherlakota and believes that the statement should be removed.


Passage number 433.
 July 31–CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without further context. The given information does not provide any indication of conflict or debated ideas.


Passage number 434.
 MR. LOCKHART.  I favor keeping the “financial developments.” I think they’re very material at this time.  Financial disruptions of any kind are things we should be worried about and we’ll monitor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lockhart expresses his favor for keeping the "financial developments" and states that they are material and something to be worried about and monitor.


Passage number 435.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. This was exactly the same language we used a couple of years ago when we had a similar type of description.  Is that okay.  Would you like to take a straw vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of statements and questions related to past language and seeking consensus through a straw vote.


Passage number 436.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  It’s certainly up to the voters to decide on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply presents a neutral perspective on the subject.


Passage number 437.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. I’ll ask participants.  How many would like to keep the “financial” language.  One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight.  Okay.  We have a majority of participants, and we’ll keep the language as it is.  The other suggestion was to change “as” to “if.”  I’m a little concerned about dialing back.  I think there were enough people around the table who were forward leaning and thought, in fact, that we should even consider moving today that I’d like to keep the forward-leaning aspect, if that’s okay.  All right; I think that covers everything.  The changes we’ve made are, first, to get rid of the red “issues relating to U.S. fiscal policy,” and, second, to get rid of “mid-2015”; otherwise, alternative B would be as written.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining and discussing the suggestions made by the participants and expressing their own thoughts and preferences.


Passage number 438.
 MS. DANKER.  Okay.  This vote is on alternative B as the Chairman described and on the associated directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the vote is on alternative B as described by the Chairman.


Passage number 439.
 Chairman Bernanke Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes Governor Duke Yes President Lacker No President Lockhart Yes President Pianalto Yes Governor Powell Yes Governor Raskin Yes Governor Stein Yes Governor Tarullo Yes July 31–President Williams Yes Governor Yellen Yes CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  We went entirely through the coffee break.  Let me propose the following.  Why don’t we take a half-hour break. During that time, there’s coffee; lunch is also available.  So please gather some lunch, and at 12:45 we will recommence.  You can even have your lunch then, and then we’ll do the last item, which is about the consensus forecast.  Okay.  12:45. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement indicated in this passage. It simply suggests a break for lunch and provides information about the schedule.


Passage number 440.
 [Lunch break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.7  Okay.  Why don’t we recommence.  We have one last item on the agenda, item 5, which is a discussion of the experimental consensus forecast.  What we’d like to do is have two go-rounds.  The first one, which I hope will be very quick, is the following.  If this were live and I had a press conference in half an hour, I would be showing the baseline consensus forecast, the one that has no policy change, and saying that this forecast is the basis of the policy decision we made today.  Then I would say that a majority of the Committee supports this forecast—or says that their own views can be described in this forecast—and that several people disagreed with the forecast on the following grounds.  Or a similar type of statement might be in the minutes.  So what we’d like to do in the first go-round—again, I think it should be very quick—is just ask people, “If this were a live exercise, would you accept the proposition that your views can be, broadly speaking, described by the consensus forecast. If not, please say a few words about why not.” In the second go-round, which is more substantive, I’ll let Governor Yellen, who’s the head of the communications subcommittee, start it off, and then we’d like to get your views and your input on this whole process—if you’d like to continue this experiment, what changes you would like to make, et cetera.  Let me begin with the first go-7 See note 4. July 31–round.  I think I’ll just go around the table, if that’s okay, and ask people their views.  First go-round:  Would your views be describable by the baseline consensus forecast.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting a quick discussion where participants can state whether or not their views align with the baseline consensus forecast.


Passage number 441.
 MR. LACKER.  The answer is, pretty much.  My forecast, as I said yesterday, for inflation is closer to 2 percent, and for liftoff I’d write down something more like end of 2013 or maybe early 2014.  Now, you’re asking about the forecast qua numbers, as opposed to a write-up or any descriptive prose in the forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the speaker's forecast for inflation and the timing of liftoff.


Passage number 442.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’m talking about the numbers in table 1 that I’d be showing—excluding the Tealbook, obviously.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 443.
 MR. LACKER. So we’re not talking about the broader context—what we’re thinking about a monetary policy report or language about why things happen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about what the speaker is discussing.


Passage number 444.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  We haven’t gotten to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "We haven’t gotten to that" simply suggests that the topic mentioned has not been addressed or discussed yet, without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 445.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay.  All right.  Then I’ll save my comments about prose for later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, mentions that he will refrain from commenting on prose at that moment. However, without more context, it is difficult to ascertain the full meaning or intention behind his statement.


Passage number 446.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Right now, we’re just talking about the numbers in table 1—excluding the Tealbook numbers, of course.  And we also have exhibit 1, which shows the fan charts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating the current focus of their discussion, which is on the numbers in table 1. They also mention the presence of exhibit 1, which shows the fan charts. There is no indication of a dispute or disagreement.


Passage number 447.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay.  That’s my answer.  I’m sticking to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, simply states his response and asserts that he is firm in his position.


Passage number 448.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only consists of expressions of thanks and a statement of the name "President Kocherlakota," so there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 449.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I don’t know if I’ll be able to obey your admonition to be brief.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging the statement made by the chairman and expressing uncertainty about their ability to comply.


Passage number 450.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Well, okay" implies acceptance or agreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 451.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Actually, I have three differences with the forecast, but they’re qualitatively quite different in importance. The first two differences are due to a different   July 31–assessment of the current state of the economy.  I think there’s less slack than most of you do, and that leads me to favor less accommodation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Kocherlakota, mentions that he has three differences with the forecast and disagrees with the assessment of the current state of the economy. Therefore, there is contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 452.
 MR. LACKER.  Is slack on the table here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any form of contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asked by Mr. Lacker.


Passage number 453.
 MR. EVANS.  It wasn’t in the table.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage because it is a simple statement of fact.


Passage number 454.
 MR. LACKER. I thought we were talking about table 1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions Mr. Lacker's thoughts and the topic of conversation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 455.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  President Lacker, I believe the table has in it a forecast for the federal funds rate. I’m trying to explain why my forecast of the federal funds rate would differ from that in this table.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. Mr. Kocherlakota is indicating that his forecast of the federal funds rate differs from the forecast in the table, implying a disagreement or difference of opinion.


Passage number 456.
 MR. LACKER.  Oh, okay.  All right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply responds affirmatively and agrees with what was said.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 457.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. I don’t view these differences in terms of policy as being that critical.  At any given point in time, we’re going to have heterogeneous views of the size of the gap.  The point of a consensus forecast is to aggregate as best as possible our heterogeneous views.  And I think the current consensus forecast does that in a fair and reasonable way. But my last concern of the three is that the consensus forecast appears to imply that the Committee’s objective function over inflation and unemployment is inconsistent with the Committee’s January statement of principles, and this is a much more significant issue for me. Basically, my point is that the consensus forecast is much more important than what the Committee thinks is going to happen; it’s a way for communicating what the Committee is trying to make happen. And I think this forecast, as written, is not consistent with our longer-term strategies. In terms of my own forecast, as I’ve said before, I think the output gap is less negative than is implied by this. Essentially, I look at measures of utilization—at capacity utilization, average weekly hours, the box on labor shortages on pages 10 to 11 of the Tealbook A—and I would say everything, though, indicates that slack is roughly equivalent to early 2004.  Here, IJuly 31–guess I disagree slightly with Governor Powell that it matters whether the output gap is minus 4 percent or minus 2 percent.  And if you go back to late 2004, the FOMC estimated the output gap to be minus 1.4 percent, inflation was actually running lower than it is right now, and the FOMC was raising rates.  And they certainly had less accommodation in place.  So my view is that I expect inflation to be rising more rapidly than is in this consensus forecast.  I think it’ll be rising to over 2½ percent by mid-decade, and I favor less accommodative policy than is described in table 1 as a result.  But the name of this forecast is “consensus,” not “unanimous.” If these were the only differences, I would be comfortable with table 1 being used as a description of the consensus forecast of the Committee in a press conference, Mr. Chairman. However, I see my final difference as being considerably more material.  I think that most of us would agree that by changing the proposed path of monetary policy, we can affect the inflation rate and unemployment rate in 2014.  So the forecasts for 2014 inflation and 2014 unemployment are actually saying something about what we’re trying to achieve for those variables in 2014.  And by doing that, it’s signaling how we’re applying policy to trade off unemployment versus inflation in response to future shocks.  The Committee voted in January to follow a balanced approach to the dual mandate.  The consensus forecast in table 1 seems inconsistent with a balanced approach.  As I highlighted earlier, the consensus forecast says that inflation will be 1.8 percent in 2014 and unemployment will be 7.6 percent.  A balanced approach would indicate, I believe, that the Committee should be providing more accommodation in order to generate inflation above 2 percent.  And this matters because, Mr. Chairman, as I said, I think the benefit of a consensus forecast is that it tells people what we’re trying to achieve, and that, I think, feeds into Governor Raskin’s perspective that it’s importantJuly 31–for people to know what we’re trying to achieve with our policy in order for the policy to have as much effectiveness as possible.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Kocherlakota, disagrees with the consensus forecast and believes that it is inconsistent with the Committee's objectives and strategies. He argues that the output gap is less negative than implied by the forecast and that inflation will rise more rapidly than predicted. He also believes that the forecast is not in line with a balanced approach to the dual mandate and that more accommodation should be provided to generate inflation above 2 percent.


Passage number 458.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply expresses gratitude.


Passage number 459.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I have a question.  Are we supposed to write down what we think is the consensus forecast or what we want to happen.  This is the consensus forecast of what we think is going to happen, not what we want to happen.  And you can’t pull your punches and write down a different forecast that you don’t think is going to happen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply clarifying that they should write down the consensus forecast of what they think will happen, rather than what they personally want to happen. Additionally, they emphasize the importance of not holding back or writing down a different forecast that they believe will not occur.


Passage number 460.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Vice Chairman, I was under the impression that this is conditional on appropriate monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Kocherlakota, is simply stating his understanding that a certain condition is dependent on appropriate monetary policy.


Passage number 461.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes, it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without the specific passage mentioned, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement within it. Please provide the passage for a more accurate analysis.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 462.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota is saying that he disagrees with the forecast on the grounds that the monetary policy underlying it is not one he agrees with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage states that President Kocherlakota disagrees with the forecast on the grounds that he does not agree with the monetary policy underlying it. This indicates a disagreement or contention between President Kocherlakota and the forecast.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 463.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. So you want a more stimulative monetary policy to generate a higher inflation outcome.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests a preference for a more stimulative monetary policy, which typically involves increasing the money supply or reducing interest rates to boost economic growth. This may be in disagreement with those who support a more conservative monetary policy to maintain price stability and control inflation.


Passage number 464.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  The consensus forecast should be consistent with the longer-term strategy principles laid out in January.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kocherlakota is stating that the consensus forecast should align with the longer-term strategy principles from January.


Passage number 465.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I’m okay with that. I just thought you were saying that we write down what we wanted to achieve, as opposed to what we thought we might achieve.  There may be times when there’s a conflict between what we want to achieve and what we think we can achieve.  This might be one of those times because the efficacy of some of the tools isn’t as great as we would like them to be.  I guess I have a question on this consensus forecast.  Could people accept this forecast as representing the consensus, even if they didn’t agree with it.July 31–My answer to that would be yes.  In other words, you could disagree with the forecast yourself, but you could agree that this represents the consensus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking a question and providing their own perspective, but there is no conflict or argument present.


Passage number 466.
 MR. LOCKHART.  That’s not the question being asked.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that the question being asked is different from what was previously mentioned.


Passage number 467.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The question being asked is, does it represent your view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is merely stating the question being asked without expressing any views or introducing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 468.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Okay. Fair enough.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a neutral and accepting response.


Passage number 469.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  And that’s the way we’re going to figure out if it’s a consensus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is discussing a method of determining consensus. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 470.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I agree with this.  This is close enough for government work.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker states their agreement with a statement and adds a colloquial phrase expressing that it is satisfactory or adequate.


Passage number 471.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions President Lockhart but does not provide any information or context about any contention or disagreement involving him.


Passage number 472.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Yes.  This forecast lines up very closely with the forecast I had coming into the meeting, and so if it were a real situation, I would endorse it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses agreement with the forecast.


Passage number 473.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement expressing gratitude towards President Evans.


Passage number 474.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you.  I think my answer is yes, but let me be careful.  The iterative process was, submit a forecast, and I’m on my own, so I put in appropriate monetary policy.  I also took the cues that President Kocherlakota mentioned last time, and I put in quite a lot of accommodation.  So I got a forecast.  Then the first iteration came back, and it’s got a funds rate path that has less accommodation.  If that’s fixed, if my forecast is conditional on that, I’m in the consensus and I am fine with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply explaining their own position and how it aligns with the consensus.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 475.
  But if we start opening it up to everybody’s appropriate policies— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, I think you could dissent on the action, for example, because you thought that this wasn’t accommodative enough, and then you could say, “Well,   July 31–conditional on what the Committee has decided to do, I think this is an appropriate forecast.” Does that sound right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "But if we start opening it up to everybody’s appropriate policies" implies that there may be differing opinions or conflicting viewpoints regarding what constitutes "appropriate policies." Additionally, the statement "I think you could dissent on the action, for example, because you thought that this wasn’t accommodative enough" suggests that individuals may disagree on the level of accommodation provided.


Passage number 476.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. This is the outcome you’ll get if the Committee does what the Committee planned to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate contention or disagreement. It simply states a hypothetical outcome.


Passage number 477.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "right" by itself does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It can refer to various things such as a direction, a legal entitlement, or a moral principle, among others. More context is needed to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 478.
  This is what will happen if the Committee does— MR. EVANS.  I’m sorry.  Could you just go through that one more time.  I’m a little slow on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply asks the other person to repeat their explanation because they did not understand it the first time.


Passage number 479.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Hypothetically, let’s assume that you’re very unhappy with the policy path that is in this baseline forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage presents a hypothetical scenario and does not involve any dispute or disagreement. It simply suggests that the reader is unhappy with a policy path in a forecast.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 480.
 MR. EVANS.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, simply affirms agreement with an unidentified statement.


Passage number 481.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  And so you could imagine, let’s say, that you dissented in the meeting on the policy action.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. While it mentions someone dissenting in a meeting on policy action, it does not provide any details or arguments that would suggest a disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 482.
 MR. EVANS.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the response "Yes" in the beginning of the statement. However, without further context, it is not clear what the disagreement is about.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 483.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You still might say, “Well, I don’t care for this policy path.  But given this policy path, I’m okay with this forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents two different viewpoints. The first part acknowledges the possibility of disagreement by including the phrase "You still might say, 'Well, I don't care for this policy path.'" However, the second part presents a contrasting viewpoint by stating "But given this policy path, I'm okay with this forecast." These two statements indicate a level of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 484.
” MR. EVANS.  Yes. I agree completely with that characterization.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Evans states that he agrees completely with the characterization mentioned, indicating that there is harmony of opinion.


Passage number 485.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Do you agree with that, Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only presents a question asking for agreement or disagreement with Governor Yellen's statement but does not express any opposing views or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 486.
 MS. YELLEN.  I agree with that, except you have people who have actually voted in favor of no action today who are very strongly inclined toward action in the very near future, like me.  I’m looking at this forecast, I’m with President Evans.  As far as the economics go, I’m fine with it, but it really calls into question the appropriateness of the policy.  And so I guess I’ll say—sorry, I guess I’m taking my turn—that I have significant reservations.  I would think you would want to be able to walk into a press conference and be able to say—when you discuss this July 31–forecast, of course—something along the lines of:  “Many participants, including those who voted for it, are concerned about the contours of it and understand that it points toward additional action under some conditions,” or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that there is disagreement and contention among the participants regarding the appropriateness of the policy. Ms. Yellen expresses her reservations and suggests that others have concerns as well.


Passage number 487.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes, that comes back to President Kocherlakota’s point.  You could think, conditional on the policy, that this is a reasonable forecast.  But it looks unsatisfactory from some perspectives, and that might be a case for additional action subsequently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement acknowledges that the forecast may be reasonable given the policy but also suggests that it may not be satisfactory to some perspectives, which could lead to additional action.


Passage number 488.
 MR. EVANS.  I thought it was very informative for exactly those reasons.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that they found something informative without expressing any conflicting opinions or engaging in a debate.


Passage number 489.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, that’s the idea.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Yes, that's the idea" does not indicate contention or disagreement. It simply confirms agreement with a previous statement.


Passage number 490.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  I would prefer the Tealbook, but it’s close enough to the consensus that I would be in the consensus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker indicates a preference for the Tealbook but acknowledges that the consensus is close enough to their preference.


Passage number 491.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage merely mentions President Williams without indicating any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 492.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage is not providing any information or statements that could suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 493.
 WILLIAMS. My forecast with the same policy assumptions would be somewhat weaker.  What I’m struggling with is jumping to the conclusion that, yes, the difference in my forecast from the consensus is statistically not important; on a statistical basis, the consensus forecast isn’t that far away.  But from a policy point of view, it’s actually hugely important because my view is that we’re not making any progress on our goals without additional stimulus.  The only way I can get to the consensus forecast is with considerable additional accommodation both in terms of the path of the funds rate and for asset purchases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Williams, is discussing their own forecast and struggling with the fact that, while their forecast may not be significantly different from the consensus, they believe additional stimulus is necessary for the goals to be achieved. There are no opposing viewpoints presented in this passage.


Passage number 494.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We can accept that answer.  We’ll think through how we would advise you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing agreement and willingness to consider the situation further.


Passage number 495.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only includes the abbreviation "MR" without any context or surrounding information to indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 496.
 WILLIAMS.  Okay. I’m just trying to highlight that when people say it’s good enough for government work, that may be true in a statistical sense, but it may send a misleadingJuly 31–signal. For example, from my perspective, I think this would send to me a misleading signal about how strong the economy will be, assuming we never take additional actions, and it sends a signal that we’re not doing more asset purchases and we’re going to raise rates in late 2014.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 497.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, the subcommittee should discuss it, but I guess if you disagree to the extent that you think it seriously misrepresents what your policy inclinations are, that might be a basis for not agreeing with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker seems to suggest that the subcommittee should discuss a certain topic, but also acknowledges that there may be disagreement among the members. The phrase "if you disagree to the extent that you think it seriously misrepresents what your policy inclinations are, that might be a basis for not agreeing with it" indicates that there is a potential for contention or disagreement regarding the topic being discussed.


Passage number 498.
 MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman, I’m not sure I heard President Williams.  Did you say that your forecast for the economy doesn’t differ statistically, but the difference is important for your policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker is simply seeking clarification from President Williams about his statement regarding the forecast for the economy.


Passage number 499.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: Without any context or specific passage provided, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 500.
 WILLIAMS.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 501.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 502.
 MS. PIANALTO.  The forecast broadly matches up to my views, and so I can endorse it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Pianalto, agrees with the forecast and endorses it.


Passage number 503.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions President Plosser without providing any context or information about his actions or statements, so there is no contention or disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 504.
 MR. PLOSSER. Like President Kocherlakota, my view is that while the top-line numbers are not that much different from what I would predict, my policy path would be different, and in fact under this policy path, I would have a different forecast.  On those grounds, what matters a lot for this is how one interprets both the shocks hitting the economy and what their effects are going to be, and that calls into question, as in President Williams’s case, much different policy forecasts.  But I’d likely be on the other side; adopting the policy in the consensus, my forecast would be quite different.  So I’m not quite sure whether we’re reaching a consensus or whether that’s agreeing with the consensus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is agreement in the passage that the policy path and forecast would be different, but uncertainty about whether there is a consensus or agreement with the consensus.


Passage number 505.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think that means you’d be outside the consensus because you think that this policy will not deliver those numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their belief or interpretation of a policy, but there is no explicit disagreement or contention with any other party.


Passage number 506.
July 31–MR. PLOSSER.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting or opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 507.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 508.
 MS. GEORGE.  I found myself agreeing with the economic variables, but I might choose a different policy path—different enough that I might raise a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Ms. George, indicates that she agrees with the economic variables but would choose a different policy path, suggesting disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 509.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply mentions "President Bullard" without providing any further context or indicating any conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 510.
 MR. BULLARD.  I think these confidence bands are great, and when I see PCE prices within a couple of tenths of 2 percent and these kinds of confidence bands, I just can’t see that as being very different from hitting the target.  So this is generally very good. I do think the unemployment rate seems to run high compared with the central tendency.  That’s really the key difference between the Committee and what the private sector seems to say:  The Committee is more pessimistic about unemployment rate adjustment quite a ways out, out until the end of 2014, as compared with the private sector, which is just assuming ½ percent a year or something like that, and so they’ve got it down at a lower level.  And of course, that pessimism is informing a lot of judgments here about what the policy should be.  The only other thing I’d say is that if you look at these charts, maybe this would be a good time to take out core PCE prices.  You’ve got headline here, and, of course, we’re looking over the medium term, which this chart already does.  Maybe it’s a good time to put the fed funds chart here instead and have PCE prices and the fed funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their opinion and making observations about the data, but they are not actively disagreeing with or challenging any other viewpoints.


Passage number 511.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Useful, interesting suggestion.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The phrase "useful, interesting suggestion" is a positive assessment, and the mention of President Fisher is neutral and does not imply disagreement or contention.


Passage number 512.
 MR. FISHER.  I don’t have a problem with the economic variables, and I think the fan charts are fine.  I do have questions about the policy path, and much like President George, I would have some reservations on that front.  And the reason I looked at my colleague was that I was going to suggest the same thing about core PCE—not to replace it with a funds rate path, butJuly 31–I would suggest removing it because I thought we were going to get away from core PCE and focus on PCE overall.  That would be the only difference, depending on how the group feels.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Fisher is expressing his agreement with the economic variables and fan charts, while also suggesting a potential change regarding core PCE. However, he does not indicate any disagreement with others or engage in a debate.


Passage number 513.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. Thank you. Governor Yellen, you’ve taken your turn.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is thanking Governor Yellen and acknowledging that she has had her turn to speak. Governor Duke's turn is being mentioned next.


Passage number 514.
 MS. DUKE.  I think yes.  I feel like an Excel spreadsheet caught in a circular reference. [Laughter]  But yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 515.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage alone. The passage only mentions Governor Tarullo without any indication of conflicting opinions or statements.


Passage number 516.
 MR. TARULLO. I have essentially the same reaction as John.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It states that Mr. Tarullo has the same reaction as John, suggesting agreement.


Passage number 517.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage because it only consists of a statement without any contradictory or conflicting information.


Passage number 518.
 MS. RASKIN. I prefer the Tealbook forecast, but I can support the consensus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement indicated in the passage. The speaker expresses a preference for the Tealbook forecast but also states that they can support the consensus. This suggests a willingness to align their viewpoint with the majority opinion.


Passage number 519.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. Only the name "Governor Stein" is mentioned, which does not provide any information about any disagreements or controversies.


Passage number 520.
 MR. STEIN.  I’m very close to the consensus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states that the speaker is close to the consensus, indicating agreement rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 521.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no mention of Governor Powell in the passage, so there is no contention or disagreement related to him.


Passage number 522.
 MR. POWELL.  I’m okay with the policy path, okay with the forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker expresses agreement and satisfaction with the policy path and forecast. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 523.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. Obviously, I think, it qualifies as a consensus in that most people could accept it, and we had people on both sides.  So that was useful.  Thank you.  I’ll turn this over now to Governor Yellen to talk a bit about how we might want to go forward with this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude and transitioning the discussion to Governor Yellen without any indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 524.
 MS. YELLEN.8  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  We circulated for your use three questions that our subcommittee would welcome any feedback on in this discussion.  I’ll just kick things off with a few comments.  As we discussed in June, a consensus forecast has the potential to significantly enhance the Committee’s communications by clarifying the rationale for our policy decisions.  We agreed to explore this initiative in a systematic and deliberate 8 The materials used by Ms. Yellen are appended to this transcript (appendix 7). July 31–manner, and I think the experiment we’ve just conducted has served as a very useful first step.  I believe it would be beneficial to proceed with another experiment at the September meeting following a roughly similar time line. One important question is the extent to which participants should be expected to provide input to the Chairman in advance of his initial formulation of the consensus forecast.  In the current experiment, that input was purely optional.  However, such input may be important for the Chairman to gauge the appropriate representation of different views of the participants in his initial formulation.  So I would suggest that starting with the September experiment, we establish an expectation that all participants should provide some form of input to the Chairman in advance of his initial formulation of the consensus forecast.  But an important question is whether or not everyone should be expected to provide quantitative projections in this initial input.  In the current experiment, 11 participants provided quantitative projections, and 3 others provided qualitative information.  In my view, qualitative information can be quite informative about a participant’s current view, and the initial inputs should not be expected to take the form of a quantitative forecast. For example, some participants may wish to indicate in qualitative terms how their views have developed, possibly referring to either the previous consensus forecast or the preliminary staff projections circulated in advance of the Chairman’s initial formulation. A related issue is whether or not participants’ initial input should be compiled and circulated to all participants. In my view, circulating these inputs would be beneficial.  It would help promote openness and transparency.  In addition, circulation of these inputs in advance of the meeting may enhance our deliberations in September.  However, on the question of whether or not the input should be circulated with attribution, I have no strong views.  Of course, if the  July 31–Committee decides to proceed with the second experiment in September, the subcommittee on communications would be happy to work with the Chairman and the staff in setting on the key logistical arrangements for that experiment. Looking ahead yet further, I think that the October meeting would offer good opportunity for the Committee as a whole to thoroughly evaluate the experiences gathered up to that point and to decide whether they’re sufficiently encouraging that the Committee wants to continue with further proofs of concept and trial runs.  If at that meeting the Committee still considers the initiative to be sufficiently promising, it may want to consider a tentative time line for adopting a consensus forecast as a tool for communication, while leaving open the question of whether this initiative will still ultimately be launched. It may also want to discuss a number of important questions that would need to be addressed before publishing a consensus forecast, such as the appropriate specification and role of a reference policy rule that I mentioned yesterday, the specification of policy variants to consider, as well as questions related to the presentation of the consensus forecast and the diversity of views in a quarterly monetary policy report. Let me conclude by saying that my subcommittee would be happy to work with the Chairman to develop a specific set of questions, and we welcome your reactions to these questions in this first trial run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Yellen is presenting her thoughts and suggestions about the consensus forecast initiative and is also offering to work with the Chairman on developing the questions for further discussion.


Passage number 525.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Let’s get some comments and reactions.  We’ll start with President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that the discussion will start with President Williams's comments and reactions. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 526.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I can't provide the information you're looking for.


Passage number 527.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman and the staff, for all of the hard work they put into producing the consensus forecast.  I think it’s been a very interesting exercise. I particularly found the two tables in the material distributed to be very useful and informative, but as I noted in our June meeting, I remain very concerned about imposing a sizable additional July 31–burden on the staff unless the benefit is equally sizable.  And as we all know, the Board staff already has a very full plate and preparing a mini-forecast between meetings, if that was necessary for this, adds to that load.  The Chairman said at our last meeting that it was important not to place a net additional burden on the staff, and I wholeheartedly agree.  As our discussions over the last two days show, we still face enormous economic challenges and heightened uncertainty about future events both here and abroad, and the staff should be focused on those issues as well as contingency planning for the possibility of further negative shocks to the economy.  I think—and I’m not sure if this is the way you’re thinking about it—that there may be a simpler way of putting together a coherent consensus forecast with relatively little cost. For example, table 1 in the consensus forecast could be produced by starting with the median SEP projection from the Committee members, which I think is how you started with this one.  And then, Mr. Chairman, you can just adjust the median projection, tweak that as needed to make sure it represents a coherent consensus forecast consistent with the Committee’s policy direction.  Draft consensus table 1 could be circulated on Friday or Monday before the FOMC meeting, and I think that would not have a large cost on the staff.  Of course, the consensus forecast would be updated at the FOMC meeting based on the policy decision and discussions there.  So my recommendation for the next meeting is, as I described, to try to refine the existing SEP process, which we’ll be doing, rather than trying to proceed with a second consensus forecast exercise like the first. As a final note, I very much like table 2 that showed how the forecast would change under alternative monetary policy assumptions.  This is one of the most useful things I’ve gotten in terms of thinking about the policies in alternatives A, B, and C.  I think that such a table should be regularly included in the Tealbook B—so much for my not throwing additional workJuly 31–at the staff. I recognize it is a challenge, having worked in this area myself, to produce alternative staff forecasts that exactly match the statement alternatives A, B, and C, but even preliminary readings on this are exceptionally useful.  It lets us all think about what are really the choices that we’re confronting, given the staff forecast, in thinking about policy liftoff dates or the need for different asset purchases. Also, we saw that little picture earlier showing different alternative forecasts for different alternative policies. I think that’s a great innovation and would like to see that become a regular part of the Tealbook B. A related thing I’d like to mention—and Governor Yellen mentioned this, too—is that we do need to think a little bit more about this policy rule that’s behind the scenes not only in the Tealbook—which I and, I’m sure, many people use as a basis of a lot of our thinking about the economic outlook—but also in terms of preparing these consensus forecasts.  And as Governor Yellen mentioned before, the outcome-based rule may not be the best choice for that, and I think definitely we may want to think about giving the staff direction concerning a preferred policy rule.  It’s important to have a policy rule in these simulations in the Tealbook; that’s just an essential part of thinking about policy.  But right now, I think that’s been a default setting that perhaps isn’t the best for what we’re doing.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. The speaker is expressing their concerns and making suggestions for improvement, but there is no disagreement with the current consensus forecast process.


Passage number 528.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude from President Lacker.


Passage number 529.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me first take this opportunity to apologize for interrupting President Kocherlakota.  That was unwise of me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, apologizes for interrupting President Kocherlakota, indicating that he agrees with the chairman's suggestion that it was unwise of him.


Passage number 530.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Accepted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Kocherlakota was accepted.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 531.
 MR. LACKER.  I’ll now go on to deliver a lengthy statement. I’m assuming that—but this is a little murky for me—the intention is that this would supplant the SEP mechanism.  Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage shows contention or disagreement. Mr. Lacker expresses uncertainty and confusion about whether the intention is for the statement to replace the SEP mechanism.


Passage number 532.
July 31–CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s a Committee decision, but it’s a possibility if we went to a quarterly monetary policy report.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the possibility of a decision being made by a committee.


Passage number 533.
 MR. LACKER.  Right. I’m just asking what the communications subcommittee has envisioned proposing.  I’m assuming this wouldn’t be layered on in addition.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is a dialogue where Mr. Lacker asks a question seeking clarification about the proposed communications subcommittee's plans. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 534.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I guess that would be my preference, but it’s not pre-programmed.  The Committee will decide that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their personal preference, but also acknowledges that the decision is ultimately up to the committee.


Passage number 535.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay. The following remarks are predicated on that.  I think that the SEP is a much more detailed request for forecast information from each participant.  I would be afraid that we would lose something in Committee deliberations in terms of quality if we were to back away from asking for the range of information we get in the SEP.  I think that under our current procedures, a good deal of effort goes into participants’ SEP submissions.  What I have in mind here is avoiding the dangers of herd behavior or free riding on the forecast.  I think that bringing independent views to bear before you get the Tealbook, before you’ve seen everything, is valuable.  The literature on the wisdom of crowds suggests that group opinion mechanisms are more valuable if you’re listening to independent views.  So I’d suggest that we could build this around just an adaptation of the SEP—have that level of submission occur and then work from that material to develop a consensus forecast. Related to this, I think it would be useful and consistent with our traditional philosophy of transparency to find a way to retain the presentation of something like the range and central tendency of participants’ views.  We have these prototype fan charts, and there are these two blue dots for the last meeting’s range.  It would be pretty straightforward to add something to represent the current cycle’s central tendency or range. I understand the value of forming a consensus forecast, but we’re throwing away information.   I think we would also invite the July 31–cynical interpretation that we’re moving to a consensus forecast as a way to suppress the apparent discrepancy between the dot picture in the SEP and the forward guidance in the statement. I applaud the use of confidence bands.  My staff says you call them fan charts only if they’re multicolored; we had this discussion yesterday.  But I’m indifferent as to whether we call them fan charts or not—that’s okay with me. But as I understand it, the fan charts as calculated don’t capture model uncertainty or uncertainty about our policy reaction function, and I think to be faithful at conveying uncertainty, we ought to strive to be as comprehensive as possible in gathering and portraying the uncertainty we have over the forecast. In addition, I strongly believe we should treat the forecast of our policy instrument in a way that’s as parallel as possible to our presentation of things like the GDP and inflation forecasts.  I think President Bullard’s suggestion of putting the fed funds rate in place of the core inflation rate on that first page, if we’re going to do four charts, or even making room for it, if we want to retain core, would be a good idea—and to show it with fan charts, to show uncertainty, because it’s spurious precision to act as though it’s a single path and yet there are error bands around everything else we do.  And I believe this is not that difficult; the staff does it, for example, in the Tealbook all the time. More broadly, I think we need to design this process in a way that handles our policy views in a coherent, clear manner.  We had a little bit of a tangle at the beginning of the last go-round about, well, conditioned on this policy and conditioned on that.  If you take the word “policy” out and substitute one variable for another—like, conditioned on GDP, my forecast for inflation would be different—you can see that it makes more sense to just think of them all as parallel. Further, we are forecasting both the economy and our policy-setting.  Now, that allows   July 31–for commitment. And it doesn’t rule out commitment or some maneuvers to push down the yield curve as we’ve tried. I think I’ll say this as well—if we present a policy forecast as part of our consensus, which I think we should, this would be an ideal vehicle for moving away from the calendar-based forward guidance in the statement. And I’ll just remind you all that we discussed this in January when I first advocated this.  In January, I proposed dropping the forward guidance in favor of the presentation that was in the SEP, and what I was told was that people objected because the statement language represents a Committee consensus.  Well, now we’re going to have a consensus.  So I wouldn’t see the rationale for retaining the forward guidance in the statement—although you could argue that it’s just superfluous and it doesn’t matter whether it’s there or not.  But it’s proven problematic in some regards, so using this vehicle strikes me as an advantage. And let me endorse strongly President Williams’s suggestion that we ask the staff for alternative forecasts under different monetary policy assumptions.  I’ve commented on this before—that they do alternatives for all sorts of crazy real-world shocks, but they don’t do alternatives for the stuff we’re trying to decide on, and I think that’s kind of a shame.  I’d be happy if they cut down on crazy scenarios, too, so that we avoid overburdening the staff.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any obvious contention or disagreement. It is a collection of statements and suggestions made by MR. LACKER.


Passage number 536.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I don’t want to get off track, but on this issue of constructing the fan charts, you use historical forecast errors, right.  Simulated forecast errors.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification about the construction process of fan charts and asking if historical forecast errors are used.


Passage number 537.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Well, they’re stochastic simulations.  The way to think about it is, you have to choose a rule—that’s critical.  And then you’re just having the funds rate respond, as the rule would dictate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining how stochastic simulations work and emphasizing the importance of choosing a rule for the funds rate to respond to.


Passage number 538.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No, I understand, but the stochastic simulation is drawing from a distribution of historical forecast errors or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification about whether the stochastic simulation is drawing from a distribution of historical forecast errors or not.


Passage number 539.
  July 31–MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. It’s drawing from a distribution not of forecast errors but of historical shocks to the economy, and it’s stochastic, so it’s running through dynamic responses to the sorts of shocks we’ve seen historically.  Under current circumstances, that gives you— because of zero bound, for example—a very skewed distribution.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is explaining a concept related to economics and forecasting without expressing any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 540.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply acknowledges the existence of President Kocherlakota but does not provide any information or opinion that would suggest disagreement or contention.


Passage number 541.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you, President Lacker, for your apology.  I’ll be brief. As Presidents Williams and Lacker did, I found table 2 to be extremely useful, and it would be great to have future Tealbook Bs include some table like that where the various policies, I guess, are related to the alternatives A, B, and C that we’re contemplating. I also like President Williams’s idea of allowing the Chairman to create the first draft, at least, of the consensus forecast based on the SEP submissions, and then tweaking that.  I thought that was a very good idea. I think there’s a timing issue we have to solve with the experiment.  The consensus forecast is going to be prepared before the meeting.  Then today, for example, alternative B allowed the Committee the opportunity to change the date in the statement to mid-2015.  In principle, the Committee could have chosen to adopt alternative A, alternative C, or elements of all three alternatives, I guess.  Once the Committee makes a decision, the forecast is going to have to be updated in some fashion.  So this could create a little bit of a logistical problem, and here are the issues. I think the forecast should be based on the outcome of the vote in the meeting.  Participants should have some opportunity to comment on the forecast before it’s released to the public.  The statement should be released shortly after the vote, and the press conference should take place relatively shortly after the release of the statement. The forecast should be made available to the public at the time of the press conference, and the press   July 31–conference should take place at least 24 hours before the end of the blackout period.  [Laughter] So these are the constraints. I think there’s a timing box here.  I think we have to build in some extra delay somewhere, but I’m not sure where.  I would suggest delaying the press conference by 24 hours.  Maybe that would be enough time to get everything done.  I’m certainly not trying to take a stand on what the right answer is. The issue is that we’re going to have a vote in the meeting—the policy decision is, obviously, not determined before we have the meeting—and then the forecast is going to have to be tweaked based on that.  I think people are going to want to have a chance to comment on that as well, and then how we resolve the rest of that I’m not sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 542.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only provides the name of Governor Tarullo, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 543.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I don’t have specific ideas as to how this should be resolved, but I do have a few higher-level observations.  One, I do think the process needs to be somewhat iterative.  And I was one of the scofflaws—apparently only two—who didn’t inject themselves into this process this time so I endorse Janet’s view that there should be something compulsory about participation beforehand.  My second point is that this really does have to be a consensus in the sense of reflecting a collective judgment by the Committee or, perhaps more accurately, the Chairman helping to forge a collective judgment by the Committee. I’m more than a bit concerned that if we end up with both an SEP and the collective forecast, we’re going to be sowing more confusion rather than less confusion.  Then taking account of Jeff’s desire to have some more transparency and make sure that the views of individuals are not completely lost here, I think that Narayana’s timing issue comes back to the fore, because I think you’re going to need a process, Janet, by which people get to express—initially at least—their own views.  Maybe there’s some transparency associated with those views, but the process then July 31–intervenes so that at the end, there’s a collective judgment as developed and articulated by the Chairman both in quantitative terms and verbally at the press conference.  And with that, at least, I think the world, at least the informed and thoughtful world, will be able to reconcile whatever these two different pieces of information are—whether it’s, I hope not an SEP but an SEP-like polling function beforehand and the eventual outcome—because there will have been this lapse of time during which everybody understands that iteration will have taken place.  Those are the only two things on which I feel strongly.  Everything else I’m happy to defer to the judgment of you and your subcommittee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 544.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 545.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Before I answer Janet’s questions, I’d like to just go over a few points.  Some of these are fairly basic, but they helped me at least clarify my thinking.  First, I understand that the purpose is to elucidate the rationale for a decision that was just made by the Committee and would be explained, for example, in your press conference.  And I agree that the consensus forecast idea conveys more information than the central tendencies in the SEPs that would be otherwise published about the same time.  The short discussion yesterday clarified in my mind what you, as the Chairman, have in mind, and that is, you have an ex post consensus forecast on what the recent decision is expected to accomplish, as opposed to an ex ante outlook to which the policy decision reacted.  And I had something in mind coming into yesterday’s meeting that I think is simpler and easier. It’s not perfect at all, but it does bring into greater relief what I think is an issue, and that is, what’s the policy assumption on which we’re all premising the exercise.  So for the good of the order, let me just walk you through how I thought this was going to operate—that is, we might use the Tealbook for reference, and we would submit forecasts similar to an SEP, premised on theJuly 31–existing policy stance, the one that had been decided at the last meeting.  The Chairman would then work with this input to craft a consensus proposal.  Everyone would react to that and, conceivably at that stage or a later stage, either endorse it or not.  The final consensus forecast would be completed, with exhibits and so forth.  That would be a forecast that preceded the FOMC meeting and serves as a basis for understanding the decision that the Committee arrived at.  And then, when you would explain it, you would have to emphasize—and this is not easy, because it could be very confusing to the public—that this is not a post-decision forecast.  This is a decision on which people formed their policy recommendation at the meeting. I do think this question of the policy assumption is very important, and I think it was already reflected in the brief discussion we had earlier.  Now, to the questions.  First, do I think the general approach used in the exercise would be helpful.  Yes, if we don’t get bogged down in this policy assumption complication.  There are various policy assumptions at work, and therefore it’s not apples to apples in terms of the input.  What elements would I suggest be modified in future experiments.  In my mind, if we could agree on the mechanics, we could go to a true trial run next time around, meaning that we would have some kind of explicit policy assumption on which we based our inputs; inputs would be mandatory.  We would submit on exact dates, try to run through a pre-meeting endorsement or feedback on exact dates, and see if some of the mechanical questions that President Kocherlakota raised are actually going to work in real time. I do have a little bit of a problem with the confidence interval exhibits.  I don’t really find the confidence intervals from model-based simulations very informative.  I’m not sure the public is going to find them very informative.  As an alternative, I’d suggest we use subjective probabilities provided by each participant, something similar to the approach that’s used in the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s surveyJuly 31–of primary dealers and other surveys.  And then from subjective probability distributions, one could derive the Committee’s sense of the risks for each economic variable.  At 70 percent or 90 percent in some of the economic indicators, the spread in the confidence intervals would be viewed by the general public as so wide as to be inclusive of practically every outcome.  So I’d like us to think about some other approach, if that’s possible. I definitely support a second experiment.  In response to the question “If the Committee proceeds with a second experiment, to what extent should participants . . . provide input to the Chairman in advance of his initial preparation of the consensus forecast.” I very much think that’s what we should do.  If it’s based on something similar to the SEP submissions, that’s fine.  And then I would certainly not object to having my input circulated or circulated with attribution—no objection there.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a response to questions and suggestions about a decision-making process.


Passage number 546.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  I think central banks use both approaches, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of agreement, expressing the belief that central banks use both approaches.


Passage number 547.
 MR. KAMIN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Since there is no passage provided in the question, the answer cannot be determined.


Passage number 548.
 The Bank of England— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. —uses an ex ante type of approach—right.—because it uses the market path.  Is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is affirming the Bank of England's use of an ex ante type of approach because it relies on the market path. The phrase "Is that right" confirms the accuracy of the statement rather than challenging it.


Passage number 549.
 MR. KAMIN.  On the policy path, yes, the Bank of England uses both a flat path and something that comes out of markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker (Mr. Kamin) is simply stating that the Bank of England uses both a flat path and something that comes out of markets in terms of policy path.


Passage number 550.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply indicates that someone is addressing the Vice Chairman.


Passage number 551.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think this is a useful exercise, and so, in response to the questions, I think we should keep going.  But I’m going to propose a second experiment that’s a little bit different than what we did as the first experiment.  The experiment I’d like to run is a little bit more elaborate and somewhat more decentralized, and it would go like this.  PeopleJuly 31–would submit their forecasts, or they would default to some preliminary Tealbook forecast, made under three different monetary policy assumptions specified by the Chairman.  You could think of that as alternative A, alternative B, and alternative C, and presumably those monetary policy assumptions would span the range of views of the Committee participants.  The Chairman would then prepare a consensus forecast from all of those submissions for each of the three monetary policy paths.  You’d actually get to see how the consensus forecast was sensitive to the monetary policy assumptions of the Committee.  And then participants at the end would be quizzed about which of these things that they actually favored—which was the consensus of the consensus, so to speak.  I think this approach would actually work better than what we have right now, because it would provide greater clarity about the source of agreement and disagreement within the Committee. Let me give you an example so I can explain what I mean by this. Let’s imagine that we’re in a circumstance today that one does not favor more policy accommodation.  This could be the case for several distinct reasons.  One might decide that greater stimulus was not warranted because one had a more optimistic growth forecast—that’s a difference in forecast. Or one might decide that greater stimulus was not warranted because one thought that policy stimulus would generate only very small gains.  You just thought that the cost–benefit calculation of additional stimulus was poor.  For example, you might think that a large-scale asset purchase program wouldn’t do very much.  It wouldn’t be that you disagreed about the forecast, but you disagreed that the policy tool would actually drive significant improvement.  Or you might be in line with the consensus for the first two, but you might not prefer greater stimulus because you had a different reaction function and you weighted the inflation and the unemployment objectives differently.  Right now, I think it’s very difficult for us to tease those three things out.  And if you started with three different monetary policy assumptions, got people July 31–to submit their forecasts relative to those monetary policy assumptions, and saw where people landed, you actually would be able to tease out a good deal of where people agree and disagree within the Committee. I think this would be a little bit more interactive and  would allow us to really play on what’s driving the differences—is it the policy assumptions, is it the forecasts, or is it the reaction function.  And so I would propose this as a second type of experiment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily a proposal for a new experiment that the speaker believes would be an improvement on the current approach.


Passage number 552.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude from President Evans.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 553.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, I thought this was a very useful exercise. The issues that Governor Yellen raised in terms of participants providing input and circulating inputs—those things would be very helpful and we should continue to make progress on them.  I was listening to Dennis very carefully, and I thought I was in complete agreement with him right up until he got to that subjective probability stuff, and then I wasn’t quite sure.  But then again, I was with Vice Chairman Dudley, too, until he started with three different assumptions.  I think those are all very interesting ideas, and if we have a lot of time to work through them, they’ll be quite useful.  [Laughter] As I say, I like the initial exercise; as a communication device for the Committee, it was useful.  It focused on our areas of agreement, which I thought was very useful.  A lot of times, with the SEPs, for some reason our eyes are drawn to the outliers and the ranges.  I thought that the common monetary policy assumption was really critical, because I might not agree with it, but at least, you tell me this is the assumption, and then I’ll tell you what my inflation outlook is going to be.  President Lacker will approach it the same way, right.  And that’ll provide a lot of the information that’s relevant for this.  Another alternative might be if you identify who the participant is and I have some idea of the kind of model of the economy that person is working their way through, there’ll be more information, but probably not a tremendous amount.  At any  July 31–rate, it could be useful.  Frankly, I think what’s really important here is whatever helps you in your press conference discuss the outlook in a coherent fashion.  You always do it coherently, but you’re provided a collection of forecasts that don’t speak well among themselves because we have different policy assumptions.  I would think that something that you have looked at very carefully, and in some sense own, would help facilitate your discussions, and it would be useful if you provided some preferences on that.  But I think that it will be useful to continue to make progress.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation:

There is contention or disagreement in this passage as the speaker mentions being in agreement with someone until a certain point, and also mentions not agreeing with the common monetary policy assumption. Additionally, the speaker suggests that different policy assumptions among the participants are causing the forecasts to not speak well among themselves, implying a disagreement on the usefulness of these assumptions.


Passage number 554.
 MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions someone named Mr. Lacker speaking to the chairman.


Passage number 555.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no passage provided. Please provide the passage you would like me to analyze for contention or disagreement.


Passage number 556.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.  Could I just ask President Evans—when you said “conditioning on the forecast,” what did you mean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage is simply asking for clarification on a statement made by President Evans. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 557.
 MR. EVANS.  I’m sorry. I must have misspoken.  Conditioning on whatever the common monetary policy assumption is that we’re given.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement apologizing for a previous mistake.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 558.
 MR. LACKER.  What do you mean by that.  Do you mean a single point path for the funds rate or a reaction function.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker is asking for clarification and seeking more details in order to understand the speaker's statement.


Passage number 559.
 MR. EVANS. I’m sorry. I can’t recall exactly where in my comments you’re taking this from.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement between the speakers. Mr. Evans apologizes for not remembering the specific location of a reference in his comments, but there is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 560.
 MR. LACKER.  Because I don’t think anywhere now we’re asked to provide a forecast conditional on a path for policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It only mentions the speaker's opinion about being asked to provide a forecast conditional on a path for policy.


Passage number 561.
 MR. EVANS.  No, we’re not.  We’re asked to do appropriate monetary policy, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Evans affirms that they are asked to do appropriate monetary policy.


Passage number 562.
 MR. LACKER.  Right.  Oh, okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply responds with "Oh, okay" which indicates understanding or agreement.


Passage number 563.
 MR. EVANS. No, that’s our current assumption under SEPs, going all the way back to when Don Kohn’s subcommittee came up with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a current assumption without presenting any opposing views.


Passage number 564.
  July 31–MR. LACKER.  So is that what you were referring to.  Is that what you meant— “conditioning on appropriate policy”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 565.
 MR. EVANS. Well, no. I thought what was useful here was that—and this is my interpretation—if there’s a policy path—a funds rate path—and if we all come up with our forecast based on that policy assumption, then I know how to interpret what those forecasts mean.  So you might have a high inflation forecast; I might have a lower inflation forecast— something like that. But the policy path is common across that.  I think that would be informative for the Chairman and whoever else is looking at this forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their interpretation and understanding of how forecasts based on a common policy assumption can be helpful in providing information to the Chairman and others.


Passage number 566.
 MR. LACKER.  But that’s asking us to forecast what the economy would have to do to make us want to choose that funds rate path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement of Mr. Lacker questioning the request to forecast the economic conditions necessary for altering the funds rate path.


Passage number 567.
 MR. EVANS.  This is an assumption about an exogenous policy variable and how the forecast would respond.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that there is an assumption about an exogenous policy variable and how the forecast would respond. There is no explicit disagreement or contention expressed.


Passage number 568.
 MR. LACKER.  Well, that’s a different question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply acknowledges that the question being asked is different from the previous topic.


Passage number 569.
 MR. EVANS.  Well, that’s how I would interpret our instruction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It appears to be a statement or opinion by Mr. Evans about how he would interpret an instruction.


Passage number 570.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That was what you were suggesting, Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states what the Vice Chairman was suggesting.


Passage number 571.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Well, the point is, in my version, you get three different monetary policy paths that span the Committee’s preferences.  And so you get forecasts that are somehow consistent across the possible outcomes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting his version as a means to achieve consistency in forecasts, but there is no indication of any conflicting opinions or disagreement among the Committee.


Passage number 572.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The problem is that it’s not truly endogenous.  What you really want, in principle, I assume, is some kind of reaction function that you’d stick into your model.  And then you’d jointly generate the path of output and inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is discussing a problem and suggesting a solution.


Passage number 573.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. In my rendition, you’re going to figure out the reaction function by the choices people make at the end.  They’re going to be faced with a GDP/inflation July 31–or an unemployment/inflation forecast under three different paths for monetary policy.  They’re going to have three sets of these things, and then their reaction function is exhibited by what they select at the end.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is describing a scenario where people are making choices based on different economic factors, and their ultimate decision will exhibit their reaction function. There is no indication of any disagreement or conflict in this process.


Passage number 574.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it consists of a simple greeting without any conflicting statements or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 575.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you.  Like many, I was troubled by coming up with a consensus forecast where policy assumptions were widely divergent.  We already have an opportunity to dissent on policy with the policy go-round.  I don’t think we want to get “dissent squared” on a difference of policy.  I actually come a little to where Dennis was—that it would be more useful to start with a common policy assumption.  I think it’s quite reasonable to use whatever the path was in the previous Tealbook as a starting-off point for that common assumption, and then ask whether the economic outcomes are different. Given the fan charts— and President Lacker would like to widen the fan charts even more than they already are, adding some additional uncertainties—it actually is going to be fairly hard to dissent against the forecast that comes out if you want to use a two-standard-error definition.  I think broadly, most people are going to be agreeing with that forecast based on that policy path.  So I would be comfortable with roughly where Dennis was. As we think about whether we should go forward with the consensus forecast, we should at least think about what the alternative is and what problem we’re trying to solve. I agree with President Evans that part of the problem was that with the previous SEP we were focused on outliers rather than commonality, and that was particularly true because there wasn’t a distinction between participants and voters.  An alternative—or it seems like the most viable alternative— would be that the participants’ forecasts for all of the variables are disclosed and identified.  It has the attribute that it makes participants accountable for their forecasts, and presumably each July 31–forecast will be internally consistent.  One of the problems with the process that we have now is that as we go from the initial round to the next round, we’re changing variables that may or may not be consistent with any kind of model, and that inconsistency bothers me a little bit.  We should ask ourselves, is it clear that the consensus forecast gets us to a much better place than a full-disclosure alternative, where all of the information would be available. It may be that we think it does get us to a better place, because it clearly focuses us on agreement rather than disagreements, and that’s true for how people would report it.  But we should at least think about what the viable alternative is that we’re considering. I do think that if we proceed, all participants should provide input—so it should be mandatory—and that the compilation that the participants provide in the initial round should be circulated to everybody.  My guess is that we could pretty much guess where people’s views are, by and large; if I’m comfortable disclosing to the public, I should obviously be comfortable disclosing to my peers.  I think that it’s not a bad thing if we just shared all of our own input.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any significant contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and suggestions about the consensus forecast and potential alternatives, but there is no clear opposition or conflict in their statements.


Passage number 576.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude from someone named President Pianalto.


Passage number 577.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Overall, I think the general approach used in this initial exercise could form the basis for an approach that, with some enhancements and a lot of practice, could produce a consensus forecast that could improve our communications.  But to increase the odds of success, I think that we will need to address a few questions about our ability to form a consensus forecast.  These questions occurred to me as I reflected on this first experiment.  These issues have already been raised by others, and I just may be using slightly different wording in order to address them.  The first question is, can we achieve a consensus forecast that is coherent in its relationships among economic growth, inflation, and unemployment without employing a consistent model of the economy.  President Rosengren was  July 31–just commenting on that.  If we rely mostly on judgment to form a consensus, do we risk producing a forecast that is sometimes inconsistent in its relationships among economic growth, inflation, and unemployment. I am inclined to think that we need some kind of consensus model to be able to have a consensus forecast so that we can tell a consistent story over time.  Without a consistent story, the sequence of forecasts that we publish might harm our communications rather than help them.  The second question is, what should the standard be for whether we think our individual forecasts are sufficiently different from the consensus to warrant dissenting. Should we consider a difference in forecast meaningful when it is large enough relative to the particular confidence interval.  Under that approach, as others have pointed out, because the confidence intervals are so wide, meaningful differences would be very rare.  For a consensus forecast to improve our communications, I think we do need to reach agreement on what would warrant a dissent from the consensus forecast.  The third question to answer concerns the communication surrounding the consensus forecast:  How should we treat the differences in our views of what is appropriate monetary policy.  Several people indicated today that they agreed with the consensus forecast, but they didn’t agree with the policy path.  So should one dissent on the consensus forecast based on a disagreement on appropriate monetary policy. In concluding, I do support going forward with the experiment, and I have some suggestions for our next experiment.  For achieving a consensus forecast, I think it would be helpful to share more of the inputs among all of the participants during the drafting stage.  Specifically, I propose that the Chairman circulate the preliminary Board staff forecast, that all of the FOMC participants then submit forecasts back to the Chairman, and that the Chairman then share those projections with the participants, along with the draft consensus. I am personally open to whether we provide the individual forecasts with attribution; I could go either way.  I am   July 31–happy to go ahead and include attribution, but I don’t think that is necessary.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Ms. Pianalto is expressing her support for the general approach used in the initial exercise and suggesting enhancements for future consensus forecasting. She raises questions about achieving a coherent consensus forecast and determining what would warrant dissenting from the consensus. She also suggests sharing more inputs during the drafting stage and considering whether to provide individual forecasts with attribution. While there may be differing opinions on these issues, there is no evident contention or disagreement in the passage itself.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 578.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude from someone named President Bullard.


Passage number 579.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have just a few comments.  I’m a big supporter of this exercise, and I think this initial round has been carried out very well.  So do I think we should do more.  Yes, I do.  We have to keep an eye on the final product, which would be a monetary policy report and the kinds of things that would go in there.  I think there would be a lot more information, at least in my mind, that would flesh out, maybe, some of the issues that are being discussed here in the final product, the final monetary policy report. A lot of people are talking about the policy assumption conundrum, and I have a suggestion for this.  I think it would be much simpler and cut through a lot of confusion if we just based the forecast on the market assumption at the time the forecast is made. This is, as I understand it, what the Bank of England does.  This would give the forecast more of a flavor of, “Given what the market thinks that we’re going to do, here’s what we think is going to happen.”  And you could even put a date on that and say that we took the market expectation as of such and such a date.  Then you don’t get into the position that you decided something different at the meeting, and now you’ve got to iterate around to get the right forecast. Now, this is a brilliant thing that the Bank of England did, because market expectations in most circumstances are not going to be too different from where the Committee expects to go, and if they are a lot different, we should be asking ourselves a lot of questions about why we have a 90-degree angle between our views and the market’s views.  Most of the time, that’s going to work very well, and I would say if those expectations are a lot out of line, then it’s up to the Chairman and other Committee members to try to nudge them back into line with what’s likely to happen.  The other thing that’s   July 31–brilliant about it is that it does put out a realistic forecast, but it allows the Committee to come back later and say, “Look, we changed our mind, and we’re going to do X or we’re going to do Y.” I wouldn’t expect that to happen a lot, but it does give the Committee that freedom to act.  For example, you might think of an intermeeting action, which has sometimes occurred in the last five years; something comes up, and you really have to move in a different direction.  The other thing about taking the market expectation of policy is that you can take all aspects of policy.  It could be everything from reducing the IOER rate to the balance sheet to funds rate dates and all those things together. My only other comment is on these confidence intervals.  They are model based.  I think they’re fine, but as the Chairman was talking about, you could use historical forecast errors from the Greenbook and Tealbook, and maybe that would be a way to capture the full extent of the uncertainty that we’ve experienced since we’ve been keeping track of those errors; I’m not sure quite how long that has been, but it goes a ways back.  In my mind, that is a more all-encompassing measure of uncertainty.  I don’t know if those bands are actually bigger or smaller, but those would be interesting.  And that would be one way to keep it a little bit model free, because otherwise you’re saying that everyone is committed to that model and everybody thinks that that model is a particularly good model. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses support and agreement with the exercise being discussed and makes suggestions for further improvement.


Passage number 580.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  One difference between the Bank of England and the Fed is that they at least nominally have a single target.  So you can look at the forecast and see whether it hits the inflation target or not, and that’s a way of signaling to the market whether they should be tightening or loosening their expectations.  With two objectives, unless you give them the reaction function, it’s a little more subtle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states a difference between the Bank of England and the Fed in terms of their objectives and how they signal to the market.


Passage number 581.
 July 31–MR. BULLARD.  In my experience, the British approach to monetary policy isn’t any different than the U.S. approach to monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement between the British and U.S. approaches to monetary policy. It simply states that in the speaker's experience, they are not different.


Passage number 582.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. There are a few people in the Congress you should talk to.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests that there are certain people in Congress who should be approached for a conversation. The mention of President George does not introduce any conflicting views or positions.


Passage number 583.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I think I noted at the last meeting, given some of our well-tested communications, such as the minutes and the statement we use, I was more willing to push more on the SEP to see whether we could enhance it more and use its diversity of views.  But I would be willing to look at that in terms of attribution, even highlighting who the Committee members, as a way to leverage that diversity of views. Having said that, I’m willing to go forward with other iterations of this experiment. I think it would be worthwhile to have some more reps to see how this plays out with respect to the input and how it gets to something, which Vice Chairman Dudley mentioned, that I would like to see—more focus on where we differ on policy paths and what the assumptions are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. MS. George is expressing her willingness to explore ways to enhance the SEP and leverage the diversity of views within the Committee.


Passage number 584.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a short message of appreciation and does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 585.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This has been a fascinating discussion, I have to confess, and I wanted to go near the end, in part because I wanted to hear what people were thinking.  I’ve come away with probably more questions than answers, and I’m open to lots of different ideas.  I’ll just react to some things that people have said, all of which I think had merit to them. John Williams’s suggestion about simplifying and using the SEP to leverage up has a lot of merit to it—to reduce costs. I am inclined to believe the SEP is still a powerful use of information and a communication device and a transparency device. I tend not to be in favor of replacing this, which leads me to the question of whether we envision doing this every meeting or only once a quarter.  One question that crops up in this discussion—if we’re reallyJuly 31–going to use it as a consensus forecast that justifies a particular meeting’s decision, then you’re almost forced into doing it on an every meeting basis.  That may be more than we want to do.  If you’re not going to do that, then you need to think of other objectives you’re trying to achieve through this thing, and I think there are a number of them.  One of the questions that come to mind goes back to the governance issue:  However we manage this process, we want to be careful that we not have a pre-meeting meeting and in some sense decide before we actually get to our meeting.  That raises all sorts of iterative questions about how we converge on this.  I think that’s going to be a challenge. In many ways, I’m very attracted to Vice Chairman Dudley’s suggestion about doing some scenarios.  I think there could be a lot of value to that.  There is a subtle question about whether this is endogenous or exogenous and how we think about that.  I’m not sure I’ve come down strongly either way, but I’m really attracted to allowing participants to generate their forecasts based on different assumptions about policy.  That could be very revealing both internally and, perhaps, for other purposes as well.  How we view this as going into a larger project, as Jim and I have been arguing for some time in terms of a monetary policy report— again, whether this is quarterly, every meeting, or what—and how all of these pieces fit together remain to be seen. One thing that was missing from this exercise that I think is going to be important going forward—one of the things that gives us value outside of whatever the consensus might be—is going to be the nature of the discussions about the varying views that goes with this.  And at some point, we’re going to have to figure out how to put that on paper, too, to make sure that we get the richness of what it is we’re to achieve in this process. I want to make one other point.  This notion of standard errors—I believe standard errors are huge on our forecasts and everything else we do, but one of the things that we know from ourJuly 31–policy rule experiments is that sometimes small differences in the variables in the reaction function can have very different policy implications.  Just to say that we’re all falling within the standard errors of these things is really not very helpful in that context.  That doesn’t mean the standard errors aren’t large, but there are subtle differences about what the policy implications might be from smaller differences.  There’s uncertainty, and then there’s that small difference that may lead some of us to have very different policy paths, because small differences can make a difference in that. I think that raises a whole host of questions in my mind about a number of things, but it does apply here, too. A lot of this discussion suggests to me that we need to proceed with this because there’s value to it, but I do believe that we’re going to have to experiment some internally.  And it may take us a while to figure out what it is we want to get out of this at the end of the day and what’s the best way to do it effectively. I think we should proceed apace, run some experiments, be willing to try some different things and react to them.  We’re going to try some things and throw them out, perhaps, but I think in some of these cases, we’re not going to be solving the problem in the abstract.  We’re going to have to see how it works.  So I’m very encouraged.  I also find it very interesting, and I think we should continue with the experiments. I’d like to say one other thing.  I want to echo what Presidents Kocherlakota and Williams suggested about table 2.  It would be very nice to be able to see that, or something like that, on a fairly regular basis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and reactions to the discussion and suggesting different ideas and possibilities. They mention that different suggestions have merit and express openness to experimentation.


Passage number 586.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Thank you" and "President Fisher" are simply expressions of gratitude and acknowledgment.


Passage number 587.
 MR. FISHER.  My sense is that this exercise is really intended to help you clarify some of the confusion that came out of what I call spots and dots, which is the SEP exercise.  Having been a full-throated advocate of your holding press conferences, it seemed to me that the way we   July 31–did the SEP made things a little bit awkward.  And in fact, I would like to have an exercise that would simplify or help you in this process.  I’ve heard some very good ideas around the table.  I thought President Williams’s ideas were thoughtful in terms of how this thing evolves.  I’d like to get to the point that Vice Chairman Dudley articulated.  That would be the most useful, although it would take us time to get there, but that should be the ultimate goal of the exercise.  I’m in favor of what makes your job easier in terms of not only explaining the cacophony at this table, but also pulling together the common threads.  With regard to Janet’s points—and I thank you, Governor, for pulling this exercise together—first, I appreciate your taking qualitative information as well as quantitative information.  Having submitted qualitative information that was quite extensive, I think that’s important.  Going back, I guess, to making the Chairman’s job easier, it could achieve that if indeed we can try to identify where the consensus is and what the common points are while also tolerating the fact that we do have ranges of views and we do have dissent that takes place at this table.  On the issue of identification, remember that I’m very leak conscious; I served on two ships in the Navy, so accidental leaks always concern me.  But I think if we’re trying to get a consensus expressed by our leader, I worry about leakage in terms of one or two people who might get more attention and distract from the point that we have achieved a common decision and that decision is being articulated by you.  We all know internally who we are and where we’re arguing.  I’m not sure it makes sense to, or whether it’s necessary, or it even adds to the exercise, for us to have attribution, as I worry about accidental leaks because some get more attention than others at this table.  And that may not help you in the job. So that’s my overall opinion, Mr. Chairman, of this exercise.  I would be in favor of a second experiment.  I think we should go through this in an iterative fashion.  And again, I want to reiterate that I found Vice Chairman Dudley’s comments particularly thoughtful; all of the   July 31–comments were thoughtful.  I’d like to get to that goal eventually where we could have a sense of how we might move along any one of the suggestions being put on the table.  Final comment: We’d like to make your job easier, not more complex, and if this serves that purpose, then I’m in favor of it. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of the speaker (Mr. Fisher) expressing his support for the exercise and providing feedback on how it could be improved.


Passage number 588.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage as it consists of a simple expression of gratitude from the speaker to Governor Duke.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 589.
 MS. DUKE.  I’m going to confess that I’m not finding this helpful at all.  I find it hard to even follow all of the subtleties of everybody’s expression of whether or not they agree with the consensus forecast.  When I try to think of how you condense this into a simple message that you’re going to communicate to the public, it’s really hard for me to come down to that.  I think it would be helpful if we started with something that we all thought in common, and then tried to see how far apart we were. In terms of the policy assumption, it seems to me that it’s a good idea to start from a single policy assumption. If the single policy assumption is, “If we do nothing different than what we had said at the last meeting, what would you expect the forecast to be, based on incoming data.” that at least says, to me, that everybody is starting with the do-nothing scenario, and if we do nothing differently, this is how we think the economy is going to evolve.  Then we use that baseline to decide what we think is the right policy. Second piece, as far as the timing and the number of iterations, I certainly have no confidence in my own forecasting ability.  I use the Tealbook, I use the information in it, and I use questions to the staff.  And it’s everything I can do to get my submissions in by five o’clock on Friday.  If you want me to make submissions a week or two earlier than that, they’re going to be pretty close to guesses—in fact, they are going to be guesses. So I have a little bit of a problem with that.  I don’t think it would be good to require me to guess just because we needed it at a certain time.  And I would hate to move the thinking that goes into the Tealbook forecast  July 31–back a couple of weeks, because then it’s based on less-current information, and I think it’s more important that we have current information to base our decisions on. Finally, I think it would be helpful if we could agree on using a particular policy rule, at least for the Tealbook.  You take a common assumption about what policy starts out at, you use that to forecast what you think the outcome would be, and then you use some kind of specific policy rule.  It might not be your favorite, but, in my opinion, if we can all agree on one that we could use so that we’re all talking about the same thing, it keeps us from having too many moving parts.  I think we could also ask the staff, in the Tealbook, to follow that policy rule with all of the alternative simulations, and it might be one that, when you’re at the zero lower bound, requires you make some adjustment, either you wait a longer time or you wait until it calls for 75 basis points on liftoff or you wait for some conditions to be met.  But again, we specify what rule we want the staff to use in terms of how they show us the alternatives, and then I think it is helpful to look at the options—if you choose alternative A, you’re choosing this path; if you choose alternative B, you’re choosing this path; if you choose alternative C, you’re choosing this path.  If you disagree that this policy option would create this much difference in terms of the ultimate outcome on the economy, then we can talk about that.  If you think that more LSAPs are not going to be that effective, and so you don’t think that the actual outcome would be what it shows in there, then you can talk about that difference.  But somehow it would be more helpful to me if we could start to narrow in on where the differences are and keep as many other pieces of it constant as we can.  It’s just hard for me to think in that many dimensions.  That’s the exercise I would like to see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement with the current approach and suggests starting with a common assumption and using a specific policy rule. They also disagree with the idea of submitting forecasts earlier and express concern about using less current information.


Passage number 590.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of a polite expression of gratitude and a mention of Governor Raskin.


Passage number 591.
July 31–MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The purpose of this particular set of parameters that were put on this experiment was really to look at three questions.  One was whether the Chairman can construct a forecast under the conditions we set forth; two, to evaluate how the input was provided to the Chairman; and then, three, to evaluate how the Committee considered the forecast. So, first of all, can the Chairman construct a forecast. I think under these conditions, we tried to do it in a very low-touch way.  We wanted to make sure that this would not in some way overtake the other important work of the Committee.  We really tried— and should continue to try when we design these experiments—to ensure that they not overtake the central work of what the Committee needs to be doing.  And I think from that perspective, this set of parameters worked. In terms of evaluating how the input is provided to the Chairman, again, it was very light touch.  I, for example, wasn’t sure, when I saw the initial forecast and then the consensus forecast, why it had changed.  And when I saw that it had changed, I was curious as to why it had changed, but really had no sense as to what the reasons were, had no idea who had provided what kind of input.  I found myself actually interested in knowing who had said what, not for any particular personal reasons, but I wanted to know, were they broad-based reasons. Are these regional differences. It was noteworthy, anyway, that there was no sense as to why the forecast had changed.  And I don’t think that’s an undesirable feature.  I think that that made me all the more curious coming into the meeting, listening to exactly what people were going to bring into the economic policy go-round.  Also, I would note that in this experiment, we didn’t have an SEP, and so without an SEP, there wasn’t really that more formal mechanism that could be used to feed into the Chairman.  But I could see, in another round, using the SEP as that vehicle and then leaving it to the Chairman and the staff to massage it, come up with something that looksJuly 31–like a forecast.  And it would then be, again, a minimal heavy lift, I think, on members of the Committee. On the third point, the question of evaluating how the Committee considers the forecast, that struck me as very choppy.  I think that we did it.  We didn’t want that question asked in the middle of our meeting today, because essentially we had bigger questions to think about, and we thought that would be distracting.  But ideally, that question of how the Committee wants to respond to the consensus forecast would be asked before the policy go-round.  It would be asked after the economic go-round and before the policy go-round.  I also think that in terms of how the Committee considers the forecast, some of Sandy’s questions about what warrants dissent matter.  “Dissent,” by the way, is a strong word here because I don’t think we’ve even decided that this would be a point of dissent; it might be a point of disagreement.  But we haven’t yet thought through whether this is something that becomes a “stake in the ground” that there will be registered dissents on, or disagreement and what would warrant disagreement.  Having a single policy assumption—again, this was very fuzzy, and I think putting some more structure around that would probably be a next, second incremental step. I think that Bill Dudley’s ideas of the “grand enchilada” of what we could do are all aspirational, but I would still advocate proceeding with a very incremental and low-touch kind of approach.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an evaluation of the experiment and suggesting potential improvements, but there is no disagreement with any specific point or argument.


Passage number 592.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statement that involves disagreement or contention. It simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Stein.


Passage number 593.
 MR. STEIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The only thought I had, and I guess I came to this independently, is exactly the same point that President Lockhart articulated and a number of others have since endorsed, which is, I think it would be a good idea to have the forecast be based on an exogenously anchored policy path—for example, exactly as in your example, President Lockhart: that which came out of the previous meeting, as opposed to some notion of   July 31–an endogenously optimal path.  Aside from simplifying things and just making our own task easier, if we’re thinking of this primarily as a communications device and we’re trying to tell the world the story of why we’re choosing to make a particular policy action, I think it just makes the communication much clearer. And let me give an extreme, stylized example, which will exaggerate the point: Imagine that we had a single mandate and all we cared about was 2 percent inflation in the long run.  And suppose we got it into our heads that we were worried about inflation expectations in 2015 picking up, so we needed to raise rates. You want to explain why you raised rates.  Well, if you do the forecast based on your endogenously optimal path, all you’ll see is that inflation will be 2 percent.  You’ll see the rates moving around, but you’ll never be able to say, “Well, there’s this counterfactual world where, if we hadn’t taken action, something would have gone wrong.”  Whereas in a fixed path, you can say, “Well, if we had kept to our old policy, rates were going to go up,” and then it’ll make it natural.  And of course, you could augment this by doing what Vice Chairman Dudley suggests, by having multiple paths.  But I think the key in either thing is that you need an anchor.  That’s come out in the discussion, and I just wanted to endorse that as a concept.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Stein agreeing with President Lockhart's suggestion to have the forecast based on an exogenously anchored policy path. Mr. Stein provides his reasons for why he thinks this would be a good idea, but there is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 594.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude from the speaker to Governor Powell.


Passage number 595.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Just a couple of things.  First, I do think that a consensus forecast and QMPR constitute a better place to be. It’s a better end state than what we have now, and I think we’re making progress toward it.  I’ll admit that it is orders of magnitude more complicated and difficult than I had any thought that it might be.  I like a lot of ideas around the table.  I like the idea that it’s mandatory, but as Governor Duke pointed out, for Governors—for me, anyway—the Tealbook is hugely important in developing my—so far, one—SEP.  And to try to do it two weeks before the Tealbook, we’d be calling on the same staff   July 31–two weeks before putting the SEP together.  So I don’t know what the answer is with that, but it’s a difference, I think, from the presidents.  I also like some of Bill’s ideas. Bottom line: I think it’s definitely a great idea to go ahead.  Without a lot more meetings like this or a lot of time spent with Governor Yellen and Governor Raskin and the subcommittee and others, I’m not sure where I’d come out on these things.  I will agree, though, that having an exogenous policy path is, to quote President Bullard, a brilliant idea. So I like that, and I’ll just leave it at that. Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their support for the ideas discussed and agrees with the concept of an exogenous policy path.


Passage number 596.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you very much.  This has been very helpful.  I’ve heard a lot of support for the concept in general.  A couple of ideas that were raised were the questions of whether the forecast should be, in some sense, ex ante or ex post and how we should specify policy paths.  Governor Yellen, did you have anything else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude and acknowledging the helpfulness of a discussion. They mention that they have heard a lot of support for a concept and bring up a couple of additional points related to the topic.


Passage number 597.
 MS. YELLEN. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 598.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any final comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. It is simply asking for any final comments or thoughts.


Passage number 599.
 MR. DUDLEY.  And table 2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage, as it only mentions the names "Mr. Dudley" and "table 2" without providing any context or information to indicate disagreement or contention.


