Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeNovember 16, 1982A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in theoffices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, November 16, 1982, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT:Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. Solomon, Vice ChairmanMr. BallesMr. BlackMr. FordMr. GramleyMrs. HornMr. Martin 1/Mr. ParteeMr. RiceMrs. TeetersMr. WallichMessrs. Guffey, Keehn, Morris, Roos, and Timlen,2/Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Corrigan, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff DirectorMr. Altmann, SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele,2/ Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Oltman,2/ Deputy General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMessrs. Ettin,2/ J. Davis,2/ R. Davis,2/ Keran,2/ Koch,2/Parthemos,2/ Prell,2/Siegman,2/ Truman, and Zeisel,2/Associate Economists1/ Entered the meeting following acceptance of Report of Examination ofSystem Open Market Account.2/ Left the meeting prior to discussion and adoption of domestic policydirective.11/16/82Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill,1/ Associate Director, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMr. Kohn,1/ Senior Deputy Associate Director, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Lindsey,1/ Assistant Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMessrs. Balbach,1/ Burns,l/ T. Davis,l/ Eisenmenger,l/Mullineaux,1/ Scheld,1/ and Stern,1/ Senior VicePresidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Dallas,Kansas City, Boston, Philadelphia, Chicago, and Minneapolis,respectivelyMr. Soss, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank ofNew YorkMs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a list of the individuals present at a meeting.


Passage number 2.
 Clarkin,l/ Assistant Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of New YorkTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofNovember 16, 1982CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a number of things to deal withapart from policy today. I am distressed about what happened afterthe last meeting, as you well know, and I am distressed by the actionsthat had to be taken for this meeting. We will return to that subjectafter we complete the policy discussion. But I think the procedure[regarding limited attendance during the Committee's discussion ofmonetary policy at] this meeting has been outlined to you. Now weneed to deal with the minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It seems to be mostly discussing the speaker's distress about certain actions and procedures.


Passage number 3.
MR. PARTEE. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "So moved" indicates agreement or affirmation with a previous statement or proposal. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 4.
MS. TEETERS. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is only providing information about a person's name. There is no indication of any contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 5.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we will approve theminutes. Next we have the report of examinations, which has beendistributed to you. Do I hear any questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states what will be approved and asks if there are any questions.


Passage number 6.
MR. PARTEE. It looked like a clean [bill of health].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply describes the bill of health, stating that it looks clean.


Passage number 7.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there are no questions, we can have amotion to accept it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that if there are no questions, the speaker suggests proceeding with a motion to accept something.


Passage number 8.
MR. GRAMLEY. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "So moved" indicates agreement or support for a previous statement or action. There is no contention or disagreement apparent in this passage.


Passage number 9.
MS. TEETERS. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not appear to have any contention or disagreement. The speaker is identified as "MS. TEETERS" and no conflicting ideas or arguments are presented.


Passage number 10.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It has been moved and seconded and withoutobjection [it is approved]. We will go to Mr. Cross.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  


Passage number 11.
MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a statement made by Mr. Cross and does not include any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 12.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions or discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage is not clearly stated, so it is difficult to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 13.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, as for the recommendation[regarding the Mexican swap drawings], we don't have any alternative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that they do not have any alternative to the recommendation regarding the Mexican swap drawings.


Passage number 14.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we could put them in default. Do wehave a motion on the recommendations [for renewal of all the swaplines for one year and renewal of the drawings by the Bank of Mexicofor three months].SPEAKER(.). So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting a course of action and then asking for a motion on the recommendations.


Passage number 15.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It has been moved. Without objection, wewill approve that. No other commentary. We will go to domestic openmarket operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statements are straightforward and do not indicate any conflicting viewpoints or opposing opinions.


Passage number 16.
MR. ALTMANN. Are you going to ratify the operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about ratifying operations.


Passage number 17.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, we have to ratify the [foreigncurrency] operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about the need to ratify foreign currency operations.


Passage number 18.
MS. TEETERS. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "So moved" indicates agreement or approval. There is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 19.
MR. RICE. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that someone named Mr. Rice is speaking second.


Passage number 20.
11/16/82VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think it's worth making onecomment. Our current account deficit is beginning to mount up; byalmost any estimate it probably will be at least $30 billion nextyear, but it might be as high as $50 billion. At what point this willchange market sentiment toward the dollar is unclear; that may requiresome other things happening as well. But I would assume that we arebeginning to see a little strengthening in the yen, and the Germansare beginning to see some strengthening [in the mark] against othercurrencies except the dollar. So, there may be a change in thissituation, although I don't expect it imminently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion and assumptions about the current account deficit and the potential changes in market sentiment towards the dollar. There is no opposing viewpoint or conflicting information presented.


Passage number 21.
MR. WALLICH. Well, the nature of this deficit is that it isthe result of a high dollar, and the high dollar is the result ofpeople wanting to get into the dollar, forcing, as it were, thefinancing of the deficit on us for the time being instead of wonderingwhether they ought to finance it. That is what I think keeps thedollar up in the face of this prospect of a huge deficit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is explaining that the high dollar is a result of people wanting to get into the dollar, which is causing the deficit to be financed for the time being. The speaker is expressing their perspective on the situation without any contradiction or opposition.


Passage number 22.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Another way of putting it is that thecapital flows are swamping the equilibrium trade effect of an exchangerate. There's nothing we can do about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presented as a factual statement without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 23.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Probably it will all reverse itself verysuddenly and give us another problem. Mr. Sternlight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a prediction or speculation about a future event.


Passage number 24.
MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by Mr. Sternlight is not being challenged or opposed by any other perspective.


Passage number 25.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions. Discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating that there are questions and a discussion taking place.


Passage number 26.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, would it be in order to ask Steve aprocedural question somewhere along here. He might not want to do itat this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is simply asking a procedural question and acknowledging that Steve may not want to answer it at that moment.


Passage number 27.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what you have in mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is stating a lack of knowledge or understanding, rather than expressing agreement or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 28.
MR. BLACK. Well, with our new targeting on M2 and M3, Ithink there are some interesting questions about whether theseprocedures work the way they did when we were targeting on M1. Idon't know whether you would like that issue raised here or at someother point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black is questioning whether the new targeting procedures work as effectively as the previous ones, suggesting that there may be some issues or differences.


Passage number 29.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It might as well be raised here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements that suggest disagreement or contention. It is a neutral statement indicating that a certain topic (which is not specified) could be introduced or discussed in the current context.


Passage number 30.
MR. PARTEE. The steering mechanism.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply introducing the speaker, Mr. Partee, and mentioning the subject, the steering mechanism.


Passage number 31.
MR. BLACK. Yes, the steering mechanism. I've been on themarket call and I've been intrigued as I watched this develop. It hasbeen a very interesting period to be there. We are following the samesort of reserve targeting procedures from all outward appearances. Westill set a nonborrowed reserve path and we have a borrowed reservestarget; and we've made some adjustments to the borrowed reservestarget. As this period unfolded, I began to ask myself whether thisreally makes a lot of sense when we are using M2 and M3 as ourtargets. They include a pretty broad confluence of assets. Some aresubject to reserve requirements and some aren't; some have interestrate ceilings and some don't; and some seem to move in the samedirection as the federal funds rate moves and some seem to move in theopposite direction. So, I'd like to ask Peter if he really thinks it11/16/82makes a lot of sense to use this kind of reserve targeting procedurewhile we are using M2 and M3 as our primary targets, or even for thatmatter if he really thinks there is any effective way we can controlM2 or M3. The bottom line on this is that I am asking whether thefederal funds rate under current procedures is an effective operatinginstrument or whether it tends to become a target in itself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is posing questions and expressing curiosity about the effectiveness of using reserve targeting procedures and the federal funds rate as operating instruments. They are not affirming or negating any specific viewpoint.


Passage number 32.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, there are a lot of parts to yourquestion, President Black. Just as a technical matter, I think inusing and revising the reserve path there are some [specific]procedures called for. We had to do some of this adjustment fordifferent factors even when we were targeting M1. But there arefurther adjustments of this kind to allow, as you say, for the factthat many components of M2 don't generate reserve requirements. Stevemay want to comment on this, but what we have done as we've gone alongis to revise the path as though there were reserve requirementsagainst M2 in general, in a sense making up for the fact that someimportant components of it didn't have reserve requirements. When youask if it is effective to control M2 via this means, I would have tosay I have some real doubts as to how good our control mechanism is onM2. But I think that would be true almost whatever rules we live byat the Desk. I do think what we're following, though, is an effectiveresponse mechanism to growth in M2 that is either on track or below orabove track. It is something whereby the performance of M2 cangenerate a greater or lesser provision of reserves that then impactson the money market, on the economy, and so on, and eventually on M2.I think that this is a sensible procedure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and expressing some doubts, but there is no explicit disagreement or argument.


Passage number 33.
MR. BLACK. But the ratio between total reserves and M2 or M3is so low or, to look at the other side, those so-called multipliersare so high. Therefore, if we miss our target--say we overrun thetarget--and we adjust by making the banks borrow that portion by whichwe have overrun the target, that's a pretty weak increase in theborrowed reserve target. Even if we do it on a one-for-one basis andeven if that were the right way, I would wonder whether necessarilydriving up the federal funds rate at a time like this would slow downa good part of M2. I think we would count on it affecting the M1portion and probably the part of M2 that is subject to rate ceilingsor reserve requirements. But some of these components are reallymoney market instruments and they seem to move in the same direction.This is the kind of thing that has concerned me about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their concern about the potential impact of adjusting the borrowed reserve target on the federal funds rate and the different components of the money supply (M1 and M2).


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 34.
 I felt aswe went through the period that the old apparatus was rather out ofdate when we were using this particular kind of target and that maybewe ought to go directly to [targeting] the federal funds rate, whichprobably sounds like heresy to a lot of people who have listened to mein the past, but--MR. PARTEE. How would you slow down M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests that the old apparatus is out of date and proposes a new method, targeting the federal funds rate. This goes against what the listeners may have previously heard from the speaker, suggesting a potential difference of opinion. Additionally, the response from Mr. Partee indicates a potential disagreement or questioning of the proposed method.


Passage number 35.
MR. BLACK. I don't think we can slow it down except throughaffecting M1 and those few assets in M2 that are subject to eitherreserve requirements or interest rate ceilings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Black expressing his opinion on how to slow something down through affecting certain assets.


Passage number 36.
MR. WALLICH. Well, one way of putting what you said is thatthe funds rate is now an endogenous variable. Is it the result oftrying to restrain M2 with reserves, or is it the other way--that wemove the funds rate and try to restrain M2 and that more or less givesus the reserve level that is needed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Wallich discussing the relationship between the funds rate, M2, and reserve levels.


Passage number 37.
11/16/82MR. BLACK. I think that's a good way of putting it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a statement expressing agreement or approval.


Passage number 38.
 Thewhole thing just bothered me and I was hoping for some--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you want to make any comment, Mr.Axilrod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own personal feelings and hoping for a comment from Mr. Axilrod.


Passage number 39.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, the comments I'd be tempted tomake would be in a fairly broad range. There is a dilemma between theshort run and the long run. It is probably true that because most ofM2 doesn't have any reserve requirements this 2 percent averagereserve requirement on M2 relative to total reserves is giving us avery weak response in the short run to overruns in M2. That assumes,if we just go to the 2 percent, that the response is somewhatproportional and that M1 together with the nontransactions componentwould be roughly [as variable as M1]. But as President Black pointedout, in the short run they clearly won't be; as interest rates go up,the market will raise rates on the nontransactions components and theywill respond. So, in the short run probably we ought to react, [ineffect,] by moving the reserve requirement on demand deposits. Thatis, if M2 is strong, the really practical option is to lower demanddeposits substantially; so we'd have to use a demand deposit ratio inthe multiplier--for the purpose of the [technical] adjustment [to thenonborrowed reserve path]--rather than the M2 ratio. In that case wewould get a very powerful interest rate response. To reduce demanddeposits sufficiently to offset an expansion in the nontransactionscomponent would require a very substantial rise in interest rates.That's just another way of saying in technical jargon that theinterest elasticity of M2 is low relative to the interest elasticityof M1.So, to try to control M2 over a very short-run period risksvery substantial interest rate movements. In the end, we would haveto have enough [of an increase in interest rates] to bring income downand reduce the amount of money available to put into M2. That's thereason that we started using the 2 percent ratio--to moderate thisparticular impact, consistent with the Committee's decision. Also, ithas a certain reality. When you think of the market response, thecontrol horizon for M2 is [necessarily] somewhat longer than thecontrol horizon for M1. Whether the Committee would then want to godirectly to the control of the funds rate and make a deliberatedecision about that instead of leaving it implied from a reserve path--knowing the control horizon for M2 might be a little longer, butimplied M1 movements would still be substantial--strikes me as anissue that has more than economics in it. My personal preference, ofcourse, would be to stay with a reserve path because I think it makesit a little easier in practice to get the movements of interest ratesthat the Committee probably would find tolerable and desirable underthe circumstances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing different options for controlling M2 and the potential impacts on interest rates. There is no mention of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 40.
MR. BLACK. Well, that's very helpful. I did not mean in anysense to be critical of what was done. I think Peter and Steve did afine job in implementing exactly what the Committee had in mind, whichreally was a sort of money market directive. I was just getting atthe kind of problems we would have if we continued this for someperiod of time. I think Steve and Peter both elucidated those verywell. That was very helpful. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Although Mr. Black acknowledges that there may be potential problems in continuing with the current approach, he also expresses his appreciation for the job done by Peter and Steve in implementing what the Committee had in mind. There is no clear disagreement or contention in this passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 41.
11/16/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just make a couple of comments. Idon't think there's any question that the mechanism creeps when it isadapted to this purpose. I would not overestimate the precision ofour control technique on M1 either, but there is no doubt that itlooks more strained when we are doing it this way. I was going tomention later, but I will just mention it now, that we will have apaper prepared for the Committee looking toward the targets for nextyear. It will not be primarily on the control mechanism, although itmay get into that. It seems to me almost certain now that [as aresult of DIDC actions] we shortly will have a full transactionsaccount with a market rate of interest. We are very close to that nowanyway, and we'll have another account. We may have very close totransactions accounts without any reserve requirements on them. Wevirtually have that now. It raises all kinds of questions both aboutthe impact this will have on differential growth among the aggregatesand even total growth of the aggregates during some perhaps lengthytransitional period. And it also has a bearing on the controlmechanism. I don't think we can solve those problems today; I'm surewe can't. But we can get this paper prepared well before the meetingat which we have to set targets for next year. We will get itdistributed before the meeting and have a discussion then; I don'tthink we will resolve it then but we ought to be in a better positionfor resolving it at the following meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that there are questions, doubts, and uncertainty about the control mechanism and the impact of certain actions on growth of the aggregates. This indicates a lack of agreement or contention. Additionally, the speaker acknowledges that the problems cannot be solved immediately and may require further discussion and resolution at future meetings.


Passage number 42.
MR. BALLES. Paul, I found the [DIDC] announcement in thismorning's paper fascinating. Would it be premature to ask you whetherin your opinion we will end up classifying these new accounts as M1 orM2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple request for information.


Passage number 43.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I've been assuming we will put them in M2and it probably is premature to say that. It's a very ambiguousaccount. Beyond that, I don't know when it will be introduced. Butthere is a meeting of the DIDC not very far off--in three weeks orsomething like that. I don't know whether the DIDC will approve whatin effect will be a lifting of the interest rate ceiling on NOWaccounts, but I think it will go a long distance toward that. In twoor three months prospectively, I think we will have that. This thingis so much like a transactions account now. If banks use it as asweep account--it's not quite clear that they will--it's on the marginthere. If it were any more liberal than it is, they would certainlyuse it as a sweep account and I don't know how one would distinguishit from a transactions account. I'm not sure we'd stop short of thatmargin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and stating their lack of knowledge about certain topics, but there is no disagreement or differing perspectives presented.


Passage number 44.
MR. FORD. Excuse me, in that regard, was the newspaperarticle accurate that the DIDC has approved in addition to the sixtransfers--three checks and three preauthorized--telephone transferswithout limit at least until the next time this is looked at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The person is simply seeking clarification about the accuracy of a newspaper article.


Passage number 45.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That may be reversed, but that's the wayit is now--[unlimited] telephone transfers into one's own checkingaccount.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement presents a fact about the current situation of unlimited telephone transfers into one's own checking account.


Passage number 46.
MR. FORD. Into one's own checking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple statement about someone putting money into their checking account. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 47.
MR. PARTEE. Or a personal visit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 48.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, a personal visit was always allowed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Well, a personal visit was always allowed" is a simple assertion about a fact or policy, without any conflicting or contrasting information.


Passage number 49.
11/16/82MR. FORD. On top of the other six transactions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage simply mentions the addition of another transaction without providing any specific information or indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 50.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That decision will [be reviewed]. One ofthe people who voted for it immediately wanted to change his mindafter the meeting and he was not allowed to change his vote. So, itmay be reversed in a subsequent meeting. But that bears upon howtransaction-like it is, of course.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information about a decision and the possibility of it being reversed in a subsequent meeting. There is no explicit disagreement or contention expressed in the passage.


Passage number 51.
MR. FORD. Was it a 3 to 2 vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply asks whether the vote was 3 to 2, without any indication of disagreement or conflicting views.


Passage number 52.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It must have been, because the one votewould have swung it. Now, we still have a decision to make on that,frankly. According to our present rules, an account of that sort willhave a reserve requirement. I think that is correct. And if we justkeep the reserve requirement on it, I presume that banks will notoffer that service. I doubt it would be worth it, in terms of payingthe 12 percent reserve requirement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and opinions without directly addressing any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 53.
MR. PARTEE. Paul, I think we are going to have to look atthe control mechanism definitely by the time we choose targets formonetary policy for next year. We probably will never be able tosteer on M1 again. But M2 or any other aggregate we might choose,such as bank credit, has to have some concept for translatingundesired behavior in an aggregate to action. And this 2 percent ruleis a minimal response and couldn't be expected to have any effect insteering the aggregates if that is what we really want to do now. Wemight want to take as our aggregate nominal GNP, but even then we needa control mechanism. That is the vital part to be studied, becausewhat we have now really doesn't have any tie to aggregate targeting oraggregate control--not with a 2 percent presumption on running aboveor below on the reserve effect of the aggregate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is simply stating that they need to look at control mechanisms for monetary policy and expressing doubts about the effectiveness of certain aggregates in steering the economy. There is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 54.
MR. BLACK. One thing we could do is to make the change inthe borrowing target some multiple of the overrun or underrun.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is proposing a potential solution or suggestion, rather than expressing opposition or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 55.
MR. PARTEE. Sure, we need an [amplification].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 56.
MR. BLACK. It doesn't have to be one-for-one; that's ratherarbitrary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion that something does not have to follow a one-for-one pattern, describing it as arbitrary.


Passage number 57.
MR. PARTEE. We don't look at M1, but of course we are goingto affect M1 by what we do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no visible contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that their actions will have an impact on M1 without any indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 58.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, "We don't look at M1" is a littlestrong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "We don't look at M1" is simply described as "a little strong," which implies that it may be an exaggeration or an overstatement, but not necessarily a source of conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 59.
MR. PARTEE. I want to put it that way, though. Even if wenever published the figure on M1 or looked at it or anything else, intrying to steer M2 we could have a process that would have big effectson actual M1 or the availability of Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their desire to approach the topic in a certain way, without any opposition or conflicting viewpoints mentioned.


Passage number 60.
MR. BLACK. It would inevitably have to work that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a hypothetical statement made by Mr. Black, implying that something is bound to happen or follow a certain pattern.


Passage number 61.
MR. ROOS. Would you think it would be helpful in making someof these very basic decisions, if some input were invited fromwhatever Reserve Banks might be interested in getting into the act onthese studies, as far as just expressing themselves. There are somevery fundamental changes in the wind and I would think that anyone11/16/82within the System who had intelligent input to offer should beencouraged. I think we ought to hear the Reserve Bank points of viewas well as those of the [Board] staff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing the belief that it would be helpful to gather input from Reserve Banks on certain studies and decisions, as well as encouraging the expression of intelligent input from anyone within the System.


Passage number 62.
MR. WALLICH. We at one time had a Committee on the Directivewhich got together when there were changes of this kind. Conceivably,we could revive that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 63.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's right. But let's see wherewe want to go from the preliminary paper. I think we're going to getit done by the next meeting. We can't be too cumbersome at thispoint, but any Reserve Bank that wants to contribute should be intouch with Mr. Axilrod. He has already been in touch with some peopleat the Reserve Banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the next steps and timeline for a project and is suggesting that any Reserve Bank that wants to contribute should get in touch with Mr. Axilrod.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 64.
MR. FORD. Will it include something about your idea, Frank,of how to control total credit. What would the control mechanism beunder your idea. Would that be in the paper.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the phrase "What would the control mechanism be under your idea" as it suggests that Mr. Ford may have a different idea or perspective on controlling total credit.


Passage number 65.
MR. AXILROD. We'll look at all the aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the speaker will be examining all the aggregates.


Passage number 66.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The first focus is on which aggregates [totarget] and how to interpret the aggregates. And that is partly--Isuppose entirely in some sense--because M1 has problems at the momentthat are looked at as a transitional thing. But it's very easy to getinto a more general discussion, starting with a transitional problem,particularly when whatever else happens to M1, it looks as if there isgoing to be interest paid on it, which is going to change its behaviorsoon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 67.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We will end up with an adjusted M1A,which will be called the monetary base.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a future outcome without any conflicting opinions or perspectives.


Passage number 68.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need to ratify the transactions, andMr. Sternlight made a recommendation to you.SPEAKER(.). I move approval.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating the need to ratify the transactions and informing others that Mr. Sternlight has made a recommendation. The phrase "I move approval" implies that the speaker is in favor of approving the transactions.


Passage number 69.
MR. PARTEE. Peter, did you have in mind longer coupons.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only contains a statement of a question being asked. There is no contention or disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 70.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, we would look at the whole range; wetypically do when we buy bonds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Sternlight is simply stating that when they buy bonds, they typically look at the whole range.


Passage number 71.
MR. PARTEE. And you would do it in some volume today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee simply suggests that the person mentioned would do something in some volume today.


Passage number 72.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes. It could be roughly $800 million to $1billion. That would be a rather normal bite, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any form of contention or disagreement. Mr. Sternlight is providing an estimate of the cost which he considers to be a normal amount.


Passage number 73.
MS. TEETERS. Why are you buying. Are you buying for reservepurposes or inventory.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a direct question and does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 74.
MR. STERNLIGHT. We have a reserve need running over the nextfew weeks. We already bought a large amount of bills at the beginningof this statement week and it would be a very normal pattern to followup with a coupon purchase in the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a normal pattern of purchasing bills and coupons in the market.


Passage number 75.
11/16/82MR. PARTEE. Do you think the market would make anything ofthe fact that this sizable and unusual operation is occurring while weare meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a question being asked.


Passage number 76.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't think so, Governor. There have beenseveral occasions when there were coupon purchases on the Committee'smeeting date.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Sternlight's statement is a straightforward response to the Governor's question.


Passage number 77.
MR. PARTEE. They are looking apparently for some sign thatwe are going to move interest rates down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee simply states that "They are looking apparently for some sign that we are going to move interest rates down." This is a neutral statement without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 78.
 The only concern would be--MR. MORRIS. I would think the market would interpret this asa Federal Reserve concern about the backing up of interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a concern about how the market may interpret the Federal Reserve's actions.


Passage number 79.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the given passage without any context or further information.


Passage number 80.
 It might draw some mild--MR. MORRIS. I think that would be very constructive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement by Mr. Morris is supportive and agrees with the previous statement.


Passage number 81.
MR. RICE. We might get more leverage if we do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It simply states a suggestion or possibility that "we might get more leverage if we do it."


Passage number 82.
MR. PARTEE. Well, it's not really a neutral movement that isbeing proposed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is simply stating their opinion that the movement being proposed is not neutral. There is no indication of contention or disagreement with another party.


Passage number 83.
MR. BLACK. It is neutral so far as the money supply isconcerned.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "It is neutral so far as the money supply is concerned" does not indicate any conflict or contrary points of view.


Passage number 84.
MR. WALLICH. Do you think an amount of that magnitude wouldaffect the yield structure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a straightforward question asking for an opinion.


Passage number 85.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't think it would affect it verysignificantly. The market might draw some mild encouragement from it,but I wouldn't think they would make a big deal of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Sternlight is expressing his opinion that the market would not be greatly influenced by a certain factor.


Passage number 86.
MR. WALLICH. I think some people will say: "I hear theTreasury is issuing these bonds and the Fed buys them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is making a statement about what some people might say, but there is no opposing viewpoint presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 87.
"MR. PARTEE. Are they in the market right now, Peter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The statement "Are they in the market right now, Peter" indicates that MR. PARTEE is questioning or doubting whether the mentioned individuals are currently participating in the market.


Passage number 88.
MR. STERNLIGHT. The new issues were delivered yesterday.It's a real question, with those coming at a current market yield andsome of the other recently offered issues because of their highcoupons having more attractive yields, whether we should buy them on ayield basis. We are apt to buy very few of the new one that just cameinto the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a question about whether or not to buy the new issues based on their yield.


Passage number 89.
MR. GRAMLEY. How long has it been since you've made couponpurchases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple question asking for information about the length of time since coupon purchases were made. There is no contention or disagreement evident.


Passage number 90.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Oh gosh, several months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Sternlight's response indicates surprise or exasperation but does not imply disagreement with anyone or anything.


Passage number 91.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I cannot determine the presence of contention or disagreement without the passage you are referring to. Could you please provide it?


Passage number 92.
 And of this size that must really--MR. STERNLIGHT. I think it was early last summer. The sizewould be a normal size; we did $800 million about 3 or 4 months ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information about the size and timing of a financial transaction.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 93.
MR. WALLICH. I am a little skeptical of this. What wouldhappen if you postponed this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The phrase "I am a little skeptical of this" indicates that there is disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 94.
11/16/82MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, we have a reserve need to meet fornext week and, given its persistence, it ought to be met in sizablemeasure through outright purchases. So, if we don't buy coupons, we'dprobably want to do another sizable purchase of Treasury bills. Itwould be somewhat of a surprise to the market for us to do thatbecause they have come to expect that after doing some sizable billbuying for a while we would intermix that on occasion with couponpurchases. I think they would take it as a deliberate shunning of thecoupon market if we didn't get in there. I don't think it absolutelyhas to be today; it seems like the most logical day to me from thestandpoint of our reserve needs. If we did it tomorrow, then peoplecould read that even more in the context of the Committee meeting thanif it is being done on the day of the meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is primarily discussing the need for reserve purchases and the potential effects on the market.


Passage number 95.
MR. WALLICH. I think you should do a mixed bag of short-medium- and long-term issues.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the statement provided. Mr. Wallich is expressing a suggestion or recommendation for a combination of short, medium, and long-term issues.


Passage number 96.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, Governor, when we buy coupons it isjust that. It's not all long-term bonds. We buy the whole range ofcoupon issues. To intermix bills and coupons I think would be aterribly cumbersome, totally novel, excursion in the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Sternlight is simply expressing his opinion about intermixing bills and coupons in the market.


Passage number 97.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think this is the most vitalissue of the day. If there is a lot of discomfort about doing ittoday, it will be done presumably on Thursday or Friday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 98.
MR. GRAMLEY. I have no problems.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states that Mr. Gramley doesn't have any problems. There isn't any contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 99.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If that makes people feel morecomfortable, we can do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is suggesting a willingness to accommodate the comfort of others.


Passage number 100.
MR. MARTIN. I have no problem going ahead today. I'd rathersee us go ahead today than tomorrow given all this mumble-jumblemisinterpretation we've been referring to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Martin is expressing his willingness to move forward with something and stating his preference to do it today rather than tomorrow.


Passage number 101.
MR. PARTEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is "No" because there is no indication of contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage simply states that someone named Mr. Partee responded with the word "Yes," but it does not provide any context or information for which there could be disagreement.


Passage number 102.
MR. WALLICH. If we're going to do it this week, it would bebetter to do it today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Wallich is expressing a suggestion or preference for taking action on a specific day.


Passage number 103.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have a motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply asking if there is a motion, without expressing any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 104.
MR. MARTIN. I move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: The word "move" suggests that Mr. Martin is proposing or advocating for a particular action, which could potentially lead to disagreement or contention among others.


Passage number 105.
MS. TEETERS. You have a motion that has been seconded.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is evident by the fact that the motion has been seconded, indicating agreement or support from at least one other person.


Passage number 106.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wasn't sure what that motion was.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is simply stating a lack of knowledge or uncertainty about a specific motion. There is no disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 107.
MR. RICE. The motion was to accept the recommendation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there was a motion to accept the recommendation.


Passage number 108.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 109.
 Well, we also have to ratify thetransactions and I didn't ask anyone for--MR. PARTEE. The motion I think is to add a billion dollarsto the [intermeeting] limit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 110.
MR. MARTIN. Raising it by $1 billion [to $4 billion].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact without presenting opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 111.
11/16/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any objections.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage is a question and does not contain any statements or arguments that would indicate contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 112.
MR. WALLICH. I think I'll vote against it if it's purecoupon purchases. If it's just to add a billion dollars [to theintermeeting limit], I can't be against that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich expresses his opposition to a certain type of purchase (pure coupon purchases), indicating his disagreement with the proposal.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 113.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we really want a voteappearing in the record that we voted on a particular operation andhad an objection. If you want to persist in your objection, I thinkwe ought to defer the whole thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is evident from the phrases "I don't think" and "If you want to persist in your objection". These statements suggest that the speaker has a differing opinion or objection to the proposal being discussed.


Passage number 114.
MR. WALLICH. No, I'll withdraw my objection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, withdraws his objection, indicating that there is no longer any disagreement.


Passage number 115.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The action has nothing to do with coupons;it's just to increase the limit.SEVERAL. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any contradictory statements or opposing viewpoints. It simply states that the action is unrelated to coupons and its purpose is to increase the limit.


Passage number 116.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We also need a motion to ratify thetransactions.SPEAKER(.). So moved.SPEAKER(.). Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both the speaker and the second person are agreeing and supporting the motion to ratify the transactions.


Passage number 117.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Approved.] Mr. Kichline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only states Mr. Kichline's name and does not present any conflicting viewpoints or opposing opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 118.
MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage does not provide any statement or context to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 119.
]MR. BLACK. That's finished goods. Jim.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is simply providing a clarification by stating that the item in question is finished goods.


Passage number 120.
MR. KICHLINE. That's right--total finished goods.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply affirms that the statement is correct.


Passage number 121.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we just go on to Mr. Truman andget the complete picture.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting moving on to Mr. Truman to obtain more information or a comprehensive understanding of a certain topic.


Passage number 122.
MR. TRUMAN. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only includes a statement by Mr. Truman.


Passage number 123.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I won't describe the picturedomestically and internationally but open it to discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is open to discussing and hearing different opinions about the topic but does not provide their own viewpoint initially.


Passage number 124.
MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, looking back over the last sixmonths, it's a little unnerving to witness the failure of prosperity,which was supposed to be right around the corner, to emerge. Layingaside political figures, as I recall, Jim, there have been respectedpeople in the forecasting fraternity who were predicting that anupturn would begin as early as last May or last June. One month afteranother after another right down to the current one, as we know, thathas failed to happen. Looking back, can you put your finger on anyparticular factor that has produced this outcome. I'm thinking thatdespite the tax cut for business last year and despite the October '81and July '82 cuts in personal income taxes and all these wonderfulthings that were supposed to get us off onto a new road here,[recovery] keeps eluding us. Looking back, I wonder why.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's observations and questions about the failure of prosperity to emerge despite various economic measures.


Passage number 125.
MR. KICHLINE. I think there are a number of factors. It'snot really comforting to know that we have had a lot of company, butyou are quite correct that the general expectation for the second half-10-11/16/82of the year has not been met. In part, from our side, I think weperhaps underestimated the interest rate impact on a variety ofsectors, and in business fixed investment it was not just the interestrate impact but more broadly an erosion of confidence in that sector.That's the one area that we have written down substantially and itaccounts for the major drop in activity late in this year. The exportside is one that has been weakening as well in recent months, giventhe deterioration in international conditions. So, both of thosesectors are now heading down with a vengeance. I would say there areobvious impacts on income and consumer spending flows from that. Ifyou look around at what went wrong, it is a bit weaker virtually everyplace. I don't know any place in our forecast where we tended torevise [our estimates] up. Some revisions have been large on the downside and others small; but they all have tended to run in a negativedirection. I think it's a whole host of factors. I would say alsothat the tax cut was a little weaker than we anticipated earlier, butit was so small that it pales by comparison with the other thingsgoing on and it just doesn't matter in the aggregate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a reflection on various factors that have contributed to a decline in economic performance. The speaker acknowledges that there have been negative revisions in their forecasts and that multiple factors have contributed to the current situation. There is no indication of disagreement or conflicting views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 126.
MR. PARTEE. We didn't have a rise in personal savings,particularly, as a result of the tax cut, which suggests that incomegrowth was so much poorer that it used up the benefits of the tax cut.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, suggests that the tax cut did not lead to an increase in personal savings. This implies that there is a disagreement about the effectiveness or impact of the tax cut on personal finances and income growth.


Passage number 127.
MR. KICHLINE. That's right. The monthly savings ratenumbers are a little hazardous to look at, but September now is downto the 6-1/2 percent range. The temporary blip has been all buterased and a lot of income has been destroyed in effect or lost fromthe fact that these other sectors were deteriorating.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states the facts about the monthly savings rate and the impact on income.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 128.
MR. BOEHNE. I think we can trace most of [the economy'sweakness], John, to very high interest rates. That stares us right inthe face. We have extraordinarily high interest rates. If you lookback at other recoveries, real rates have been a good bit less. I'venoticed in my District, for example, that the drop in rates over themost recent months and its impact on the stock market has had apositive effect; there is less pessimism and some increase in hope. Ithink that will be quickly erased if rates reverse themselves to anysignificant degree. I believe the recovery eludes us because ratesare too high, and we won't get a recovery until we have lower rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. While Mr. Boehne argues that high interest rates are the main cause of the economy's weakness, there may be other factors at play that are not mentioned in the passage. Additionally, someone else may have a different perspective on the causes of the economic weakness.


Passage number 129.
MR. BALLES. I happen to agree with that, Ed. I didn't wantto put words in Jim's mouth. I think that's the way it came out,though. The key factor, I think you said, Jim, was the interest rateimpact particularly in the business fixed investment area and theexport area. Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 130.
MR. KICHLINE. I think that's right. I would say that we hadhigh interest rates in our forecast and we still had a recovery. So,looking back, I'd say either we misestimated the impact of those ratesor attitudes changed. But it's very clear to me that one can't ignorethe rate impact in terms of what is happening in the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply reflects the speaker's personal opinion and reflection on the impact of high interest rates on the economy.


Passage number 131.
MR. PARTEE. The velocity numbers have been very unusual,haven't they. We've had pretty good monetary growth throughout butvelocity has been negative instead of positive.believe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the velocity numbers being unusual without expressing any disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 132.
MR. KICHLINE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Since you have only provided "MR. KICHLINE" as the passage, it is impossible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 133.
 Steve is going to be discussing that, I-11-11/16/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who sees the recovery beginning.SPEAKER(.). Beginning.SPEAKER(.). Some flurries.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that Steve will be discussing something and mentions the topic of recovery beginning, without any conflicting opinions or arguments being presented.


Passage number 134.
MR. CORRIGAN. I do get a little sense of it, at least in ananecdotal sense; there certainly are no hard statistics at this point.But I do have a very distinct sense of a bit of a change in businessattitudes and so forth just in the timeframe of the past month or so.One place where it is very evident, as Jim mentioned, is in thehousing sector. There clearly is a little action developing--I don'twant to say a burst of activity--in the housing sector.who is in the wood products business even acknowledged thatin a very forceful way last week. In termsof the number of plants making wafer board and that type of thing, allof a sudden they are back on 7-day workweeks. So, I think there issomething there. More generally, I do perceive in a variety of placesand contexts a sense that a bit of momentum is beginning tomaterialize.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's personal perception of a change in business attitudes and some positive developments in the housing sector.


Passage number 135.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There is going to be a substantialdecline in commercial construction next year, so even though lumbermay be benefit, net, I'm not sure that the overall construction impactis going to be that significant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing uncertainty about the overall impact of a decline in commercial construction on the lumber industry.


Passage number 136.
MR. CORRIGAN. The commercial construction situation isreally very, very bad. Indeed, not only do I suspect that that sectorof the economy is going to remain very soft for a long time but Ithink that is going to show through in another clustering of realproblem situations for the people who are financing these buildingsthat are just being finished.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the speaker's belief about the commercial construction situation.


Passage number 137.
MS. TEETERS. What is the state of the farm economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply asks about the state of the farm economy without expressing any contrasting viewpoints or disagreement.


Passage number 138.
MR. CORRIGAN. It's not good. Certainly, the price situationis terrible. These people, though, really do have remarkable stayingpower, in our District anyway. I sent my staff out to visit 6 or 8major agricultural lenders to try to get a first-hand picture of whatthey thought was going on, and I was astonished. We are seeing a lotof problem situations and problem loans and all the rest, but it'sstill the Main Street [retailers] and the implement dealers [that aremainly affected]; the farmers themselves are hanging in there prettywell. The livestock people, again despite low prices for livestock,are benefitting obviously from lower grain, feed, and energy prices.So they actually are hanging in there in a reasonable fashion. Butwith regard to farm-sector purchases of any equipment, they arevirtually non-existent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It primarily presents facts and observations about the current situation in the agricultural sector.


Passage number 139.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me ask the question the other way inthe interest of even-handedness. Who sees a continuing momentum ofdecline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply presenting an alternative perspective or viewpoint. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 140.
MR. MARTIN. I'd like to speak to the housing sector.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement indicated in the passage. Mr. Martin simply expresses his desire to speak about the housing sector.


Passage number 141.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll come back to you in a second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that someone will return shortly, but does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 142.
-12-11/16/82MR. GRAMLEY. Let me just make one comment. I have alwaysfound it interesting and useful when I'm uncertain about whether myforecast is right or not to do what I call a "National Bureauexercise" in which I look at what I think are the better leadingindicators of economic activity to see whether they confirm or deny mythinking. Of course, I play this game in my own way; I choose theones I think are best. I don't look at the leading indicators, but Ilook at things like the average workweek in manufacturing, initialclaims for unemployment insurance, orders for durable goods, andindustrial raw materials prices. And they are all still going down.I'm quite convinced we will find that the recession not only has notended in October but that it will not have ended in November either.And while I would make a forecast like Mr. Kichline's that recoveryprobably is right around the corner, I made that same forecast atmidyear, as he did, and I was dead wrong. So, I think we have toreckon with a quite high probability that recession may well continuethrough the first quarter of 1983.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is sharing their own perspective and analysis of the current economic situation.


Passage number 143.
MR. CORRIGAN. There's a point that I think is lost here. Wekeep talking about the fact that interest rates have come down. Idon't know what the real interest rate is, but if you look at therelationship between current nominal interest rates and current ratesof inflation, the reduction in real interest rates, if it's there atall, certainly is not very significant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing uncertainty about the real interest rate and mentioning that if there is a reduction in real interest rates, it is not significant.


Passage number 144.
MR. GRAMLEY. The other aspect of this interest rate movementthat I think we need to take carefully into account is that thisrecession is quite unlike earlier ones in terms of the internationalcomponent. A very large part of the decline in real GNP since themiddle of 1981 can be explained by the drop in real merchandiseexports. Now, that's a consequence partly of a worldwide recessionbut also of a very substantial increase in the value of the dollar inexchange markets. And the drop in nominal interest rates has notreversed that. That negative effect is still there in spades, as theInternational Finance Division has reminded us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, is explaining the factors that have contributed to the decline in real GNP and the drop in real merchandise exports. He acknowledges that a worldwide recession and the increase in the value of the dollar have played a role in this decline. There is no opposing viewpoint presented in this passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 145.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even though unemployment levels don'ttrack real GNP that quickly, the view on Wall Street--I would say theconsensus view--is that unemployment will continue to rise. I hearestimates of from 10.6 to close to 11 percent. Some people say itwill peak by the end of this year but others say it will peak in thefirst quarter of '83. We could have some plus--a tiny little plus--inreal GNP and still get rising unemployment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents differing opinions on when unemployment will peak and provides a range of estimates for the unemployment rate.


Passage number 146.
MR. PARTEE. Oh, sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple response or agreement.


Passage number 147.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But that wouldn't be perceived asrecovery, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states the perception of recovery and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 148.
MR. WALLICH. Well, we're not thinking in terms of interestrates very much. We should remember that when we used to do this weallowed for a lag of 6 to 9 months before [the economy] turned. Iwould think these lags have shortened, particularly in housing, andexpectations tend to shorten them. But this fall in interest rateswasn't all that long ago that we could expect very great results bynow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about the consideration of interest rates and the expectation of results.


Passage number 149.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot provide a response as the passage or any additional context is missing.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 150.
-13-11/16/82MR. MARTIN. I've noted along with President Corrigan a fewsigns of housing recovery. Like Jerry, I've talked with both lendersand developers and found from them the first sparks or glimmerings orvery preliminary indications of some recovery. But we have to putthat into the changed institutional framework in which the lenders andthe developers and the sellers of existing housing now operate. Oneof the positive indicators, of course, is the substantial upswing inFHA applications. That is a positive, but those FHA applicationsgenerally deal with housing, in submarket by submarket, that is at thelower percentiles of the housing market. It would be difficult tohave a 1.3 or 1.4 million housing start number based only on thatsegment of the market. It would be difficult to have that kind ofrecovery in housing from the 800,000 to 900,000 level unless existinghome sales revive and continue to support the month or two upswing innew home sales. The question is whether even that one or two monthincrease in new home sales will persist. The question is where thefinancing is going to come from to handle the need for the financingof the foreclosed properties--and they would be foreclosed if theydidn't have to be shown in certain asset categories of the thriftinstitutions and the commercial banks. That kind of financing, ofcourse, is taking and will continue to take first priority overadjustments and accommodations to the regular borrower. I note thatthere is a question about the thrift institutions with this marvelousnew account, which is primarily a transaction account and will belooked on by their managers as a short-term source of funds. Do wereally expect them to make 30-year fixed rate, fixed term loans with 5or 10 percent down. That kind of contract is going to be what ittakes to get to a 1.3 million level, supported by some multiple ofexisting home sales of 5 million or whatever it takes to support the1.3 million. I don't see it that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement. The speaker is presenting a different viewpoint or skepticism regarding the housing recovery and the ability to reach certain levels of housing starts. They question whether the increase in new home sales will continue, where the financing will come from for foreclosed properties, and whether thrift institutions will be willing to provide long-term fixed rate loans. This contrasts with the earlier mention of signs of housing recovery and sparks of preliminary indications.


Passage number 151.
MR. PARTEE. You don't think the public will buy a variablerate mortgage.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. The statement is a simple statement of opinion by Mr. Partee, without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting perspectives.


Passage number 152.
MR. MARTIN. I think the public will buy a variable ratemortgage. That gets us to the complication of qualifying the buyer,particularly the young buyer, in what more often than not won't be avariable rate but a renegotiable rate mortgage. That gets us to thesecond problem of qualifying the young buyer particularly and otherbuyers where the lender demands a pledged account mortgage--where asavings account has to be put up in order to qualify the borrowerbecause the income-to-debt-service requirement is such that they can'thandle it without debiting a pledged account. In other words, theinstitutional context in this recovery period for housing issignificantly different from any recovery period we've had before.So, if you foresee a consumer-led recovery with housing as theharbinger, I suggest you take another look.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is merely presenting their viewpoint and discussing potential challenges and complications in the housing market.


Passage number 153.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 154.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Jerry Corrigancaptured the theme that I wanted to express. And that is that thediscussions in October with businessmen and bond dealers in our areaand at our board meeting involved probably the grimmest, gloomiestreports on the business outlook that I've experienced since I've beenwith the Federal Reserve. Interestingly, at the most recent boardmeeting and in meetings with businessmen in November, there was thisglimmer of hope that things indeed were getting close to improving.11/16/82There was some report, for example, that housing in the Oklahoma-Colorado area particularly, which has been a very vigorous economy, iscontinuing fairly strong.As far as the agricultural sector is concerned, while I doagree with Jerry that the agricultural sector has great resiliency, intalking to the farmers and [others] and also as a result of aquarterly agricultural farm survey that we conduct, we find that theforeclosures or the estimates of near foreclosures, which includesubstantial sales of assets in order to provide liquidity to theproducer, are increasing or expected to increase rather dramaticallyin our area. One other thing we hear from farm credit people as wellas bankers is that they are very conscious of [the desirability of]not putting very much foreclosed farm real estate onto the marketbecause the market is already depressed in value by some 25 percentfrom a year ago. They are going to hold that farm real estate in somefashion rather than flood the market with it, which would push valuesand prices down [further], thus jeopardizing the collateral onoutstanding agricultural loans. The bright spot in agriculture is thered meat area; hogs and cattle, for example, both are in the black asfar as profits are concerned. So there is some hope.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges the grim reports on the business outlook in October but also mentions a glimmer of hope in November. They also discuss the increased foreclosures in the agricultural sector but mention the bright spot in the red meat industry. Overall, there is no clear disagreement between the different points mentioned.


Passage number 155.
MS. TEETERS. How much of the glimmer of hope you are seeingstems from the drop in interest rates and the anticipation of theirgoing down further.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about the source of hope related to the drop in interest rates.


Passage number 156.
MR. GUFFEY. Nancy, I'm not sure I can identify all that goesinto that glimmer of hope. But the fact that interest rates are lowercertainly has to be an important factor. There is obviously somebroad anticipation of a further drop in interest rates. I'd justsuggest that without a further drop or with some backing up I thinkthat glimmer of hope could vanish immediately. It would not only goaway but that would worsen the potential outlook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Mr. Guffey is expressing his thoughts and speculations about the importance of lower interest rates and the potential impact of a further drop. There is no overt contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 157.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the full context or information about Mr. Balles.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 158.
MR. BALLES. Just to reinforce what Governor Martin wassaying on housing, the forestproducts industry, one from one of the biggest firms in the West, saythat there indeed have been signs of a little pickup. Translatingthat into what it means for 1983 as a whole, they are still prettybearish in the sense that 1.3 million would be about as much as theyare looking for in new housing starts. And in a broader sense thatindustry is still in the doldrums because of what the foreign exchangebusiness is doing to log exports; that is a very, very severe blow.And finally, the pulp and paper business, which is another importantleg of that industry, is really in the doldrums. So, at least in ourforest products firms, I don't find any great optimism these days.If I could finish with a question, Mr. Chairman, I'd like toask a question of Ted Truman, at the risk of repeating what perhapsalready has been said, which I didn't understand. In view of what hashappened to interest rates in this country, with lower nominalinterest rates at least, is there any good reason you can think of whythat darn exchange rate is not only hanging up there but gettingstronger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Balles, acknowledges that there have been signs of a small improvement in the forest products industry but also highlights the negative impact of the foreign exchange business on log exports and the doldrums in the pulp and paper business. He concludes that there is no great optimism in the forest products firms. This contradicts any notion of significant improvement or positivity in the industry.


Passage number 159.
-15-11/16/82MR. TRUMAN. Well, as was noted earlier, it has moved down alittle and may be coming [down more]. But the staff, at least at theBoard, has pretty much run out of what I might call good reasons onthat. And, not satisfied by the staff, I've noticed that severalpeople we've had in here--the Board [staff] having been exhausted--were asked the same question. One clear factor seems to be theuncertainty and the safe-haven arguments. There is something there;how much one can't say. That kind of argument is very difficult tomeasure in terms of how important it is. Another factor is thisrecent phenomenon, as Sam mentioned, that there does seem to be asense in the market that even though U.S. interest rates have moveddown, foreign interest rates, even if they didn't move down in thisperiod, are expected to move down further. We saw some of thatphenomenon in the market yesterday when there were reports thatBritish interest rates were going to drop very dramatically over thenext six months; that knocked down the pound quite markedly againstthe dollar and other currencies at that time. So, there is a sense inwhich there is a decoupling of interest rate policy [whereby ratescoming down in] other countries at the same time our interest ratesare coming down has led to some marking up [of the dollar]. One thingthat we do sometimes lose sight of is the fact that our inflationperformance has been better than expected and better relatively thanexpected. All three together suggest that the dollar in a sense isnot quite as high as we think it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It discusses various factors and observations related to interest rates and the value of the dollar, but there is no conflicting or contradictory information presented.


Passage number 160.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 161.
MR. KEEHN. Well, I have [heard] the comments that wouldsuggest that emotionally there is perhaps a better tone in the market,but I really think it's only because the previous period had been sovery, very bad. In answer to Nancy's question, I think [the weakness]is entirely interest-rate driven. With rates having been so high,that created such a very bad attitude that a reduction, even a modestone, has been well received. But looking aside from the emotion intothe basics, I think the situation is continuing to deteriorate. Thebasic industries, particularly those in the Midwest, are continuing todecline. That tone comes through in the Redbook; the Redbook made forpretty consistently gloomy reading this particular time. I think weare at a point where, if the rate structure doesn't stabilize orindeed doesn't continue to go down, this emotional improvement isgoing to deteriorate pretty rapidly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 162.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 163.
MR. BOYKIN. Well, I would pretty much be where Roger andJerry are. My overall reading of the Eleventh District [based on] ourown internal forecast that we've just gone through at our Bank isslightly more optimistic certainly than the Board staff's forecast. Idon't know how much of this is hope. But I see things that I findvery hard to understand. This is strictly anecdotal, but with regardto housing, Sunday afternoon out of curiosity I visited two housingdevelopments in Dallas. At one, the builder apparently was prettyoptimistic; he had just completed 10 specialty homes beginning at$375,000. And the crowds [were so big] you could hardly get in thehouses. I was impressed with that, so I went across the road toanother new development, and the lots began at $250,000.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boykin's statement that he is "slightly more optimistic" than the Board staff's forecast suggests a difference of opinion or perspective. Additionally, his anecdotal observation about the housing developments, where one builder is optimistic and experiencing high demand while another is not, shows that there is disagreement or differing experiences in the housing market.


Passage number 164.
MR. PARTEE. The lots.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their point of view or making a statement.


Passage number 165.
11/16/82MR. BOYKIN. The lots.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states a date and the phrase "The lots." It does not present any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 166.
MR. BLACK. That's low income housing in Texas.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions low-income housing in Texas.


Passage number 167.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is a lovely countryside.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that there is a lovely countryside, without any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 168.
MR. GRAMLEY. Each has its own golf course.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is a simple statement of fact, stating that each subject mentioned has its own golf course. There is no disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 169.
MR. BOYKIN. Three homes had just been completed and were onshow and we could not get in them because of the crowd. They begin at$1 million and they have "for sale" signs on them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply describes a situation where three homes are on show and could not be accessed due to a large crowd.


Passage number 170.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. People aren't buying; they're looking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presenting a fact about people's behavior - that they are looking instead of buying.


Passage number 171.
MR. BOYKIN. But what builder has that kind of financing andthat kind of optimism to build a million dollar [spec house]. And onethat is about half completed is going to be priced at $1.8 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement about a builder's financing and the pricing of a half-completed house.


Passage number 172.
MR. MARTIN. Bob, there's an old maxim that builders use,which is: "I'll build anything [the lenders] will finance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is simply stating a maxim or saying that builders use, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 173.
"VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But, Bob, isn't the number of rigs inuse up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 174.
MR. BOYKIN. The rig count has improved. There is a questionof whether it is a real improvement or seasonal for tax purposes andso forth. But the rig count is up slightly. On the other hand, theseismic surveys are not showing that much improvement, so it doesraise the question of whether it will hold.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that the rig count has improved, but questions whether it is a real improvement or just for seasonal tax purposes. Additionally, the seismic surveys are not showing much improvement, which raises doubts about the sustainability of the improvement in rig count.


Passage number 175.
MR. BLACK. Bob, doesn't your housing information supportPres' statement that the strength is going to be in the low incomepart of the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black is simply posing a question to Bob based on the housing information.


Passage number 176.
MR. MARTIN. In Texas, that's low income.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is a factual statement about the income level in Texas, there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 177.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about Mr. Ford's opinions or actions that could result in contention or disagreement.


Passage number 178.
MR. FORD. Well, I would say I get pretty much the samereadings. I've been through three of my six locations in the last twoweeks and there was a marked change from the last go-around. Abouthalf of my branch directors and Atlanta directors are now saying somepositive things; it's pretty much concentrated, as others havereported, in housing and housing-related areas, which are sensitive torates. One of was absolutely euphoric.He said he had an infinite improvement in building permits; inMontgomery, which is a city with a few hundred thousand residents,permits went from zero to thirty. Of course, that was[unintelligible]. Another reported that he'd seen trucks going out ofthe local lumber mill for the first time in a long time; that ishousing-related and is supported by some statistical data that arecoming out.We did a special survey of thrifts with regard to thequestions that Governor Martin reported on and also the question ofwhere the money is going. We looked at nineteen of the biggest thriftinstitutions in the Southeast and they account for $1 billion of thenationwide total of all savers certificates. Half of it disappeared.11/16/82We compared September 20 to October 20 to see what happened to themoney, and about $500 million ran off from the all saverscertificates. The thrifts were pretty cheered by the fact that thebiggest chunk of it--$150 some odd million--went into passbookaccounts; they wish it were permanent, but they doubt it will be.Another big chunk--about $30 to $40 million--went into IRAs, which islong-term money. That might be the partial answer for why NOWaccounts and IRAs and deferred comp accounts are starting to build up.Basically, I guess I have to go along with the general thrust of thereports here, which is that the only real optimism or rays of hopethat we see are in housing and housing-related industries. There area few minor exceptions; there's a bit of tourism and a littleimprovement here and there, but overall it is in the rate-sensitivesectors.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents information and observations made by Mr. Ford, who agrees with the overall reports and identifies areas of optimism in the housing and housing-related industries.


Passage number 179.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions Mr. Solomon without providing any information or context that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 180.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Consumer credit interest rates arenot coming down very much. I gather they are running 18 to 24percent. Many department stores are keeping their rates at 24percent. The argument is made that they had losses earlier when therewere usury ceilings that they have to make up. Some of the banks sayit is longer-term money that they have to borrow in order to financeautomobiles, for example. Some of the upstate bankers in New Yorkhave said that their auto credit business has not picked upsignificantly. But one banker told me that he has offered a 12percent rate on the condition that the customer open an account or hadan account in his bank. And he said he is absolutely deluged withapplications and that he did an enormous volume of financing of newauto sales at 12 percent. Now, Karl Otto Pohl in Germany made apublic plea to the banks to pass on reduced interest rates in theconsumer credit area, and a few of the banks followed with a onepercentage point reduction. I don't know whether Chairman Volcker isthinking of making a comparable appeal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is primarily a description of different interest rates for consumer credit and the actions of banks in response to calls for reduced rates.


Passage number 181.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are you recommending it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply asks if the reader is recommending something without providing additional context or argument.


Passage number 182.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, I think it would be a good idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, I think it would be a good idea.


Passage number 183.
MS. TEETERS. I wasn't aware that consumer credit interestrates moved with the cycle. I thought that automobile and mortgagerates moved with the interest rate cycle, but that everything else wasalways at usury ceilings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states the speaker's previous understanding about consumer credit interest rates and expresses surprise at learning new information.


Passage number 184.
MR. MARTIN. Well, we have the impact of personal bankruptcybehavior patterns that lenders are taking into account a bit more thanthey did in the previous so-called recovery.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply discusses an observation about the impact of personal bankruptcy behavior patterns on lenders during a previous recovery.


Passage number 185.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 186.
MR. ROOS. In looking ahead, I think it's important to keepin mind several fundamentals. I don't think any economist I haveheard from or read about really equates this recovery with otherrecoveries from troughs in economic activity in recent times. Peopleare almost unanimous in anticipating that the fourth quarter of thisyear, which is the time we're speaking of right now, will beessentially flat and that there might be, and hopefully will be, somepickup going into next year, with maybe 2 percent real GNP growth at-18-11/16/82best in the first half of next year. Some of us get exceptionallygloomy when we don't see the dramatic increase that has characterizedprevious recoveries. Just last week we had the chief financialofficers of the largest companies in our area in for lunch. What manyof you have reported was indicative of their points of view. They didrecognize a rebound in home building and home-buying activity, but itwas essentially in higher priced properties. The one significant hintof meaningful improvement came in the retail area where two largenational retail firms, and another, said that they weresensing what they thought was an improvement that they hoped wouldcarry over into Christmas as a significant improvement. But I thinkit's important when we get around to making policy that we not reactin an inflationary manner to a gradually improving probability becauseI don't think there is any way that we will get the sort of dramaticupswing that has occurred in the past without fueling the[inflationary] engines to an extreme. But we saw glimmers ofimprovement among the contacts we had in the Eighth District.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Roos expresses skepticism about the likelihood of a significant economic recovery, while also mentioning some hints of improvement from certain sources.


Passage number 187.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ms. Horn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 188.
MS. HORN. I suppose if I were grasping at straws to saysomething optimistic from the Fourth Federal Reserve District point ofview, I would say that the comments I've heard since the last meetinghave [conveyed] in some sense more confidence. But if one goes belowthe tone of the comments and into the statistics business people havebeen basing them on, in fact, the statistics don't seem to show anyimprovement in the capital goods industries. We hear about continuingdeterioration and backlogs, for example. And the farm sector is muchas several people have reported, in terms of what farmers buy andextremely weak land prices. But, in fact, the comments do seem tohave a little more confidence in them, perhaps really because peopleare now beginning to say that they are going to take market share awayfrom somebody else and somehow be at a competitive advantage ratherthan that they are seeing an overall improvement in the economy. Isee this as heavily reflected in the consumer sector in the FourthFederal Reserve District as in any other [sector]. But I could put anoptimistic face on what continues to be perhaps not a negative set ofdata but a stagnant to negative set of data in our District.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Ms. Horn mentions that the comments from business people convey more confidence, but she disagrees with the statistics that show no improvement in the capital goods industries. She also mentions that the farm sector is weak, contradicting any positive sentiment. Therefore, there is contention between the comments and the statistics presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 189.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. One last comment I'd like to make isthat I met with a group of about fifteen business leaders, and thoseamong them who have been doing well in the last two years--three orfour of the fifteen--continue to do well. Those who have been doingvery poorly say they see the situation as absolutely flat; though itis not deteriorating further, they don't see any signs of recoveryyet. And I found it interesting that when I asked about salary andwage increases, all of them, including those who were doing well,talked about increases in a range from zero to 6 percent, with theexception of the New York financial community.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests disagreement or difference of opinion among the business leaders regarding the current state of the economy and their expectations for recovery. Some believe the situation is flat with no signs of recovery yet, while others who have been doing well see continued success. Additionally, there is variation in their views on salary and wage increases, with some expecting zero increases and others expecting up to 6 percent. The exception of the New York financial community is not relevant to the question of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 190.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd say that you weren't talking to theNew York bankers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents someone's perspective or opinion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 191.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The wage increases that the New Yorkbank community expects to pay within the next 12 months were running 8to 10 percent, but the increases expected in the industrial communityranged from zero to 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage states that the wage increases expected by the New York bank community are running 8 to 10 percent, while the increases expected in the industrial community range from zero to 6 percent. This difference in expected wage increases suggests a disagreement or contention between the two communities.


Passage number 192.
11/16/82MR. PARTEE. I wonder whether the type of people you all talkto might not be considerably influenced by the 250 point increase inthe DOW. It seems to me that that is one of those things that colorattitudes. It may not add that much to consumer spending or anything,but most business leaders and most people who would buy a milliondollar house have a considerable stake in the equity market one way oranother, and they probably are feeling quite a bit better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 193.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can turn to Mr. Axilrod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states that Mr. Axilrod can be turned to for something, without presenting any conflicting opinions or disagreements.


Passage number 194.
MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.][Coffee break][Secretary's note: The meeting resumed at this point withmore limited attendance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply describes a break in a meeting and a note about the meeting resuming with limited attendance.


Passage number 195.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have to come down to making adecision. The assumption of the Bluebook is that we will keep thesame general framework we had last time. I thought this [distortionin] M1 from the all savers certificates would sort itself out by thistime. I'm not sure that it has; it appears that it has not. We stillhave that problem. A much more fundamental problem, implicit orexplicit in the earlier conversation, is that the business situationdoesn't look red hot. It has a lot of international complications.And, certainly, the relationships between the money figures and theeconomy have run way off the postwar track. We may be ending up witha tighter policy than we intended for that reason and not because welet [the aggregates] run above track. That's a judgment that has tobe made. Without any question, they are off track; and whether theyare going to return to track in the foreseeable future is a matter offaith. It doesn't surprise me, particularly, that they are off tracknow, but one can't judge the amount. I'm not so sure if we're reallygoing to disinflate. We have all kinds of institutional problems withM1, but extracting from the institutional problems I think the basictrend in velocity might change. I've said that before, but I can'tprove it. It certainly has changed in the short run and I'm not surewhy. I would think that the basic trend in M2 and M3 ought to change.But that's really a problem for next year and not for next month.It's just a matter of judgment how much we allow for these liquiditypressures, and I suppose that gets mixed up in interest ratejudgments. Who would like to approach the problem. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 196.
MR. BOEHNE. Paul, I would like to start. I have made a listof the key points that have been made. We clearly have a weak economyand the prospects for recovery are elusive at best. The point hasbeen made about some glimmer of hope at the emotional level, but Ithink that is largely a result, directly or indirectly, of lowerinterest rates, and it can evaporate very quickly if rates reverse.The foreign situation, at least from my perspective, is just plainscary. And there is the point that you just made: That the moneysupply figures have to be viewed with increasing skepticism in termsof their economic meaning, at least at this point and maybe for a longtime. I might add a point that has not been made. We have had a muchimproved inflationary situation. There is no room for an inflationscene [but] I think we have to be prudent about the inflation problem.As I add all these up, and admittedly it's a judgmental issue, they11/16/82make a rather convincing case for a monetary policy that encouragessome lowering of interest rates.As for the alternatives in the Bluebook, that pushes me inthe direction of "A." It may be "A" to "B," but I'm certainly closerto "A" than "B." If we did that, I would think that the funds ratewould drop to 9 percent or a little under, and that also would open upa window for an appropriate drop in the discount rate, which I thinkhas been discounted to some extent in the market. Unless we get somemove there, we may give up some of the progress we've made on lowerrates since the last meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. All the points made in the passage are in agreement that the economy is weak, the prospects for recovery are elusive, and the need for monetary policy that encourages lowering of interest rates.


Passage number 197.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 198.
MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I think we've gone a long waytoward dealing with our long-term inflation objectives. That is notsaying we won't have to deal with them in the future, but it seems tome that the immediate, imperative policy is to find the level ofinterest rates that is going to permit the economy to turn around. Ithink the evidence at the moment is that the current level of interestrates is too high and that the economy is still sliding downward.Quite clearly, the monetary aggregates are giving misleading signals.Their strength clearly does not reflect strength in the economy, butquite the opposite. It's a reflection of the weakness of the economy.In large part, I think the growth in the aggregates reflects the factthat the business community has not been able to fund their debt inthe long-term bond market in the normal cyclical manner. And that hasproduced the unusual phenomenon of growing, indeed rapidly growing,business loans at banks all through a recession. I can't recall thatever happening before. Again, this sustained business loan demand,which has contributed toward the strength in the aggregates, as wellas the liquidity preference factors are giving us very misleadingnumbers on the aggregates.It seems to me that at the moment we have to go foralternative A; it is the only alternative that makes any sense to me.We have to set aside the aggregates as our prime objective at themoment. But if we go for "A," and I hope we do, that does mean wewill have to inform the markets in some way that it is not necessarilyour objective to bring M2 and M3 within their ranges because, if weget the markets anticipating that the Fed is determined to bring M2and M3 within their ranges by the end of the year, we could very wellnot have the kind of response that we want. But that's a problem foryou to figure out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris expresses his opinion and makes suggestions, but there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 199.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will be making a little speech tonight.Mr. Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply states that they will be making a speech tonight without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 200.
MR. ROOS. Well, I see this somewhat differently from Frank.First of all, I would ask Steve a question because I may be analyzingthis incorrectly. One of the reasons for shifting our emphasis orattention away from M1 was to accommodate the distortions that the allsavers certificates and other instruments might be causing as the allsavers certificates [matured]. If we have the M1 growth that isimplied in any one of these three alternatives and if we project thatgrowth from the present time, aren't we in effect projecting 5 percentin the case of alternative C, or 6-1/2 or 8-1/2 percent from a basethat includes the all savers certificates where they are now. In11/16/82other words, don't we in effect validate that bulge that is a resultof the all savers certificates termination.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Roos is simply presenting his viewpoint and asking a question to clarify his understanding.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 201.
 Don't we take off fromthat higher level and doesn't that give us for the year growth in thataggregate that is way above the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are you talking about 1983.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The initial speaker seems to believe that they start off at a higher level and experience growth throughout the year. The second speaker questions if they are referring to the year 1983, suggesting a difference in understanding or perspective.


Passage number 202.
MR. ROOS. I'm talking about 1983, yes. What I'm trying tosay, and I guess I'm saying it in a very clumsy fashion, is that Iwould feel no discomfort with 6-1/2 or 5 percent growth from Octoberto December if that growth were after the effects of the all saverscertificates have washed out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their opinion and trying to clarify their statement, but there is no conflict present.


Passage number 203.
MR. PARTEE. He's talking about the bulge.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply describing Mr. Partee talking about the bulge.


Passage number 204.
MR. ROOS. I think we're really moving from an inflated M1because of its all savers component; if we put in a 5 or 6-1/2 percentgrowth rate above that, we're really getting a much higher rate ofgrowth relative to our original targets than we had originallycontemplated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their opinion about the potential growth rate in a rational manner without contradicting any previous statements or causing disagreement.


Passage number 205.
 I don't know that I'm asking quite--MR. PARTEE. One can see that; it's on the chart here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses uncertainty about their question and acknowledges that it can be seen on the chart.


Passage number 206.
MR. AXILROD. Well, the growth rates we have here arecertainly higher than we assumed at the last Committee meeting wouldbe consistent with your original M2 targets. The M2 target may beslightly higher, but not very much. A problem, as far as we can seefrom the casual information we get on bank deposits, is that the allsavers certificate money that went into demand deposits has not comeout yet. And we don't know when, in fact, it will come out. For allI know it may sit there and jump into this new money market instrumentthat the DIDC has authorized. So, in some sense, that temporary moneyis still in there and is raising these growth rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting information and observations about growth rates and the M2 target.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 207.
 I think that'swhat is causing these numbers--MR. ROOS. Well, I would see the effects of this on interestrates differently from the way Ed Boehne and Frank Morris perceivethem to be. Regardless of what we know about the behavior of theaggregates, there are a lot of people out there doing a lot offiguring. And if money--whether it's M2 and M1 or a combination ofthese various Ms--continues to grow at anything like the rate it isgrowing presently, even though that money growth is authorized as ameans of achieving lower short-term interest rates, I believe theopposite is going to occur, and I think it will occur very quickly.In other words, we will start to get articles and a reaction that willboost rates rather quickly in the belief that we will reinflate.Frank, I don't think we can turn this inflation [fight] off and on inany orderly way; people are still skeptical as the devil as to whetherwe are going to hang in there and keep our anti-inflationary posture.If we have three months or four months of really fast money growth, Ithink we will see these rates skyrocket instead of coming down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker is disagreeing with Ed Boehne and Frank Morris and expressing a different perspective on the effects of money growth on interest rates. The speaker believes that if money continues to grow at its current rate, it will cause interest rates to increase rather than decrease. This disagreement creates contention in the passage.


Passage number 208.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 209.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I agree with those whohave already suggested that we must find an appropriate interest ratelevel that will further our economic recovery. I'm not sure that-22-11/16/829-1/2 percent isn't it, but it certainly hasn't given a good signalyet that it is the appropriate level. That implies to me that weought to move interest rates to a modestly lower level, and that lowerlevel is, I suppose, something this Committee should decide. All thetalk about targeting reserves and looking at M2 for some informationalcontent as to what policy should be I think is a bunch of baloney inthe sense that we are targeting interest rates. And we ought torecognize that. In that context, I think there are a couple of waysto go. First of all, let me say that I am not suggesting that we doaway with or abandon the regime of targeting reserves and moneysupply, at least for public consumption. But around this table itseems clear to me that [we are on] an interest rate regime and weought to target on the interest rate we think is appropriate to getthe economic recovery started again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Guffey disagrees with the idea of targeting reserves and looking at M2 for guidance in setting policy. He believes that the focus should be on targeting interest rates instead.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 210.
 Having said that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think that's quite accurate,Roger, if I may interject. Speaking for myself, I would have lowerinterest rates if these aggregates weren't rising so darn [fast].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement or contention in the passage. The phrase "I don't think that's quite accurate" shows that the speaker disagrees with Roger's previous statement. Additionally, the phrase "if I may interject" indicates that the speaker is interrupting to present a different viewpoint.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 211.
MR. MARTIN. Would you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The use of the word "Would" suggests that there is a possibility of disagreement or contention in the following sentence.


Passage number 212.
MR. PARTEE. I agree with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Partee, clearly states that they agree with the statement mentioned. There is no sign of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 213.
MR. GUFFEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: This question cannot be accurately answered without the accompanying passage. Please provide the passage in order for me to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 214.
 I agree that we have to be concerned about--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not exactly what I would target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The person is agreeing with the idea that there needs to be concern but stating that it may not align with their specific target or focus.


Passage number 215.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, notwithstanding growth of the aggregates,I would propose that some lower interest rate is necessary to triggerthe recovery. The way to get there is what this Committee has to dealwith. Others have suggested alternative A and that has someattractiveness to me. But there are a couple of ways to engineerlower interest rates in the intermeeting period. And I would preferdoing it by adopting "B" and having an initial borrowing level belowthat suggested in the Bluebook, which was $350 million. I would makeit $250 million or maybe $300 million, thus setting the reserve pathin such a way that we would get a fairly immediate drop in interestrates; and coupled with a discount rate decrease, that would bring thefunds rate to the 9 percent area. The reason I'm not terriblyattracted to "A" is that, if I understand the Bluebook projectionscorrectly, "A" [contemplates] about an 8-1/2 percent fed funds rate inthe intermeeting period. That's a full percentage point decrease in afive-week period. That may be a little quicker than I'd like to seehappen. I'd like to go down gingerly and see what happens so that wecould continue a downward trend. And thus, I would opt for "B" with alower initial borrowing level as the prescription.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is an individual expressing their preference for a particular approach to lower interest rates in order to trigger economic recovery.


Passage number 216.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Teeters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Since there is no passage provided, it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 217.
MS. TEETERS. Well, what I would recommend is not new. Ithink we have to get interest rates down to get the economy started.Therefore, I'd opt for alternative A. I did an interesting thing lastweek. I realized I had never actually looked at the numbers from theearly 1930s, so I went back and took a look at them. There is noquestion but that we are not in a situation like the 1930s. [Then theeconomy] just went straight down; in the current situation, it hasbeen going sideways for three years. But there is one thing that isvery similar to the 1930s and that is the international crisis. What11/16/82made the depression so extended was that all international creditflows essentially stopped. Our interest rates, the lack of recoveryin this country, and the high international value of the dollar arecreating a situation in the international field that could lead usinto something very similar to the 1930s, and I'd be very careful.So, not only for domestic reasons but also for international reasons,I think it's imperative that we get our interest rates down and downto a level that will start a recovery. In addition, more and morepeople and more and more members of Congress are pointing the fingerat us, saying that the lack of recovery is solely a result of eitherhigh nominal or real interest rates. If that continues and more blameis heaped on us, the possibility of major institutional changes islooming in the next year. I wouldn't change [policy] solely for thatreason, but the economic and international outlook are such that wecan't afford to stay at these rates. Therefore, I would stronglysupport "A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's recommendation and observations.


Passage number 218.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just say a couple of words aboutthe international situation. We have an IMF agreement--letters ofintent anyway--with Mexico and Argentina. Their problems are far frombeing solved, but that's a very important step. Mexico still doesn'thave much money and their economy is winding down for lack of importsand other things. There is going to have to be a big negotiation withthe banks to get them to put up some credit. I don't anticipate thatwe will be asked to do anything more but it's not inconceivable [thatwe may be asked]. I just don't know how much [it might be] in theshort run. The U.S. government is certainly going to be asked to dosomething on Argentina. I don't think it necessarily is going toinvolve the Federal Reserve. I have taken the opposite view. It's avery complicated situation. It depends upon what kind of securityarrangements can be developed and it depends upon whether any foreigncentral banks will join in. It's in a state of being unresolved.As for the Brazilian situation, they had their electionyesterday. I don't know what happened. It probably will take them aweek to count their votes, but at least they have that behind them.They may have special vote-counting techniques for all I know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and expressing uncertainty about certain situations.


Passage number 219.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Are they counting the way they do itin Illinois.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. It is simply asking a question about the counting method used in Illinois without expressing any opposing or conflicting views.


Passage number 220.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That comment doesn't go in this report.My only point is that it may clear the way for a more opendiscussion of the Brazilian problem. There was an article in The NewYork Times a day or two ago, which you may have seen, that is fairlyaccurate. That is going to burst upon the world's consciousness alittle more fully in the next few days. The Treasury has provided$500 million to Brazil already and probably will do another $200 to$300 million very shortly just to keep them afloat until the timing isright for them to go to the Fund and try to deal with the problem moreopenly, which is certainly going to have to be done. It is still avery uneasy situation. The IMF negotiations, on the other hand, arebeing speeded up, and that should be of some assistance. I think thatwill be resolved in the next month or so in terms of enlarging quotasin the special fund. I interject that because it arose in a couple ofcomments. Mr. Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and updates on the situation in Brazil.


Passage number 221.
-24-11/16/82MR. GRAMLEY. I am with the majority view that is beginningto develop. That view is that we have to do something to make surethat a recovery begins soon. Frank used the word "imperative" and Ithink that is quite right. It's a matter of urgency. Looking at thedomestic economy, I have a feeling that the widespread expectation ofthe business community at midyear that the recession was over and thata recovery would begin led to actions that were deeply disappointedwhen the growth in final sales that was expected to come from theconsumer sector didn't happen. We had a very serious worsening ofexpectations during the course of the summer and a drop in the demandfor business fixed investment among other things. And I think thereis more than a small risk that it might happen again. If I wereforecasting, I suppose I would say it is probable that the recoverywill begin sometime early in 1983. But there are no concrete signs asyet that the recession is over.I agree with Governor Teeters that the internationalconsiderations are pointing strongly in that direction, too, as wellas considerations about what Congress might do. It's not just aquestion of potential anti-Federal Reserve legislation, but we badlyneed to have action that is going to reduce the prospect for growingdeficits in the out years. And it's going to be extremely difficult,if not impossible, for the Congress to go in that direction if theeconomy is still falling. I look at the present level of interestrates and I have to acknowledge that I'm not sure the present level ofinterest rates is inconsistent with recovery. But if it's the wronglevel, it certainly is not that interest rates are too low. On thecontrary, they are more likely to be too high. I don't think there'sany significant danger that what we do between now and the end of thisyear is likely to provoke a massive turnaround of inflationaryexpectations. I think we have established our credibility. I thinkwe have to follow a course now that prevents any possibility thatinterest rates might go up. So, "C" and "B" are quite unacceptable tome. I wouldn't want to take such aggressive action that the marketswould think we were throwing in the towel. I would be inclined,therefore, to go somewhere between "A" and "B" with an initialborrowing of maybe $250 million, as Roger Guffey suggested. Iwouldn't be reluctant to stick with the growth rate of M2 in "A" and Icertainly would want to keep in the directive the statement that weincluded last time about uncertainties leading to exceptionalliquidity demands. We ought to err on the side of providing moregrowth rather than permitting less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and discussing their thoughts on the current state of the economy and potential actions to stimulate recovery.


Passage number 222.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about Mr. Keehn's opinions, beliefs, or actions that could lead to contention or disagreement. It only mentions his name without any further context.


Passage number 223.
MR. KEEHN. Well, I don't know what I can add to what seemsto be an emerging consensus for alternative A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement suggests that there is an emerging consensus for alternative A, indicating agreement or unity among those involved in the discussion.


Passage number 224.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The consensus is mostly among non-votingmembers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage suggests that there is a consensus among non-voting members, indicating agreement rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 225.
MR. PARTEE. I noticed that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 226.
MR. KEEHN. I think interest rates really do matter. Andgiven the noise in the aggregate numbers, we really can't be in thebusiness of slavishly following statistics that may or may not makesense whereas interest rates, as I say, really do have a significantimpact. All the sectors I deal with in the Midwest are precariously11/16/82positioned: The agricultural situation is serious; the industrialsituation is serious also; and the consumer is at this point justplain scared. And I think consumers are not going to begin to moveout until they get some confidence. Nothing will build confidencelike a slightly lower rate structure and, therefore, I would be infavor of "A." I certainly hope that the fed funds rate would be underthe 9-1/2 percent level--that it would tend to be around 8-3/4 or 9percent and no higher than that. I think the borrowing level toaccomplish that would be $150 to $200 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses their belief that interest rates matter and that a lower rate structure would build consumer confidence. They also express a desired range for the fed funds rate and an estimate of borrowing level. There is no indication of disagreement with any other party.


Passage number 227.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 228.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I won't repeat the reasons that havebeen offered already on why I also share the view that interest ratesshould come down. Summing up, I think there is only a 50-50 chancethat we will get a recovery. We need a little more margin there. Weneed some further relief on the international scene. So, the questionis how to do it. It seems to me that even if we reduce the borrowingto $250 million--and I can't see it going safely below $200 million orprobably $250 million--the most we are going to get is less than ahalf-point drop from open market operations. It is going to take adiscount rate cut to move it a half point. If it doesn't offendanybody's integrity, I would prefer to put a figure of 9-1/2 percentfor M2 but have a $250 million borrowing assumption and use the fundsrate range of "A." The funds rate range doesn't have the samerelevance it did earlier because if we have the same kind of languagein the directive that we had last time, there is a considerableflexibility for the Chairman and the Manager. That's the combinationI would prefer, but I could live with a straight "A" if others feltthat it would be very inappropriate to have a 9-1/2 percent target forM2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining the author's view and preference on interest rates.


Passage number 229.
MR. BLACK. Is that 9-1/2 percent you are talking about forM2 for September to December, Tony.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 230.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Yes. The passage might contain contention or disagreement if it presents conflicting ideas, contradictory information, or opposing points of view. Without the actual passage, it is not possible to determine the specific reason for the disagreement or contention.


Passage number 231.
MS. TEETERS. Could we achieve that with a 9-1/2 percentfederal funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question about achieving a specific goal with a certain interest rate.


Passage number 232.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What I'm assuming is that there wouldbe a discount rate cut within a relatively short period of time. Ifthat happens, then whether we have 9-1/2 or 10 percent doesn't makethat much difference. Maybe it does by the end of the intermeetingperiod; I don't know. Steve might want to comment on this. Assumingwe had a discount rate move in the next week or two, how significantwould the difference be with an initial borrowing such as I talkedabout.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It is discussing potential scenarios and seeking input from Steve.


Passage number 233.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we defer that question until weget into an elaboration and just get the general views now. GovernorWallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker suggests deferring a question until later and getting general views instead, without any sign of disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 234.
MR. WALLICH. I, like everybody, would like to see lowerinterest rates. But what is the way to get them. The basic reasonthey are so high, I think, is indeed that the targets were too tight;they were calculated on the expectation of something like 3 percentvelocity gains and we've had the opposite. So there is less money in-26-11/16/82the economy than there should be unless this turns out to be atemporary situation, as it quite conceivably may. We have suspendedM1 temporarily; I think targeting on M2 is a good thing to state as aprinciple, but it's not a very easy thing to do operationally. Thebasic decisions we have to make are about the funds rate and theborrowing assumption. I think we have a certain degree of leeway asfar as departing from the targets is concerned. The market hasresponded, I think, very well to our statement that we weren't goingto adhere closely to M1. It hasn't had the effect of causing thelong-term rate to go up, which would be the interpretation of a strictmonetarist position; the long-term rate has come down. How long thiscondition will continue is a real question. Bob Eggert asked thisquestion of his forty economists and got a response that no doubtranges from 0 to infinity. But eliminating the [outliers], he arrivedat seven months as the period of time over which perhaps a departurewould be accepted by the market before people would begin to becomeuneasy and long-term [rate movements] would begin to become perverse.So, we have some leeway and we must make the optimum use of it. I'dbe reluctant to spend it all right away and reluctant particularly todo what the market seems to want and to expect us to do right away,which does look like throwing the book at the recession now. So, Iwould like to postpone a more drastic action and would go with "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, expresses his reluctance to take immediate and drastic action to lower interest rates, despite the market's expectation and desire for it. He believes that there is some leeway and that the current situation may be temporary, while others may have a different opinion on the matter.


Passage number 235.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions. It simply states the name "Mr. Corrigan" without providing any context or information to indicate any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 236.
MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, the way I view the currentsituation is that I just don't think it's possible that the economycan stumble along at essentially zero growth for much longer. Thefinancial strains that are there just won't permit it. If we floataround zero for too much longer, with very little difficulty we couldend up in a more severe downside situation. It is clear from theinternational side that the LDCs need to generate some exports. Onthe domestic side, I suppose some consolation can be drawn from recentdevelopments in the financial markets but, underneath all that, theextremely serious financial strains are still very much with us. Myown bet is that, even with the current interest rate structure orsomething very much like it, the prospects for some growth in realterms emerging in early 1983 and getting up in a range of 4 percent orso are reasonably good. But at the same time, while that is my ownbet, I have to concede that the amount I'd be willing to wager at themoment is not much more than a nickel.There is another characteristic of the outlook for 1983 thatI'd like to mention, too. All the forecasts, of course, assume thatunemployment is going to stay high no matter what. I think somethingis going on that may make it stay even higher than the conventionalforecasts. And that is that a lot of businesses have really cut intotheir management and white collar work force during this correctionperiod, and I think they are finding that they didn't need all thosepeople. As we begin to see a recovery, that phenomenon is probablygoing to make unemployment stay higher than it normally would, whichsimply is going to add more fuel to the fire.Having said all that, in terms of the alternatives that arebefore the Committee, if I understood them or if I thought they meantanything, I would be inclined to alternative B. That may in one senseseem to contradict what I said earlier, but I don't think it reallydoes. Again, I'm not sure what any of it means, but the thrust of my-27-11/16/82position is that I would tend to be a bit on the cautious side rightnow, [given] the monetary growth that we are seeing--whatever thenumbers mean. The potential is at least remotely there that we couldfind ourselves facing a bit of a problem in early 1983. The problem,other things being equal, might even call for a slight increase ininterest rates. It seems to me that that is a total no-winproposition. That view is reinforced, at least in my mind, by thepeculiarities of the operating environment that we are in. If we haveto snug up, regardless of what alternative we are working from, giventhe way the path is drawn and the operational mode that we are in, thesnugging up process inherently is going to be slower and less precisethan it would have been under the former procedures.The last thing that is relevant, in terms of being a bitcautious, is this new [financial] instrument. It really won't hituntil December, but it seems to me that it is going to depress thegrowth of M1 when it hits; and on top of that it is going to produce ashift from higher reserve requirement instruments to lower reserverequirement instruments, which as that begins to happen would in turnmean that a given reserve path, however drawn, might have differentimplications for the amount of money growth, however defined, onemight have assumed in the first place. That, too, leads me to theview of being a little cautious among those alternatives. I wouldhedge my bet along the lines of Mr. Guffey's suggestion of putting theborrowing level down a bit from the $350 million that the staffassociated with Alternative B so that we could see a reduction in thefunds rate coupled with or followed by a reduction in the discountrate. I might even be prepared to go one step further. If fortechnical reasons, we aren't able to orchestrate that, I'd be inclinedto take my chances with a reduction of the discount rate even with thefed funds rate trading about where it is right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. MR. CORRIGAN expresses caution and uncertainty about the current economic situation and the effectiveness of different alternatives. He acknowledges the potential for growth but is hesitant to bet on it. He also expresses concern about high unemployment and the impact of new financial instruments on monetary growth. Ultimately, he suggests a reduction in the borrowing level and potentially even a reduction in the discount rate, even if technical difficulties arise.


Passage number 237.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the following passage.


Passage number 238.
MS. HORN. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to ask you to expand a biton a statement you made earlier, which was that you would like to seelower interest rates if that could happen in an environment of lessmoney growth. I'd like to hear you talk about how much lower interestrates you think the market might tolerate in the context of variouskinds of money growth. As I look across the alternatives in theBluebook, it seems one could construct a situation where any of thethree alternatives could be consistent with lower interest rates. I'djust like to hear you expand your comment a bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Ms. Horn is simply asking the chairman to elaborate on his statement and share his thoughts on how different levels of money growth might impact interest rates.


Passage number 239.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My comment was a casual one, not ananalytic one, but I will try to make a more analytic comment. I justmeant to say that if I were plucking an interest rate out of the air,I'd pick a lower one if I weren't constrained by worrying about howfast the aggregates were growing. I don't know how responsive I canbe to your question. Somebody--I guess it was Frank Morris--said thatthere may be a perversity in the aggregates' growth at the moment. Ithink we do know at the moment, whatever it means for the future, thatthere has been an increase in liquidity preference. It almost seemsto me tautological that we would get a decline in [velocity] of thekind we got. People want to hold more money; they want to hold moreM2 and more M1 relative to economic activity. And it has persistedlong enough so that it has been of some cyclical significance. Whatmotivates that. Well, Steve gave a complicated explanation, which I'm-28-11/16/82not sure I followed entirely, about the differences between liquiditypreference and spending preference or whatever. I'm sure it wasanalytically all brilliant. But there is some element of uncertaintyhere. People want to be more liquid but that is something I can'tmeasure. To the extent that is true, I don't think it's inconceivablethat if people had more confidence and saw the economy growing, at anygiven level of interest rates we would get less growth in theaggregates because they might invest in stocks, for instance, or putmore in bonds, or lengthen maturities, etc. People would begin tolook at assets that are outside these very liquid assets. I guessthat's what Frank may have had in mind in part. I don't think it'sthe interest rate itself so much as a general feeling about theeconomy, which may be tied into interest rates. It isn't 100 percentcertain, but if over a period of time--I'm not talking just about thenext month--we got a different set of economic expectations, we mightfind these aggregates growing more slowly rather than more rapidlysimply because of a return of confidence. One could argue--I don'tknow how far I'd want to carry this argument--that by taking a chancein the short run and departing from the usual analysis or the usualexpectation of the way these things work that we might end up withlower growth in the aggregates than we would expect if indeed therewere a change in the atmosphere and people had some confidence in theeconomy looking out three or four months ahead. But I can't provethat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 240.
MR. RICE. Can you imagine that we could do anything aboutconfidence without reducing interest rates somewhat from their currentlevels.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker asks a hypothetical question, implying that reducing interest rates may be necessary to address confidence.


Passage number 241.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I can imagine it, yes. Things couldjust get better at current interest rates. What I'm saying is that ifwe chose to be more liberal on the reserve-supplying side in the shortrun, though this analysis suggests that that would produce higheraggregates we might be pleasantly surprised over a few months and findthat it didn't work that way. Nobody will ever know because we won'tknow what would have happened if we had done the opposite. But thedifferences in these aggregates projections are so small; they arewell within the range of our capacity to foresee developments, withina month anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is expressing a speculative scenario and discussing the uncertainties involved.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 242.
MR. ROOS. Do you have any uneasiness or any fear that if themarkets perceive the aggregates to be growing [rapidly], the movementin interest rates would be upward instead of downward. Is that a[concern] that should be factored into our decisionmaking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing concern about the possibility of interest rates increasing instead of decreasing if the markets perceive the aggregates to be growing rapidly.


Passage number 243.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, [though] we may be in an impossiblesituation. The economy does not always develop in a way that thereare any answers except after the passage of longer periods of timethan we are thinking about. And I think that is a danger. That's whyI pay some attention to these aggregates. What we have to balance ishow much we think we can get away with, even if we recognize thedangers in the business situation and want to get interest rateslower. Even if we think that's where the balance of the risks is, wecan't throw discretion to the winds for the reason you are suggesting.Where is that balance. I think that's what we are talking about. Ithink one would have to conclude from what has happened in the marketthat people haven't been that upset by what they've seen so far. Idon't have the figures right in front of me but in fact the surprising11/16/82thing is that while Treasury bill rates and the funds rate are [notmuch] lower than they were in early September, CD rates and privaterates are. And bond rates are way down, which seems to be the inverseof what you would worry about if there were, at this point anyway, agreat fear about what the monetary expansion was doing to us. Now,there are obviously anticipatory effects, but that is roughly right,is it not, Mr. Axilrod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their thoughts on the current economy and the need to balance risks and make thoughtful decisions. There is no opposing viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 244.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, [but] the 3-month, 6-month, and one-yearbill rates are down [some].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that the 3-month, 6-month, and one-year bill rates have decreased. The use of "Yes, [but]" suggests that the speaker may be acknowledging a different point or addressing a potential counterargument, but it does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 245.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Once we get out in the maturity range,including as short as 6 months, rates came down [more].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply mentions that once they reach a certain maturity range, which includes as short as 6 months, rates decrease.


Passage number 246.
MR. ROOS. It does take a little while, though, for therecognition of the change to sink in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that it takes time for recognition of a change to sink in. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 247.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's the judgment we have to make.The biggest protection we have against that is that things havechanged. I suppose what the market is telling us is that people arenot going to get worried about that when they have a sense that theeconomy, if anything, is still declining. That raises the question ofwhat will happen as soon as they get a sense that the economy may bein recovery; but we've got to get to the recovery first. Everythingelse is just an extreme example of what we are doing, which isbalancing risks. If we had a clear answer, it would be easy to dumpit into Mr. Axilrod's computer and he would tell us. But I don'tthink his computer is that good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the need to make a judgment regarding the economy and acknowledges the uncertainty and balancing of risks involved.


Passage number 248.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. One thing that puzzles me in themarket comments is that there is a very widespread view that even ifrates come up again in the early part of 1983, they will trenddownward during 1983. And yet these are the same people who believethere will be a modest recovery. I'm not sure how they arrive at thatview. They have a feel for what everybody else is thinking in themarket.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 249.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, they have seen what is going on.But what I am saying explicitly in answer to Mrs. Horn's question isthat I do not discount the possibility that with a feeling of economicrecovery we could get a very rapid reversal of this velocity movementin M2. I wouldn't be so certain about M1. I think M1 is just [in awhirl] with interest being paid on it and a change in inflationaryexpectations and all the rest, so I don't have the same feeling aboutM1. But for M2 it's a little hard to see why the velocity should godown indefinitely--why people should change permanently therelationship between their liquid asset holdings and income. Onecould argue, I suppose, that institutional competition has made thoseinstruments so much more relatively attractive than they used to bethat we have had a structural shift in terms of how much of that kindof money people want to hold as opposed to stocks, bonds, or whateverelse they can hold their money in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their own opinion and uncertainty about the future movement of M1 and M2 in relation to economic recovery and changes in inflationary expectations.


Passage number 250.
MR. PARTEE. That's a good argument.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is acknowledging that the argument being presented is strong or valid.


Passage number 251.
MR. CORRIGAN. One can't entirely dismiss that either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "One can't entirely dismiss that either" is not a clear indication of contention or disagreement. It suggests that there is a possibility or consideration that should not be completely disregarded. The passage as a whole does not present a clear contention or disagreement between parties.


Passage number 252.
-30-11/16/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe. I wouldn't dismiss it. Theinteresting thing is that M2 really hasn't budged for three years interms of its growth rate, including this year. It has beenpractically the same every year while the economy is going up and downand generally trending lower in terms of inflation and in growth. Wehave had some tendencies toward a decrease in velocity for some time,although it has only been this year that it has become reallypronounced. So, maybe there is a structural change here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is simply discussing their observations and speculating on a possible structural change.


Passage number 253.
MR. CORRIGAN. If one looked at the composition of M2 threeyears ago, what percentage were demand deposits and savings accountsthen. I don't know but it was pretty big, wasn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Corrigan simply asks a question and acknowledges that he does not know the answer.


Passage number 254.
MR. AXILROD. Yes. There has been a shift toward things thathave a market rate of interest.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It states that there has been a shift towards things that have a market rate of interest.


Passage number 255.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is rather interesting. Nothing couldhave been much steadier than the growth in M2 over the past threeyears while all this other stuff has been going on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their observation of the steady growth in M2 over the past three years, contrasting it with the various other events happening simultaneously.


Passage number 256.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And we are going to have the sameamount of overrun this year as last year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement indicates a similarity between the amount of overrun expected this year and the amount experienced last year.


Passage number 257.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We keep the target the same and onlyslightly overrun it. One would certainly think, given that inflationis down, real growth is down, and nominal GNP is down, that if M2growth remains at the same rate, obviously something structural isgoing on. But this year it must be something cyclical, too. I don'tknow whether that helps you. You pay your money and take your choice.It comes down to balancing out, as so many people have said, the needfor providing some protection on the down side, so to speak, againstthe danger that it's possible to overdo it, as Larry Roos keepsreminding us. The way to reach that judgment is what we're trying todo today. Governor Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different factors (inflation, real growth, nominal GNP, M2 growth) and acknowledging that there may be a mix of structural and cyclical reasons for the current situation. They also mention the need to balance the need for protection against overdoing it. The speaker does not express any disagreement or contention with another viewpoint.


Passage number 258.
MR. RICE. I'd like to join all those who feel that interestrates need to come down from their current levels for all the reasonsthat have been given, both domestic and international. I won't try togo through all those reasons again. I'd just like to say that it'sclear to me that real rates are too high to permit a recovery and,therefore, they have to come down from where they are at present.Like Governor Gramley, I don't know to what level they need to comedown. And for that reason we ought to try to get them down gradually.We ought to be careful not to overdo it. But at the same time I thinkwe have to do what we can to move rates in the right direction--downward--but gradually. I also agree with Governor Wallich that wehave a limited amount of time during which we will be able to maintainour credibility and we ought to use that time wisely. The clock isticking and we don't want to wait too long to have some effect on thecurrent situation. I would conclude that we had better use some ofthat creditability soon in order to encourage recovery while we havetime. If we wait too long, we may not make effective use of thiscredibility. Therefore, I would support alternative A in the beliefthat that will encourage a gradual decline in rates. I also think, ifI understood correctly, that alternative B would not result in anydecline at all in interest rates from their current levels. Is thatcorrect, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Rice, expresses agreement with the need for interest rates to come down, agrees with Governor Gramley's suggestion to gradually lower rates, agrees with Governor Wallich's view on the limited amount of time available to maintain credibility, and supports alternative A as a means to encourage a gradual decline in rates. Their only question is whether alternative B would result in any decline in interest rates.


Passage number 259.
11/16/82MR. AXILROD. Well, if the aggregates came out that way, yes;it's set that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of agreement based on the condition mentioned.


Passage number 260.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And if all these other assumptions arecorrect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is conditional, implying that if the other assumptions are correct, then something will follow. However, it does not express disagreement or contention with any specific ideas or arguments.


Passage number 261.
MR. RICE. So, to support "B" doesn't seem to me consistentwith the objectives that we all say we have. I would be content to besomewhere between alternatives A and B provided it resulted in somedownward [interest rate] movement. But alternative A seems perfectlysafe at this time and that's the way I think we should go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Rice expresses his opinion and suggests a compromise, stating that alternative A seems safe and is the way to go.


Passage number 262.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 263.
MR. FORD. May I ask a quick question. If I did myarithmetic right, the midpoint of the fed funds range in "B" is about1 percentage point below the current fed funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Ford is simply asking a question and providing a statement based on his calculations.


Passage number 264.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, for "B" we just put in the range that theCommittee adopted at the last meeting. But our expectation was for afunds rate more like it is now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that their expectation for a funds rate is more in line with the current rate.


Passage number 265.
MR. FORD. And in "C" the midpoint is about where today'srate is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement simply states a fact about the midpoint of rate "C" being similar to today's rate. There is no disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 266.
MR. AXILROD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is yes. The inclusion of the word "Yes" suggests that Mr. Axilrod is responding to a previous statement or question, indicating some form of disagreement or contention. Without further context, it is not possible to determine the specific content of the disagreement.


Passage number 267.
 We started with "B" as the range theCommittee had, but the range--MR. FORD. Well, I think you have characterized it exactlyright, Mr. Chairman, in saying that we are at a point where we areweighing the [unintelligible]. The consideration is whether or notwe're in a historical discontinuity. When I first joined thisCommittee I thought it was a line-up of Keynesians versus monetaristsas to just what we needed to stimulate the economy. I'd like toreview briefly what kind of stimulus we are now putting in from both[the fiscal and monetary] sides. As everybody knows, the deficitspending of the government really didn't explode until the second halfof the last fiscal year. That is, through the spring we were runninga deficit about the same as the previous year at about a $60 billionannual rate. It was in the last six months ending with September thaton a seasonally adjusted basis it went from around the $60 billionannual rate up to $110 billion. That means that fiscal policy hasonly recently become dramatically more expansive. We now apparentlyare running a deficit somewhere in the range of $120 to $130 billion[or as much as] $150 billion for this fiscal year. In other words,fiscal policy was made much more expansive in the last few months.Likewise, as Lyle mentioned last time, the question of whatis happening to the real money supply depends on what kind of monetarytheory one likes. If you look at what is happening to the real moneysupply--I'm sure you've all seen the little chart that shows that ithas only been since last summer that the nominal money supply, M1 andM2 both, has been growing. And with the drop in prices, the fact isthat what is happening right now is that the real money supply isexpanding very rapidly whether one measures it in terms of M2 or M1.That, too, is a quite recent phenomenon; it has only been occurringduring the last few months. Those two conclusions, together with thenormal lags in the impact of fiscal and monetary policy, lead me to-32-11/16/82the conclusion that the current set of policies on both the fiscal andmonetary sides are very expansive. In terms of the fiscal thrust, thedeficit is running at 5 to 6 percent of GNP; in terms of the fullemployment deficit, [the federal budget] is now in deficit at anyreasonable definition of full employment. Real monetary policy isjust expansive. And all that says to me is that we are sitting herereading each other the gloom and doom report, but unless we are at ahistorically discontinuous point in our economy, which a number ofspeakers have suggested in different ways [may be the case], we arerunning a high risk of throwing both of the throttles in our economicairplane fully to the wall and the plane has to take off. The greatdanger is that it will surge forward in the next few months after thenormal lags on both fiscal and monetary policy take hold and then wewill be in a position of having the worst of all worlds, namely,higher long-term interest rates--we may manipulate the short ones, butthe long ones will get to us--higher unemployment, and price inflationstarting to turn around against us, all without any significant dropin unemployment. And that's the scene that concerns me on the otherside of this judgment we are making.Given that we haven't allowed for the normal lags, I wouldsay we need to wait a little longer and risk keeping policy where itis--that may mean something more like "C," whose average interest rateis right about where we are now--and see after another quarter if theeconomy does or does not respond to this tremendous stimulus we'regiving it now. If at the end of that time, by late in the winter, westill see everybody pushing their forecasts of recovery forward, Iwould be more inclined to share the judgment a number of you aremaking, which is that we are already at a historical discontinuity.Then I would say we should go into our mode of being preventors of thegreat depression. If the problem is that we have had not just four orfive quarters of unusual velocity behavior but that we are looking atsix or seven quarters of it and the number is getting bigger andbigger in the wrong direction, at that point we should push this kindof stimulus. But until then I want to emphasize the risk on the otherside, as noted in the comments of Mr. Wallich. All the business folksare saying they will give us a period of grace of, say, seven months;they will watch this and after that the indicators of expectationsturning against us should probably start to break. I look at fourthings in terms of those indicators: the price of gold, which isturning against us; the exchange value of the dollar, which iscurrently all right or more than all right as a number of you noted;long-term interest rates, which are still declining, and as you saidthe market hasn't turned on us yet; and sensitive commodity prices,which are still reasonably okay. But if we go for "A" or anythinglike "A" to "B," I think we will start to see these things turnagainst us, and with the economy surging we really will be in the soupsix or nine months from now. So, while I'm worried about what theCongress is going to do to us and I'm also very worried about the factthat most of you may be right and we may be [witnessing] a historicaldiscontinuity, I still think we should lean on the side of notoverdoing the monetary stimulus to complement the excessive fiscalstimulus that everybody agrees we now have. I'd go for "C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is presenting their analysis of the current fiscal and monetary policies and their concerns about the potential risks and consequences.


Passage number 268.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply mentions the name "Governor Partee" without providing any additional information or context.


Passage number 269.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I'm pretty sympathetic to what Bill Fordhad to say. I don't think we have allowed enough time to see the11/16/82effects of what is obviously a considerably more expansive monetarypolicy that was developing increasing momentum as we went through thesummer and into the fall. It is very much like 1980 as a matter offact. And the fiscal policy setting is certainly on the expansiveside. I don't know that I would characterize it as expansive as youdo, Bill, because I think we do need to look at the 6-1/2 percent fullemployment setting. It is negative but it's not so terribly negativeat this point, though probably it will drift up rather than downbecause I think all the Congressional sentiment will be to raise thedeficit rather than reduce it, in pursuit of particular job creatingpolicies.On the business situation, I agree most with Lyle. I thinkit is quite poor. And I'm very worried about the marginal indicators.Jerry Corrigan mentioned that employment may not do at all well, and Ithink that's quite right. I know of a plant that has reduced itsoffice force from 1300 to 500. They are not doing much out in theyard, but they are going to have to do a lot more in the yard beforethey add back to that 500 they have in the office. That plant happensto be in a deeply depressed industry, but its [action to reduce officestaff] is a mark of what a lot of business people are thinking aboutbecause they are very squeezed on cash flows and very scared abouttheir financial condition. So, I don't think business is very goodand it isn't going to get very good in the immediate future, but I dothink we need to have some time to see what the effect of thesepolicies may prove to be.Over the years the Committee frequently has made seriouserrors by not allowing for the lag in [policy] effects because wealways expect to see instantaneous results and we never get them ineconomics. I think we ought to wait a little while. I don't knowwhether interest rates are too high or not. I agree that onesympathetically thinks they ought to be lower because the real ratesare so high; on the other hand, we have this structural problem inthat they have to be disproportionately higher because of thegovernment's financing needs. That is, the government is interest-insensitive in its demand for funds and it is going to take asubstantial share off the top, so real rates have to be higher than inpast settings in order to have a balanced economy with that kind ofdeficit. So, Paul, I come out for "B;" I think "C" is perhaps alittle draconian. And I feel rather strongly that we shouldn't beposting in the directive expectations for the aggregates that are asfar out of our expectational range of just 6 weeks ago as those in "A"would be. Even if we shade the funds rate range in "B," I think weought to keep the specifications for the aggregates that are in "B"and wait until we see this staff paper and have a little moreexperience in order to see whether we have to shift our focus entirelyin terms of aggregates. The 1930s do suggest that we might have somekind of change in the function here and that we might be back to thatbecause we certainly are going to have many more failures in thiseconomy and many more failures abroad in the year to come. Maybe thatmeans that we have to have more liquidity relative to economicactivity. But I don't feel prepared to commit myself to that at thispoint. So, I would go for "B," and I feel pretty strongly that Iwouldn't want to see aggregate growth ranges above those specified in"B" by the staff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is sharing his thoughts and opinions, but there is no explicit disagreement with any other speaker.


Passage number 270.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting ideas or opinions about Governor Martin.


Passage number 271.
-34-11/16/82MR. MARTIN. I think the case for saying that we are in aperiod of discontinuity is a mixed one. I don't think any of us cansit here and say that indeed the liquidity preference schedule hasshifted--that the employment of liquidity and debt by the corporatesector or the private sector has really changed. But certainly thereare a number of indications that indeed this may have taken place. Tothe extent there is credibility in the argument, one can look at thepast two or three years and see two recessions back-to-back, withreally no recovery. My colleague, Governor Teeters, occasionallyasks: If one discounts the pseudo-recovery, isn't this the longestperiod ever of depressed growth. It's an intriguing idea. Obviously,there are many things to go by. That's the trouble. We know so manythings that aren't [typical]: this very recent experience in theholding of liquidity; the recent experience of business firmsrestructuring themselves in terms of employment and outlook onmarkets; and the apparent significant change in the internationalsituation. Those are facts that can be considered cumulative and theymake the discontinuity argument.I am not impressed by the current jargon on how narrow theopening of the window is--that it's only seven months or 19-1/2 daysor whatever--because there is an awareness in the markets, as distinctfrom the flow of articles, Larry. I read all those articles andnewsletters and whatnot, too. That is a cottage industry. I'm gladwe have nearly full employment there. But I do believe there is asignificant difference between what traders and portfolio managers doin the markets and what some very interesting people write in thenewsletters and in the financial press. I'm relatively unimpressed bythe flow of articles, although I'm vastly entertained by them.Looking at the recent experience of nonrecovery over more than a2-year period, looking at the benign effect of lower interest rates,if you will, what has been the effect of the decline of 150 or 200basis points in short and long rates in terms of the internationalsituation, in terms of the amelioration of the fragility of our owneconomy. People are still failing there. I have major mortgagelenders who come in here and tell me that "they are still putting ourfriends out of business," a [reference] I take it to adhering tosupervisory pressures to clean up the loan portfolio. The down sideis still a specter that must be contended with and, therefore, I am an"A" to "B" person. I am bothered by a target of borrowing of $150million; it seems to me too low. I can live with $200 million. Icertainly can accept $250 million in the short run. I am greatlybothered by the alternative B notion that we might behave in such away as to produce a 10-1/2 percent federal funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their own thoughts and beliefs about the current economic situation. They mention different factors and indicators that may suggest a period of discontinuity, but they do not argue or debate with anyone else's perspective.


Passage number 272.
MR. PARTEE. Take about 1/2 point off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply a statement made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 273.
MR. MARTIN. I think a 10-1/2 percent federal funds ratewould be a significant negative in the markets. They would understandthat. They might not pay attention to 19 articles in that direction,but get that funds rate to 10-1/2 percent and I think we will continueto do damage to the economy. We have done damage to it. We, fiscaland monetary [policy] both, had to do damage. But there comes a pointwhere the battering must stop. And 10-1/2 percent to me is cruel andunusual punishment. So, I'm an "A" to "B" person. I would hope tosee $200 to $250 million as the borrowing target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 274.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but the passage you provided is incomplete. Could you please provide the full passage for a more accurate analysis?


Passage number 275.
-35-11/16/82MR. BALLES. I come back, Mr. Chairman, to your excellentstatement on the balance of risks, and that has me in a coin-flippingstage, I guess. I join everybody around the table in wanting to getinterest rates down as fast and as much as possible, but hopefullykeeping them down. And that's the hang-up. In a day or so, I assume,Murray [Altmann], the directive from our October 5th meeting will bepublished and at that time the public will know of just one more keything that they don't already know, and that is that we set a range of8-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent for M2 and M3 [growth] at that time. Theywon't be too scared because the October M2 that has just beenpublished shows 8 percent and that's so far so good. What they don'tknow and what we do know is that in October M2 was considerably higherthan the path plotted by the staff. I'm afraid, given the lowassumption on M2 that the staff made for October, that if we get acontinuation of accelerating M2 growth in November, which clearlyseems possible--I think I heard Steve say that--we could be in[danger] of letting things get out of hand on the up side.Personally, I'm glad that we did in fact have the rapid M1growth of August, September, and October, and that we got [interest]rates down in a rather dramatic way. But I'm a little afraid that wemay begin to get some perverse reaction in the long-term bond market.This is always a judgment call, and judgment will differ around thetable, but I begin to worry a bit--not that one swallow makes spring--about the articles I see such as the one on the front page of today'sWall Street Journal in the "What's New" column. The article said thatofficials of OMB and Treasury are beginning to worry now that we willsee higher interest rates, higher inflation, and higher unemploymentif the current monetary and fiscal policies continue. There are fearsthat the Fed's monetary policy has become too expansionary, [asreflected by] the fact that the money supply announcement yesterdaywas received poorly in the bond markets and bond prices went down. Sofar I think we've been lucky--not lucky in one sense because we havedeserved what we have gotten, which is very good treatment--in thesense that our [monetary] expansion over the last three months hasbeen accompanied by a downward drift in long-term interest rates inparticular. I wouldn't want to overdo it; I wouldn't want tooverplay our hand and carry that too far. As you said. Mr. Chairman,we just can't throw caution to the winds. And it's difficult to judgewhen you're overplaying your hand. I would join several of those whohave already spoken in favor of tugging on the reins a little and,therefore, going with alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses their concerns and shares their opinion but does not challenge or oppose any other viewpoints.


Passage number 276.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage as the sentence "Mr. Black" is incomplete and does not provide any context or information to analyze.


Passage number 277.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think you expressed very well thedilemma that we face in trying to decide what to do today. I don'tthink there's any real difference among any of us around the table asto the objective we want, but we have some obvious differences aboutthe means. At the last meeting I understood full well why we decidedto deemphasize M1, given the international situation, the precariousdomestic situation, and the noise in the M1 statistics. I thought wemade a bad mistake when we did that but in retrospect I think it had apretty salutary effect upon expectations, and it accounts to a largeextent for this improvement we've seen in attitudes. But I do think acaveat is in order. Despite its having been maligned a great deal, itseems to me, from what I can understand in the literature, that M1over the long run is still the best predictor of inflation and nominalGNP. Money thrown out to satisfy these high demands for liquidity in-36-11/16/82a period of recession like this remains around; and when the demandfor money shifts in the other direction, it can come back to haunt us.So I'm very much concerned about the [money] growth we've had in thelast several months and I fear that this may go on into November.Bill Ford and Chuck Partee after him expressed much better than I myfeelings on this. I believe the battle today--if there is a battle orif one can call it that--is going to be fought over the question ofwhether we move the federal funds rate down deliberately or whether weare going to stick with a steady money market directive somewhat likewe did the last time. My choke point is right at that point. If wedecide to keep the federal funds rate about where it is now, I can buythat. If we decide to deliberately push it down in the absence of aweakening in the aggregates, I choke over that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that there are differences in opinion about the means to achieve the objective, but there is no evident conflict or argument.


Passage number 278.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not provide any information about Mr. Boykin's stance or opinions, as it only mentions his name. Therefore, there is no contention or disagreement present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 279.
MR. BOYKIN. In trying to balance the risks, the down side isvery frightening. There is a possibility, though, that there is alittle [risk] on the up side. Obviously I'm influenced somewhat by aslightly more optimistic view of where the economy is heading. Withregard to the lag effect, the argument has been made that we reallyhave not had time to see the full effect of recent policy actions. Ifind that to be a fairly persuasive argument [so] the cautionaryapproach also has appeal to me. I think we can remain cautious andnot take a very overt action at this point to deliberately try tobring rates down. So, if I were voting today, I would vote for "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Boykin, discusses weighing potential risks and expresses a slightly more optimistic view of the economy's direction. However, he also acknowledges the argument that the full effect of recent policy actions may not have been realized yet. Ultimately, he leans towards caution and not taking overt action to bring rates down. This indicates a disagreement or contention between the different viewpoints on the best approach to take.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 280.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me make a couple of additionalcomments. I gave you a finely balanced statement of pros and consbefore, I suppose. I have no doubt in my mind that we've had a changein liquidity preference. The argument is over how long that willlast, but it has lasted for five quarters. Well, I don't know if onecan say it has lasted for five quarters; the numbers always have bumpsup and down in a quarterly series. But when velocity has declined forfive [successive] quarters for the first time in the postwar period,something is different.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is indicated by phrases such as "I have no doubt in my mind" and "Well, I don't know if one can say." The speaker acknowledges that there has been a change in liquidity preference and that velocity has declined for five quarters, but they question the significance of these observations and express uncertainty about the duration and implications of the change.


Passage number 281.
MR. PARTEE. Four quarters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a standalone statement without any opposing views or conflicting perspectives.


Passage number 282.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Axilrod told me it was five.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement "Mr. Axilrod told me it was five" is a straightforward statement of what Mr. Axilrod said.


Passage number 283.
MR. PARTEE. Including the fourth quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement stating that the fourth quarter is included.


Passage number 284.
MR. AXILROD. Including the fourth quarter of last year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a time period.


Passage number 285.
MR. PARTEE. And the fourth quarter this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply states the topic of discussion, which is the fourth quarter of the year.


Passage number 286.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He's projecting this quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a statement of someone projecting something for this quarter.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 287.
MR. AXILROD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage does not provide enough information to determine the specifics of the contention or disagreement.


Passage number 288.
MR. GRAMLEY. It seems a fairly good guess, Chuck.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley's statement is presented as a guess, indicating uncertainty.


Passage number 289.
MR. FORD. Is that what he said, or did he say since 1960.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a question about what someone said or whether they said something specific.


Passage number 290.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He went backwards only with quarterlyfigures. I used to watch velocity figures in the '50s and I will tellyou they were rising, because I used to write stories about the belief-37-11/16/82that they had risen so much they had to stop rising. And they'verisen every year since then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the narrator's observation and personal experience regarding the rise in velocity figures over time.


Passage number 291.
MR. GRAMLEY. You were sort of premature on your forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply acknowledging that the forecast was made prematurely.


Passage number 292.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That shows you how great an expert I am onvelocity. I remind you of Milton Friedman who, looking at a hundredyears, wrote his book and said that velocity will always fall. Moneyis a luxury good and the most certain thing about monetary policy isthat velocity is going to fall. Like all scholars he has caught up.I used to write internal memoranda; he had to get a book published.By the time the book came out velocity was already rising and it hasrisen every year since then, until last year. I think something isgoing on there; that is the only point I'm making. I have no doubtsabout that, but that doesn't tell you how long it will last.In terms of the business situation, and putting theinternational dimension into it--I'm not thinking just of thefinancial strains, though they are very real--we have a world inrecession the way we have never had it before. And now we haveadditional deflationary pressures rising in a developing world thatare very strong and certain. There's no escaping them. In talking tomy foreign central banking colleagues, which I have done a bitrecently, they are approaching the stage of being--if I wasn't goingto be recorded, I would say frantic. Discomfited, maybe, is thebetter word. There is virtually a unanimous feeling that some effortsought to be marshaled to push--if that's not too strong a word--interest rates 2 percentage points lower. I don't share that feeling,but I cite it as a symptom of the atmosphere in the rest of theindustrialized world based upon their observations and their appraisalof the prospects in their own economies. They may all be wrong. Thepicture is very sluggish and I think the risks are on both sides, butpredominantly on the down side.For better or worse, we're faced with an indefinite periodthat we are not going to be able to figure out M1 just purely forinstitutional reasons. I think there is a case to be made that it wasthe most reliable variable in the past, but I don't think that casecan be made looking into the future simply because of theinstitutional changes, even abstracting from the issue of whetherthere has been any basic change in velocity on an unchanged concept ofM1. We are not going to have an unchanged concept of M1. I think wehave to hedge the risks a bit; it's a question of to what degree.That brings us to the specifics. I think we have a choice,given where the weight of opinion lies. Mr. Solomon long agosuggested that we stick with the 9-1/2 percent [for M2 growth], whichis within the range that we had last time. We could eliminate the8-1/2 percent side of it, if I followed him correctly. There's quitea lot of feeling that we ought to reduce the borrowing level, startingoff anyway. That is a feeling I share and it is the principal hedgethat I would recommend.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting their own opinions and observations, while also mentioning the opinions of others. They state that they do not share some of the opinions mentioned, but there is no argument or conflict between the speaker and others.


Passage number 293.
MR. FORD. From what to what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It only includes a statement asking for clarification.


Passage number 294.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know where it is now, frankly, butwe have had various proposals: $150 million is the lowest one I seein my notes; more people mentioned $200 or $250 million; and the-38-11/16/82highest was $300 million among those who in general wanted to make ita little lower. Some people may not want to make it lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is describing different proposals for a certain amount of money, but there is no clear contention or disagreement between different parties or individuals.


Passage number 295.
MR. PARTEE. Could we ask where it is. What is the case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question asking for clarification.


Passage number 296.
MR. STERNLIGHT. The borrowing level now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 297.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information in the passage to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 298.
 Yes, abstracting from that--MR. STERNLIGHT. This current week [we expect] $550 millionbecause we started out with $3 billion in borrowing on last Thursday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 299.
MR. AXILROD. The last weekly number that we had that wasindependent of this problem Peter mentioned was something like $366 or$367 million. We never quite obtained that. Borrowing for the lastfive weeks has run, in millions, $248, $405, $273, $263, and then $530million last week, which was also influenced by that high Wednesday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information about the weekly borrowing numbers.


Passage number 300.
MR. PARTEE. Well, $200 million or $150 million wouldcertainly be lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a straightforward statement of a fact.


Passage number 301.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's no question about that. To put anumber on the table--it is around the midpoint of what a number ofpeople suggested and leans [in the direction favored by] those whowanted to hedge the bets this way--I'll say $250 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 302.
MR. FORD. You're taking the alternative C growth [for M2] of9-1/2 percent. Do you mean for October to December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 303.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I assumed the 9-1/2 percent meantSeptember to December.SPEAKER(.). Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply making an assumption based on their interpretation of the statement.


Passage number 304.
MR. FORD. So you're on "B" for the growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage because Mr. Ford's statement is a simple statement of fact without any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 305.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" does not provide any information that can indicate a disagreement or contention.


Passage number 306.
 For the lower--MR. GRAMLEY. Were you thinking of retaining that statementabout precautionary demands for money. That would be a critical partof the directive, I think, saying that expected growth in Septemberthrough December is at levels which might well imply the need tochange the nonborrowed reserve path fairly soon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification and expressing their thoughts on a specific statement.


Passage number 307.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can't find [my copy of] the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement expressing a personal difficulty in finding a directive. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 308.
MR. PARTEE. Well, of course, we're virtually unaffectedanyway by overshoots.SPEAKER(.). Why not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee provides an opinion stating that they are unaffected by overshoots, and the speaker responds with a question asking for clarification or further explanation.


Passage number 309.
MR. PARTEE. The 2 percent rule.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply mentions the "2 percent rule" without any indication of opposing or contrasting viewpoints.


Passage number 310.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is not true. We increased it--in amuted way, I think it's fair to say--but we increased it from the waywe [started out].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a different perspective or correction to a previous statement.


Passage number 311.
MR. PARTEE. You say muted and I say virtually unaffected.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers have different perspectives on the impact, but they are not actively disagreeing or arguing with each other.


Passage number 312.
11/16/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, virtually unaffected pushed thefunds rate up and stopped the interest rate decline and reversed thestock market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating that something (presumably certain actions or events) pushed the funds rate up and stopped the interest rate decline, as well as reversed the stock market.


Passage number 313.
MR. GRAMLEY. The market went down again today, I understand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley is simply stating a fact about the market going down.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 314.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The stock market is way down today.SPEAKER(.). It was against inflated expectations. But therecertainly has been a trend in recent weeks toward a firmer tone ratherthan the reverse. It is quite noticeable in the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

There is disagreement or contention in the passage as the speaker acknowledges that the stock market is down but argues that it is against inflated expectations. The speaker also counters the idea that there is a reverse trend by stating that there has been a recent trend towards a firmer tone in the market.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 315.
MS. TEETERS. What federal funds range do you get with the$250 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 316.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, all those federal funds rangesencompass anything I could see happening, so I don't feel terriblysensitive to it. I'd say it's at least time to knock the 1/2 off the10-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is stating their opinion about federal funds without any opposition or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 317.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, I thought so, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. "Yes, I thought so, too" indicates agreement or confirmation rather than disagreement.


Passage number 318.
MR. GRAMLEY. And why not make 6 to 10.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage provided. It is a simple statement and does not present any conflicting ideas or arguments.


Passage number 319.
MS. TEETERS. Yes, 6 to 10.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker's statement is simply acknowledging that there is consensus among a group of individuals, with 6 out of 10 people agreeing on something.


Passage number 320.
MR. GRAMLEY. So we're not narrowing the range still further.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Gramley is simply stating that the range is not being narrowed further.


Passage number 321.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I personally don't have any big problemwith that, but with the present situation we aren't going to get downto 6 percent, given anything I see developing. Maybe we should, butwe aren't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage expresses agreement with the idea but states that it is unlikely to happen given the current situation.


Passage number 322.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But we don't want to go up to 10percent either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement expressing a preference or opinion about not wanting to increase something to a certain percentage.


Passage number 323.
MS. TEETERS. We don't want 10-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a statement without any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 324.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But we don't want to go up to 10percent either. I don't think we're going to hit either of them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about not wanting to reach either 10 percent or any other unspecified percentage.


Passage number 325.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're considerably closer to 10 percentthan we are [to 6 percent].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any disagreement or contention. It simply states a comparison of percentages.


Passage number 326.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, I could imagine 10 percent, but 10-1/2percent would be a shock to the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not show any indication of contention or disagreement. The speaker is only expressing their thoughts and imagining a possible scenario.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 327.
MR. FORD. 10-1/2 percent is where it is now, right.SEVERAL. No, 9-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

There is a disagreement in the passage. Mr. Ford states that the interest rate is 10-1/2 percent, but several others contradict him and assert that it is actually 9-1/2 percent.


Passage number 328.
MR. GRAMLEY. I know he means the [upper end of the] range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley is simply clarifying and understanding the meaning of "the range."


Passage number 329.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where the range is now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any range or specific topic where there could be contention or disagreement.


Passage number 330.
MR. FORD. The present range is "B," right. So if we drop itto 10 percent, that indicates a further loosening of policy in thesense of where the band is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Ford is simply discussing the current range and speculating about the potential impact of dropping it to 10 percent.


Passage number 331.
-40-11/16/82MR. PARTEE. Very little.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is simply stating that there is very little information or engagement from Mr. Partee.


Passage number 332.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The way we're operating now, we arenot going to hit either end of these ranges. So it's partiallypsychological. I would assume that if the economy stays thisdepressed and we saw the rate going up to the 10 percent area, theChairman would either feel he had enough leeway to make an adjustmentor he'd schedule a conference call.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is speculating about what the Chairman would potentially do in a certain scenario.


Passage number 333.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I assume more specifically that thefunds rate is going to be within range of wherever the discount rateis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement or assumption made by the speaker.


Passage number 334.
 What is going to happen--MR. FORD. May we ask what your feeling is on the discountrate. Should it be dropped another notch or left where it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply asking for someone's opinion on the discountrate.


Passage number 335.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Going back to what I said earlier, if Iwere picking interest rates out of the air, I'd make them lower. So,I have some predisposition in that direction. Whether we have thestage set for it properly against all these other considerations, Idon't know. But I wouldn't let a good opportunity pass.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The author is expressing their personal opinion and uncertainty about the appropriate interest rates, but there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 336.
MR. GUFFEY. In that connection, I think the question iswhether we continue to do what we say we have done, which is to followthe [market] rate down, or whether this is an appropriate time to[lead] by moving the discount rate down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is posing a question about whether to continue following the market rate down or to take the lead by moving the discount rate down. The passage does not indicate any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 337.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Personally--I can't defend this verystrongly, but just as a matter of tactics--I'd rather have thediscount rate down and the borrowings higher, for any givenconstellation of forces. I feel a little more comfortable when thebanks have to borrow a little.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion and acknowledging that they may not be able to strongly defend it. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument.


Passage number 338.
MR. GUFFEY. If we had some assurance that there will be adiscount rate decrease, I would agree to a little higher borrowinglevel for the intermeeting period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not include any contention or disagreement. It is a conditional statement expressing a willingness to increase borrowing level if there is a decrease in the discount rate.


Passage number 339.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The trouble with that is that it gets toofancy and is hard to explain. We'd have to face the fact that wewould reduce the discount rate [without] a clear signal from themarket. But I wouldn't be unhappy to end up in that position somehow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement does not present any contention or disagreement. It expresses a personal preference for potentially reducing the discount rate, even though it may be challenging to explain and may not have a clear market signal.


Passage number 340.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I think what you're suggestingis okay. I don't think the funds rate range makes much difference.If we want to make the top side 10 percent, we could make it 7 to 10percent or 6 to 10 percent. It's strictly psychological; it has nooperating significance at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear disagreement or contention. The speaker simply expresses their opinion on the matter and offers some alternatives, but there is no opposition or argument present.


Passage number 341.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the crucial point is where westart the borrowing. Frankly, I wouldn't put it above $250 million.I wouldn't be unhappy to go lower than that, the way I see things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion on the borrowing amount and indicating a willingness to possibly go lower.


Passage number 342.
MS. TEETERS. How much seasonal borrowing do we get on this,Steve--about $50 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward question about the amount of seasonal borrowing.


Passage number 343.
-41-11/16/82MR. AXILROD. It's running fairly low, Governor Teeters. Wehave had $50, $77 and $90 million recently. It has been below $100million for the last five or six weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker presents factual information regarding the current running balance, without any conflicting opinions or opposing views expressed.


Passage number 344.
MS. TEETERS. And the extended borrowing isn't in that numberat all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a neutral observation about the extended borrowing not being included in a certain number.


Passage number 345.
MR. AXILROD. No. That has risen a little; it's about $190million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact about the amount of money.


Passage number 346.
MS. TEETERS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 347.
 But that's not in the--MR. AXILROD. It's not in this number, but the seasonal is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact that the information being discussed is not included in a specific number.


Passage number 348.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suppose I am affected by believing thatin the short run the economy is still declining and industrialproduction is going to be down in November. Maybe I'm all wet there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is personal and speculative, expressing the author's belief or viewpoint on the economy.


Passage number 349.
MR. KICHLINE. The way it looks now, yes. We have someinformation on raw steel output, and auto assemblies are down. Itlooks as if it's going to be a negative number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents information and the speaker's interpretation of that information.


Passage number 350.
MR. GRAMLEY. The other thing is, looking at the structure ofindustrial output in October, there isn't any evidence that it isconsistent with an immediate turnaround. That is, one normally wouldexpect in an economy that is about to pull out of recession andflatten out that production of materials will not go down as much asfinal product. In this case what we saw was a flattening out ofmaterials production in the early summer and then it resumed [itsdecline] again and is still going down rapidly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, is simply stating an observation about the structure of industrial output in October and noting that it does not align with what one would expect to see in an economy about to recover from a recession.


Passage number 351.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I really cannot over-emphasize the extentto which my foreign brethren feel strongly about this. I don't carehow conservative the central banks are, they are all in that directionand very strongly. I also do think that the current level of thedollar is catastrophic. As surely as we are sitting here, it's notonly depressing the economy today but it is going to turn. We talkabout the kind of current account deficits that are projected. I findthem almost unbelievable because I don't know how we would financethem. We are going to be in Mexico's situation. The implication isthat we are going to have a declining dollar and expect to raise $50billion in capital abroad. Well, who is going to put money into thedollar when they sense it is on a down trend.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own strong belief about the current level of the dollar and its impact on the economy, as well as their doubts about how the projected current account deficits can be financed. There is no mention of conflicting opinions or disagreement among different parties.


Passage number 352.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Carter bonds. We made a lot of moneythat way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker made a lot of money through Carter bonds.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 353.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can do the Carter bonds once thedollar has dropped by 30 percent. That atmosphere is going to beawful if it develops.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests that the Carter bonds can be done once the dollar has dropped by 30 percent, implying a negative view of the situation and potentially conflicting with other perspectives. Additionally, the use of the word "awful" in relation to the potential atmosphere further emphasizes disagreement or concern.


Passage number 354.
MR. CORRIGAN. What about the exchange rate situation.Doesn't that situation give us a little more leeway in terms of beingable to do something directly with the discount rate, without havingto worry about finessing the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not exhibit contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Corrigan, expressing a thought or inquiry about the exchange rate situation and its potential impact on the discount rate.


Passage number 355.
-42-11/16/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If the discount rate were reduced, I thinkwe would have to explain it as a straightforward concern about theeconomy and, in part, the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 356.
MR. GRAMLEY. Put more generally, the level of the exchangerate gives us more freedom to do something with money supply, interestrates, and so on without worrying that somehow it is going to have animmediate inflationary or expansive impact. We are not getting asymmetrical response to changes in interest rates. The movementupward in interest rates carried with it a very substantial increasein the exchange rate, so we had a lot of negative effects on exportsfrom that. The decline in interest rates, it seems to me, has not hadthat effect. It's a lot less than the opposing effect on the up side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting that there is a difference in the effects on exports between an increase in interest rates and a decrease in interest rates.


Passage number 357.
MR. PARTEE. I think Paul is probably right that when itstarts to run, it's going to run pretty fast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 358.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are not going to be left alone in anyinterest rate decline that develops here. And, of course, that's oneof the reasons the exchange rate stays so high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact about how they will not be left alone in any interest rate decline and giving a reason for why the exchange rate stays high.


Passage number 359.
 I guess Ted orsomebody mentioned that there is--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They are going to match it point forpoint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The mention of matching points is more about agreement or aligning with someone's perspective.


Passage number 360.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And maybe more than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 361.
MR. MARTIN. They are holding their breath.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 362.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm repeating myself, but there is a deepdegree of depression and feeling of disturbance in every otherindustrialized country.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage states that there is a deep degree of depression and feeling of disturbance in every other industrialized country, suggesting disagreement or contention about the prevalent mental state in those countries.


Passage number 363.
MR. RICE. Do you think this proposal of $250 million onborrowing and, say, a 7 to 10 percent funds rate band is consistentwith a decline in interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for an opinion on whether the proposal is consistent with a decline in interest rates.


Passage number 364.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, it would take the edge off the federalfunds rate, presumably.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement or assumption without engaging in any opposing viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 365.
 It may not right away; we're going to publisha high borrowing figure this week, but I presume the funds rate--MR. MORRIS. It would take a cut in the discount rate,wouldn't it, to do something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The statement "It may not right away; we're going to publish a high borrowing figure this week" suggests that there may not be an immediate solution to a certain situation. However, the response "I presume the funds rate--MR. MORRIS. It would take a cut in the discount rate, wouldn't it, to do something" indicates disagreement or a difference in opinion regarding the potential solution, specifically whether a cut in the discount rate is necessary or effective.


Passage number 366.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, and I think this might be consistentwith the funds rate going slightly below the discount rate. It hasbeen below it for months. It does not imply a change from whereinterest rates have been for the last month, in my opinion. That initself [would require] a reduction in the discount rate. Even thenI'm not sure it's a lot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and discussing the possibility of the funds rate going slightly below the discount rate. They are not disagreeing with anyone or engaging in an argument.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 367.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Short-term rates now generally areworking on the assumption of an 8-3/4 to 9 percent funds rate. Theydid not align even with a slight upward movement. As I understand it,at least from some of my banker friends, short-term rates are lowerthan would be indicated by a 9-1/2 percent fed funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests disagreement or contention about the current short-term rates and their alignment with the fed funds rate. The statement that short-term rates are lower than would be indicated by a 9-1/2 percent fed funds rate goes against the assumption stated at the beginning of the passage.


Passage number 368.
-43-11/16/82MR. RICE. Well, we would have to wait a while to reduce thediscount rate in this current market environment. Interest rates aregoing the wrong way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that interest rates are going the wrong way, indicating a consensus or agreement on the matter.


Passage number 369.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we would tell them that wedon't like to see them going that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a personal opinion or preference.


Passage number 370.
MR. RICE. That's why I think we have to do something here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Rice, is expressing their opinion and suggesting that action needs to be taken.


Passage number 371.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a more difficult decision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is simply expressing that the decision is challenging or not easy to make. There is no indication of any disagreement or conflict present.


Passage number 372.
MR. RICE. We have to do something to nudge market rates downand then we can reduce the discount rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states a proposition that Mr. Rice suggests taking action to lower market rates and subsequently reduce the discount rate.


Passage number 373.
MR. KEEHN. How about using the fed funds range ofalternative A the way it is written [in the Bluebook].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply a question about the use of a specific range mentioned in the Bluebook.


Passage number 374.
MR. FORD. That puts me on the other side of the river.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they are on the opposite side of the river.


Passage number 375.
MR. MARTIN. 6 to 9-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a simple statement of numbers. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 376.
MS. TEETERS. We could put it at 6 to 10 percent, which wouldgive us a 4-point range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Teeters is suggesting a specific range of 6 to 10 percent, which is a 4-point range.


Passage number 377.
MR. CORRIGAN. There you are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MR. CORRIGAN is simply stating a fact or observation.


Passage number 378.
MR. GRAMLEY. That doesn't have any meaning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Gramley simply states that something does not have any meaning.


Passage number 379.
MS. TEETERS. I know it doesn't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 380.
MR. PARTEE. Well, it does have some demonstrable meaning; Ithink 6 to 10 percent is okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contentions or disagreements. It is a simple statement of opinion without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 381.
MR. GRAMLEY. You mean when it's published.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley is simply asking for clarification about the timing of when something will be published.


Passage number 382.
MR. PARTEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any evidence of contention or disagreement. It only mentions Mr. Partee responding with "Yes," which does not indicate any form of disagreement.


Passage number 383.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me sum up my own view another way. Ithink this general pattern is acceptable. It is playing it very closeto the vest, considering what I see going on. The risks areunbalanced but they are on both sides. The risk is that this is notenough.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion and summarizing their own view on a certain topic. They mention that the general pattern is acceptable, but also acknowledge that there are risks involved. However, there is no conflicting viewpoint or disagreement present.


Passage number 384.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Or [the Board] could drop thediscount rate a whole point. I'm not recommending it; I'll be sendingin a 1/2 point recommendation this week. But there is just no moreroom in this nonborrowed reserve path. There isn't any room to domuch more than what we are doing. If we go significantly below $250million, that runs some serious risks that we could have a very screwymarket situation. We are better off with a move on the discount rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the limited options and potential risks of lowering the discount rate below a certain threshold.


Passage number 385.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One way of looking at it, I think, is thatwhat we have been doing for some time is letting these aggregates runa little high because we recognize that there are liquidity pressuresand we haven't wanted to move strongly against that. We haven't beenvery forward in pushing them higher. If we really felt that liquiditywas changing and the market was terribly sour and it was going to lastfor a while, we would take that additional step and push them higher.-4411/16/82We haven't done that and I don't think what we're proposing does that;one might argue that "A" verges on that. If it turns out thatvelocity keeps declining, we should have done that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 386.
MR. PARTEE. And we may need to do that, but it's premature.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement about the need to potentially take certain actions, but acknowledging that it may be too early to do so.


Passage number 387.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Then we would really have a problemcommunicating that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a potential issue of communication.


Passage number 388.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's easier to communicate the sourer theeconomy, I can tell you that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their perspective about communicating the state of the economy.


Passage number 389.
MR. GRAMLEY. I think the case for waiting was a saleable oneat midyear. But too much time has elapsed since then. I no longerthink it's saleable to say that we will wait to see whether or notthis velocity trend continues. It has been going on too long. So, Ithink we've got to err on the side of setting specs that give us ahigh probability that we will not see any upward movement of interestrates and that the greater likelihood is that they are going to movedown. It's not guaranteed; one can't guarantee anything in thisworld. But I'm afraid if we have another recurrence of thedisappointment that we have had with an economy not recovering, we'regoing to see a souring of attitudes, and this economy is going to getaway from us. We then are going to have to take some very, verystrenuous action on both the fiscal and monetary sides to rescue it.The international complications make this a profoundly different kindof recession than we ever have had before in the postwar period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and concerns about the economy and the need for action.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 390.
MR. ROOS. If you count four or five months into the future,I'll be fishing and you all will still be wrestling with this. Butlet's assume that by forcing rates down a little you do achieve animprovement in the economy and this stimulus starts causing interestrates to rise next spring as this long-sought recovery is reachingmeaningful proportions. Yet money has grown so quickly that theprospect of inflation is heightened. Are you all going to be willingto apply the brakes at the time. If you don't apply the brakes atthat time, we're going to be right back into double-digit inflationrates in a few years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Roos, is questioning whether the potential short-term improvement in the economy achieved by forcing rates down will lead to inflation in the future. He implies that if the brakes are not applied at the appropriate time, there will be a return to double-digit inflation rates. This perspective contrasts with the assumption that forcing rates down will stimulate the economy without negative consequences in the long run.


Passage number 391.
MR. MORRIS. Somehow, Larry, that scenario doesn't fly withme. I don't think that's the situation we're in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris is simply expressing his opinion or disagreement with Larry's scenario.


Passage number 392.
MR. GRAMLEY. I'd sure be a lot happier about applying thebrakes if the car were rolling rapidly down the hill than to roll itbackward down the hill.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their preference for applying the brakes when the car is rolling rapidly down the hill rather than rolling it backward.


Passage number 393.
MR. PARTEE. We'll think of you though, Larry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that Mr. Partee will think of Larry.


Passage number 394.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't discount that [scenario] entirely.It is complicated by the budgetary situation. I don't know that itwould happen as soon as this spring, but I think it is possible. As Isaid before, we will not find this particular monetary growth[pattern] again. I don't know what M1 is going to look like then.I'm not sure we're going to find M2 all that rapid in thosecircumstances, but we'll have to wait and see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is primarily expressing uncertainty and lack of knowledge about certain financial scenarios.


Passage number 395.
MR. CORRIGAN. But if we do something like setting borrowingsat $250 million and do whatever you want with the federal funds rate,-45-11/16/82it seems to me that we have some reasonably high degree of assurancethat we're not going to see interest rates higher than they are now;and depending upon finessing the market or [the Board's] willingnessto do something with the discount rate in any event, there is theclear potential for lower rates. In the worst of conditions, [theBoard could] reduce the discount rate even if the fed funds rate is at9-1/2 percent; [you would] just bite the bullet and do it. Mypersonal view is that the markets and everybody else would acceptthat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 396.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The markets would love it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that the markets would appreciate or respond positively to something without presenting any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 397.
MR. CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I'm unable to provide a response as the passage you mentioned, "MR. CORRIGAN," is not provided. Can you please provide the passage so that I can assist you with your question?


Passage number 398.
 But I don't see that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not so sure what would happen withreducing the discount rate by 1/2 point. They have all been expectingit and for that reason it may have very little impact.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker does not have a clear view on the potential impact of reducing the discount rate by 1/2 point, and suggests that others may also be uncertain about it.


Passage number 399.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No, I'm not saying it will have muchimpact, but if you don't do it--if you wait too long--there willclearly be a backup in rates. If we actually wanted to move the bondmarket and the stock market up--I'm not saying we should--then we'dhave to consider a one-point move. But I'm not recommending that. Ithink, though, that you have to move 1/2 point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing potential actions and their potential impact on rates, but there is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 400.
MS. TEETERS. But 1/2 point doesn't have to be the end.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement expressed. The statement is simply presenting an opinion or suggestion.


Passage number 401.
However it develops, we can move the discount rate down to 8-1/2percent after a 2- or 3-week delay and it's still--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. This is true. Judgments can be madeas we go along.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presenting a hypothetical scenario and expressing the possibility of adjusting the discount rate after a delay. The phrase "This is true" indicates agreement with the previous statement. The mention of making judgments as we go along also suggests a willingness to adapt based on circumstances.


Passage number 402.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's just see where we stand.Looking back at the directive, if I can find it, what I suggested andothers have suggested is to put in 9-1/2 percent [for M2], which iswithin the range that we had but it looks a little easier.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not have any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing an intention to find and review a directive, followed by a suggestion made by the speaker and others.


Passage number 403.
 We can putthe funds range at 6 to 10 percent if that's where the--MR. PARTEE. We aren't using a range, though, [for M2].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 404.
MS. TEETERS. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as there is only one speaker, Ms. Teeters, expressing her opinion or stating a fact.


Passage number 405.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we could say "around.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting viewpoints or disagreement. It simply states that something could be said "around" a certain topic without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 406.
"MR. PARTEE. [This draft] doesn't have "about" or "around"9-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact without any conflicting opinions or contradictory information.


Passage number 407.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know about that phrase, just interms of its internal consistency, "taking account of the desirabilityof somewhat reduced pressures in private credit markets." I'm notsure we're saying that this is going to produce in and of itself lowerinterest rates. We might just leave that phrase out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In this passage, there is no clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing uncertainty or confusion about the phrase and suggesting the possibility of removing it. However, there is no explicit disagreement or argument being made.


Passage number 408.
MR. PARTEE. I would be inclined to take it out because wemoved to the 9-1/2 percent on the M2 from 8-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent. Wehave already taken account of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 409.
-46-11/16/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Actually, the private credit markets, asdistinct from the public credit markets, have improved during thisperiod. This great tiering and backing up tendency we had in thosemarkets is not evident today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the private credit markets have improved during the mentioned period and that the previous tendency of tiering and backing up is not evident today.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 410.
MR. WALLICH. I would like to see that phrase removed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The use of the phrase "I would like to see that phrase removed" indicates a disagreement or contention with the presence of the phrase in question.


Passage number 411.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, does this suit, as well as anythingis going to suit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing uncertainty but not necessarily indicating disagreement or debate.


Passage number 412.
MR. BLACK. Could we ask Peter and Steve to tell us what theythink would happen to the fed funds rate with this kind of directive,in the absence of a change in the discount rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a question posed to Peter and Steve to share their thoughts on what would happen to the fed funds rate in a certain scenario.


Passage number 413.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I think $250 million on borrowing would tendto produce a funds rate right around, or a shade below, the discountrate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Sternlight expressing his belief about the impact of borrowing $250 million on the funds rate.


Passage number 414.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. A shade below the present discountrate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no mention of any disagreement or contention in the passage. It simply states a current discount rate being slightly below a certain level.


Passage number 415.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a simple statement by Mr. Sternlight without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 416.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So, if [the Board] doesn't move thediscount rate, it won't go down to 9 percent; it will stay at around9-1/4 to 9-3/8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing a statement about the potential movement of the discount rate. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 417.
MR. BLACK. You are saying we really have a money marketdirective--a very tight money market directive, probably--if there isno move on the discount rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states a statement from Mr. Black that suggests that there might be a tight money market directive if there is no move on the discount rate. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 418.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't think we'd have much scope for adownward movement in the funds rate with a $250 million borrowinglevel without a discount rate change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Sternlight is simply expressing his opinion that there would not be much opportunity for a decrease in the funds rate without a change in the discount rate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 419.
MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I have one other point to make onthis directive. I'm a little concerned about the phrase in theopening paragraph that reads "the reinvestment of funds from maturingall savers certificates and the public's response to the new accountdirectly competitive with the money market funds mandated by recentlegislation." The latter half of that statement really flies in theface, I think, of what is said on page 7, paragraph 9 in the Bluebook.It is made pretty clear in the next to the last sentence of thatparagraph--and I agree with what is said there--that the new moneymarket account will only have a small [quarterly] effect on M2 when itbecomes available in mid-December for the simple reason that it is notgoing to be around long enough in the fourth quarter. I tried my handat writing a slightly different version of a directive. I don't knowwhether this will help or hurt the cause. The bottom line is to takeout that phrase in the current proposed directive which reads "thepublic's response to the new money market account competitive withmoney market funds mandated by recent legislation." I agree it isgoing to be a big problem when we get into the first quarter; I don'tthink it's a problem for this quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Balles disagrees with the phrase in the proposed directive and suggests removing it.


Passage number 420.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just raise a question. Why do weneed this paragraph at all now. We needed it the last time to explain-47-11/16/82what we were doing. Would we lose anything by just dropping the wholeparagraph.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply questioning the necessity of a paragraph and suggesting that it could be removed without any negative consequences.


Passage number 421.
MR. AXILROD. No. The last sentence of paragraph 9 is ourfeeling about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating someone's opinion or feeling about a topic.


Passage number 422.
 We're not certain when we--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, presumably we will say somethingabout this in the [policy record] discussion. But is there anyoperative need to put it in the directive at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing uncertainty and questioning if there is a need to include something in the directive.


Passage number 423.
MR. AXILROD. No, but I do think there is some uncertaintyrelated to both the all savers certificate and the new instrumentabout what is going to happen in the interim, [which should be in therecord] for discussion purposes. I don't know where people are goingto store their money in anticipation of those things. But you don'tneed it for operational purposes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 424.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only significance of taking it out--maybe it is too much--is that it says "much less weight." The fact isthat it has some weight. If M1 had happened to be dropping off thetable in the last couple of weeks, we would have behaved somewhatdifferently. If we leave it out completely, we lose any flavor ofthat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply explains the significance of including or excluding certain details in a given situation.


Passage number 425.
MR. BALLES. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about contention or disagreement. It only states that Mr. Balles answered affirmatively, but it does not indicate any conflicting opinions or viewpoints.


Passage number 426.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I think we would have to explain why wehaven't specified it. That is, the earlier paragraph [on theCommittee's long-run objectives], which isn't here in the Bluebook,talks about the Committee's expectations for M1 and M2 and so forth.So we have to continue to say why it is that M1 is not figuring inthis instruction to the Manager.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is simply expressing the need to explain why M1 is not included in the instruction to the Manager, based on the information provided in the earlier paragraph.


Passage number 427.
MR. WALLICH. That's very important, because otherwise we arein fact implicitly still giving weight to M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating the importance of a particular factor and its implications.


Passage number 428.
MS. TEETERS. It also has the advantage of showing that wewere right for a change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a positive opinion without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 429.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not quite sure what your particularsuggestion is, John.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 430.
MR. PARTEE. This talks about M1, John. It seems to me thatyou were talking about M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no evident contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is merely pointing out a possible misunderstanding or confusion in the conversation.


Passage number 431.
MR. BALLES. Well, I was talking about both. I happen tohave some copies of this here for distribution. Maybe the easiestway, if it could be helpful, is to distribute them. The main burdenof the message is that it backs away a little from what we said lasttime. There is still uncertainty about M1, but not as much as lasttime. The opening sentence is that the specification and behavior ofM1 over the balance of the year are subject to fewer uncertainties nowthan at the last meeting in October. You may not agree with that, butthat happens to be my view.SEVERAL. No way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Balles expresses his personal view, but there is no indication of a disagreement among the speakers.


Passage number 432.
-48-11/16/82MR. GRAMLEY. I don't want to give any kind of[unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage provided.


Passage number 433.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Suppose we leave it the way it is now andjust say the difficulties of interpretation of M1 continue to suggestthat less weight--I don't care whether we say "much less" or "lessthan usual"--is being placed on movements in that aggregate during thecurrent quarter. And we can forget about that M2 sentence, if that'stroublesome.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting a course of action and expressing indifference regarding the choice of wording.


Passage number 434.
MR. BALLES. I ended up the first paragraph by saying:"Nevertheless, the difficulty of interpretation of M1 still suggeststhat less than usual weight be placed on movements in that aggregateand more than usual weight be placed on M2 during the currentquarter." In order not to scare the heck out of everybody, I waswondering what we would really tolerate in M1. In the secondparagraph, after noting whatever range we decide would be appropriatefor M2 and M3, I'm toying with the idea of a proviso clause for M1--"provided that M1 does not exceed x percent over the same period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Balles, is simply discussing his thoughts and ideas about how to interpret and analyze different aggregate measures of money. He is considering placing less emphasis on M1 and more on M2, and also considering setting a limit or condition for M1. There is no disagreement or conflict being presented.


Passage number 435.
"MR. PARTEE. 20 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage simply provides a statement without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 436.
MR. BALLES. Well, you name it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement made by Mr. Balles, without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments present.


Passage number 437.
MR. GRAMLEY. That's just not the way to go now. Later,maybe. We just have not had the uncertainties clarified [enough todetermine] that figure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley is expressing his opinion or perspective on a certain matter, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflict.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 438.
MR. FORD. Paul, this really raises the question I wanted toask, which is based on your perception of the usefulness of M1. Ihave the feeling that in your mind M1 is permanently [distorted],especially in light of what the DIDC is doing [and] the all saverscertificates. If the consensus of the Committee is that M1 will neverbe used again, or at least not in the foreseeable future, then I thinkwe ought to come out and say it and see what happens.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is contention or disagreement about the usefulness of M1 and whether it will be used again in the future. Mr. Ford implies that Paul sees M1 as permanently distorted due to the actions of the DIDC and the introduction of all savers certificates. He suggests that if the Committee agrees that M1 will not be used again in the foreseeable future, they should make that statement and assess the consequences.


Passage number 439.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's a bit of an overstatement ofmy feelings at the moment. I'm not saying never; never is much toolong a period. The question is how soon we are going to be able tomake some sense out of it, which is really the subject of this paperwe are going to get next time. I wouldn't be too sweeping about anyjudgment until we have had a chance to consider that explicitly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their own opinion and suggesting to withhold judgment until further discussion has taken place.


Passage number 440.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 441.
 Well, of course in January we have to specifyaggregates ranges, and--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I know. What I'm concerned about iswhat we specify next year, because I anticipate that probably by sometime next year we will have full interest payments on transactionaccounts at least of individuals. I think we are hanging by a thread,frankly, in terms of having reserve requirements on individualtransaction accounts at this point. The new account is so close to itthat I can see the lobbyists saying we have this account, which ispractically a transaction account without reserve requirements, andyou can't go back and put reserve requirements on something that isonly marginally different from what Congress just told you to give uswithout a reserve requirement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The second speaker is expressing concern and skepticism about maintaining reserve requirements on individual transaction accounts, while the first speaker seems to be more focused on the technical aspects of the current situation.


Passage number 442.
-49-11/16/82MR. FORD. Why don't you change the reserve requirements from1 percent on transactions to one that they allow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 443.
 When you get to 12percent--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This new account, depending on how it'sdeveloped, is going to be so close to a transaction account that maybewe ought to put it in M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It is stating a hypothetical situation and suggesting a possible course of action.


Passage number 444.
MR. PARTEE. We'd get some phenomenal annual growth rates--athousand percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. The speaker is simply suggesting that they would achieve high growth rates.


Passage number 445.
MR. CORRIGAN. That will occur with reserves declining.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a straightforward assertion about reserves declining.


Passage number 446.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That would be quite impressive,though, wouldn't it--having a component in M1 that doesn't have anyreserve requirements.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence is expressing a positive and hypothetical scenario, without any contradictory or conflicting information.


Passage number 447.
MR. MORRIS. When it reaches maturity in 7-1/2 years then wecould do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Morris about a future possibility.


Passage number 448.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would be inclined, in the interest ofcompleting this [discussion], to modify this language to a moreminimal degree. I'd say "considerable" or something like that insteadof "unusually great". The second comment is not a sentence is it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and suggesting a modification to the language used in the discussion. The second comment is not a sentence but a question.


Passage number 449.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The dash is left in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 450.
MR. PARTEE. After circumstances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a response to a question or comment without any conflicting views or arguments presented.


Passage number 451.
MR. GRAMLEY. Two dashes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage contains a statement from Mr. Gramley, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement in this brief statement.


Passage number 452.
MR. FORD. Are we looking at John's [version].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that "we" are looking at John's version.


Passage number 453.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm looking at the present one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states that the speaker is examining the current situation, without any indication of disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 454.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Mr. Axilrod without providing any information or details about him, therefore there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 455.
 I guess there are special circumstances inconnection with--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have done a great sample of two peoplewho had all savers certificates. I was not making the survey, butmuch to my surprise in my sample of two both put the funds in demanddeposits and still have it there. One of them is my wife. The otheris a distinguished ex-member of the Federal Reserve Board.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a personal observation about two individuals who had all savers certificates and opted to keep their funds in demand deposits.


Passage number 456.
MR. BLACK. Not even in NOW accounts, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact or situation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 457.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't want to nit-pick, but I don'tsee the point of deleting the words "much less than usual weight," assuggested because the Fed watchers are going to wonder what thatmeans. They will wonder if that means we're giving it somewhat moreemphasis now. Why don't we just leave it alone the way it was.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses their disagreement with the suggestion of deleting the words "much less than usual weight" by stating that they don't see the point and asking why they can't leave it as it was.


Passage number 458.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have it left alone in my presentversion. All I have is "Specification of the behavior of M1 over thebalance of the year remains subject to considerable uncertainty." Ithink that's singular--["uncertainty" rather than "uncertainties"]."Substantial uncertainty," I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their opinion and interpretation on the subject, but there is no indication of a disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 459.
-50-MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 460.
11/16/82MR. WALLICH. I think we should say "continues to be" torefer back to what we said earlier.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 461.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It says "remains." "Subject tosubstantial" is it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Subject to substantial" does not create any conflict or disagreement within the sentence. It simply indicates that there is a certain condition or requirement that needs to be met.


Passage number 462.
MR. PARTEE. "Considerable" seems rather [unintelligible]compared with "unusual.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is simply expressing his opinion or observation about the word "considerable" being less clear or precise compared to the word "unusual".


Passage number 463.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "...substantial uncertainty because ofspecial circumstances in connection with the reinvestment of fundsfrom maturing all savers certificates and the public's response to newaccounts directly competitive with money market funds mandated byrecent legislation. The probable difficulties in interpretation of M1continue to suggest that much less than usual weight be placed....
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 464.
"MR. PARTEE. And then drop the last sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply making a suggestion or requesting an action to be taken.


Passage number 465.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation:


Passage number 466.
MR. ALTMANN. Are you leaving "probable" in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Altmann's question without any conflicting views.


Passage number 467.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I meant to leave out "probable."Well, unless there are some other proposals on main points, we aretalking about 9-1/2 percent, 6 to 10 percent, and $250 million. Anycomments. If not, we will vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking for comments and if there are no objections, they will proceed with a vote.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 468.
MR. ALTMANN.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Balles YesPresident Black YesPresident Ford NoGovernor Gramley YesPresident Horn YesGovernor Martin YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich YesEleven for, one against.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, there is disagreement or contention as President Ford is the only one who voted against the discussed matter, while the other eleven individuals voted in favor of it.


Passage number 469.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. I have a few things I have to do.We have to discuss a couple of things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker has a few things they need to do and that there are a couple of things that need to be discussed.


Passage number 470.
MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, may I just ask one question. Do weaccept that the ground rules for this meeting are that we don'tdiscuss even with our senior economists what we have done.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification on the ground rules for the meeting.


Passage number 471.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess we better discuss that while weare in this limited session. It occurs to me that I have a speech togive tonight, unfortunately. Let me just read what I have here; Idon't know whether I have to alter anything. Frankly, I think weought to say something; I don't know if we have to, but this is how Istarted it:-51-11/16/82As you know, most of the monetary and creditaggregates that the markets watch so closely arerunning somewhat above the targets we set forourselves at the start of the year. So far as M1is concerned, the data plainly came to be distortedby institutional change--particularly in October bythe flow of funds into checking accounts....Prospectively, the introduction of new forms oftransaction or quasi-transaction accounts is likelyto distort the figures further, although thedirection of impact is less evident. In thecircumstances we have had little alternative but toattach much less weight to that aggregate inguiding the provision of reserves until theinstitutional changes settle down.More generally, current developments with respectto the growth of money and credit have had to beinterpreted in the light of all the evidence we cangather with respect to the economy, pricedevelopments, interest rates, and financialpressures. Taken together the evidence is strongthat the desire for liquidity has strengthenedappreciably this year, as sometimes happens inperiods of exceptional economic uncertainty. Theturnover or velocity of M1, for instance, hasdeclined appreciably this year instead of trendingupward, as has been the pattern throughout thepostwar period. M2 velocity--generally stable inmost recent years--has declined even more sharply.In all these circumstances, the Federal Open MarketCommittee remains willing for a time--as weindicated at midyear--to tolerate monetaryexpansion at a somewhat higher rate than thetargeted annual rate. That approach, in the lightof the evidence of exceptionally strong liquiditydemands, should in no way be interpreted as a lackof continuing concern about inflation--and happilyI don't believe it has been so interpreted by themarkets. The fact is that, with velocity patternsobviously shifting at least for a time, rigidpursuit of the targets would have the practicaleffect of a more restrictive policy than intendedwhen those targets were set out. It's not withoutrelevance, in that connection, to note that growthin bank credit, or private credit generally, hasbeen relatively limited this year, tending toconfirm that the greater liquidity provided has notspilled over into inflationary private creditexpansion.-52-11/16/82What recent developments do emphasize is that, in atime of rapid institutional economic change, wemust be wary of highly simplified rules in theconduct of policy. That is why we have alwayslooked to a variety of monetary and credit"targets" and retained elements of flexibility andjudgment in pursuing those targets.What we do not have the flexibility to do is toabandon broad guidelines for monetary and creditgrowth as the means of judging policy over a periodof time. The danger of creating excess liquidityis not so much immediate when there is so muchsurplus capacity and unemployment, but rather whenthe economy begins to regain forward momentum.That is why we must continuously balance the needto meet liquidity needs today against the risks ofbuilding in fresh impetus to inflation tomorrow.Then the speech goes on to talk about the budget imbalance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an update on the current monetary and credit situation, discussing the need for flexibility in policy, and emphasizing the importance of balancing liquidity needs with the risk of inflation.


Passage number 472.
MR. PARTEE. That's fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee's response suggests agreement or acceptance.


Passage number 473.
MR. ROOS. I don't mean to be a broken record, but I thinkit's important that we have uniformity in what we say or do not say toour own immediate, fairly eminent, associates such as researchdirectors.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing the speaker's concern about the need for uniformity in communication with research directors.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 474.
 Are we all going to talk about the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me talk about the public sidefirst. What is distressing about this to me is that it obviouslyaffected the markets and affected policy. Maybe we came out of it allright and maybe we didn't; I don't know. But it certainly gave riseto more dangers about misinterpretation of our intentions than I hadbargained for. I might also say that we had a leak--and maybe morethan one--about the Greenbook, as you know. I don't know whether itwas from the Administration or the Federal Reserve. I have heard allsorts of allegations from the market--they may be without substance,but it worries me every time I hear this--that there has been anoccasional leak of an M2 figure or an M1 figure, or whatever. I hopethat is wrong, but it makes me uneasy when I hear about it. Whatworries me, just looking ahead, is this lack of discipline--if I canput it that way. It's like the vultures going after carrion. Everyreporter in the world is challenged to make his own story, and thereporters who may have been involved the first time are all the morechallenged to keep it up. I think there is a tendency on the part ofany organization, for people to say "Damn it. If somebody else isleaking, I'm going to talk to a reporter, too, and get my story out."Unless this is stopped, it's just going to cut us up.I am convinced that in a way it enormously complicates thepolicy problem because so much of policy is what people think it is orthink our attitude is over a period of time as opposed to what we do.-53-11/16/82This whole situation is intolerable to me. This organization, aboveall others in Washington--I used to think the Treasury was this way,but certainly do not now--does not leak. And I think it has been toour advantage to have that be both the impression and the reality. Ithas enormously increased our credibility, the credibility of officialstatements over the years, and the credibility of policy. I don't seeany way we can operate other than on that presumption. We are dealingwith a Committee; we are dealing with a lot of people. We can't havea lie detector at the door coming in or out of the office. Weultimately have to do what is right because there is a consensus thatthat is right and an understanding of what the rules are--anunderstanding of the people around the table and our associates.Frankly, I think we perhaps should tighten up the distribution of someof the materials--to go to your point--partly as a reminder of thesensitivity of this business. And we will be proposing some changesin that connection. Joe Coyne might just talk a minute about hisunderstanding of the rules and then we'll have a more generaldiscussion of this or of any ideas anybody else might have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses distress and worry about leaks and lack of discipline within the organization, suggesting that there may be disagreements or issues of trust among the members.


Passage number 475.
MR. COYNE. To be brief, my understanding is that the policyrecord, of course, comes out the Friday after the following meeting,and what that means is that we do not talk about what happened at that[earlier] meeting until that time. There are very, very, fewexceptions to that. We can say we had a meeting; we can give thestarting time and the closing time, and the attendance. And that'sit. That has been my understanding since the Committee adopted therules.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining their understanding of the policy regarding discussing meeting minutes before they are officially released.


Passage number 476.
MR. WALLICH. That includes telephone meetings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that the mentioned meetings include telephone meetings.


Passage number 477.
MR. COYNE. No, we do not mention telephone meetings untilthey are reported in the policy record. That is only for our face-to-face meetings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Coyne simply states that telephone meetings are not mentioned until they are reported in the policy record, and that face-to-face meetings have a separate mention in the record.


Passage number 478.
MS. TEETERS. This is to reporters, Joe. This doesn't apply,say, if we are talking to the chief economist at a Reserve Bank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that certain information does not apply in a certain situation.


Passage number 479.
MR. COYNE. This is to the outside world.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Coyne.


Passage number 480.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are now talking I think about theoutside world.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This sentence is a statement and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 481.
MR. COYNE. Yes, anybody in the outside world.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. Mr. Coyne is merely giving a response to a statement or question.


Passage number 482.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What I think I am bound to suggest at themoment is that we just don't talk to reporters for some interval afterthe meeting, however innocuously. The Washington Post this morninghad a comment attributed to a Federal Reserve source. It was not thewildest thing in the world, obviously.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of the speaker's opinion or suggestion.


Passage number 483.
MS. TEETERS. It was just "a source".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. The phrase "a source" is mentioned without any conflicting or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 484.
 It didn't say---54-11/16/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, no. There was one comment that said"a Federal Reserve source." And it was the kind of comment somebodycould make. The article is a little odd because it makes it sound asif the Federal Open Market Committee sets the discount rate. It saidsome Federal Reserve source said the option was between blank andblank or something. In the present environment even that kind ofcomment just feeds this atmosphere. I think it's fairly simple forus, let's say in the first week, not to talk to reporters. Peopletalk to reporters once in a while, and it has to be done, I suppose.But it doesn't have to be done that first week. We typically meet ona Tuesday; it doesn't have to be done during the course of that week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is discussing the idea of not talking to reporters in the first week and the author expresses their opinion on the matter. However, there is no mention of any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 485.
MR. COYNE. If I might, Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The passage includes the phrase "If I might, Mr," which suggests that there may be a disagreement or contention between two individuals. However, without further context, it is difficult to determine the nature of the disagreement or the parties involved.


Passage number 486.
 Chairman--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just to repeat the obvious: You couldmake a comment that seems pretty innocuous to you, and the reporterfinds three more people to make a comment that is pretty innocuous tothem. And then if he is any good and knows what the issues are, hebegins putting together a story which may be partly right, as that onein The Washington Post was; but the total essence of the article Ithink was substantially misleading. And that's where we are going toget torn apart even with the most innocent of motives.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The chairman is expressing his opinion and personal analysis of the situation, but there is no apparent contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 487.
MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, I presume we'll talk about thisafter lunch, but we could finesse the whole issue by releasing [thedirective] right after the meeting, [as I proposed in a recentmemorandum to you, which I also sent to all Committee members andother Reserve Bank Presidents].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that there is a difference of opinion regarding the timing of releasing the directive. Ms. Teeters suggests releasing it right after the meeting, but it is implied that others may have different ideas or plans.


Passage number 488.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is something I want to talk aboutduring lunch or whatever, but let's assume that is not going tohappen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any signs of contention or disagreement. It simply expresses a desire to discuss something during lunch, but acknowledges that it is unlikely to occur.


Passage number 489.
MR. PARTEE. It may be time to do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee simply stating that it may be time to do something does not indicate any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 490.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I didn't mean that. Does anybodyelse have any [comments].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if anyone else has any comments.


Passage number 491.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Did Joe finish.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a question without providing any additional context or points of view.


Passage number 492.
MR. PARTEE. A blackout of the press is a little difficult.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states that a blackout of the press is difficult.


Passage number 493.
MR. COYNE. About the points the Chairman made, a lot ofreporters will do a round robin and call as many people as they canand compare answers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply describes a common practice of reporters seeking information from multiple sources.


Passage number 494.
MR. FORD. May I ask this. My feeling about this has beenthat we don't discuss it with outsiders, as you suggested, but that[is] the role of a Federal Reserve official, a senior Federal Reserveofficial especially, giving you the first shot at talking. Forinstance, the last time you should have had the first shot at that-55-11/16/82meeting down at the Greenbrier. Now you are telling us you are goingto do it tonight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Ford about his feeling regarding discussing a topic with outsiders and his suggestion that it should be the role of a senior Federal Reserve official. There is no indication of disagreement or clash of opinions.


Passage number 495.
 But after that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. These are very vague comments as youheard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit signs of contention or disagreement. The phrase "very vague comments" suggests a lack of clarity or specific information, but it does not necessarily indicate disagreement.


Passage number 496.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We should be guided, no matter how wefeel individually, by the line that you are expressing. Basically, ina polar case there are two choices: Either we refer all calls to youor we make a best faith effort to state what the official line is,based on the way you interpreted it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is proposing two choices and suggesting that they should be guided by the interpretation of the person they are addressing.


Passage number 497.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, we are talking about a specificdecision at a specific meeting. Obviously you have to talk about thegeneral policy line, so to speak. That's quite a different category.But you have to be careful about it. There is a real distinctionbetween that general policy line and this--what the argument was atthe Committee meeting, with views attached to individuals. The mostdamaging thing is to say "This is what we really meant or somebodyreally meant..." and getting into that kind of thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the importance of distinguishing between a general policy line and the specific argument and views attached to individuals in a committee meeting. They caution against assuming what someone meant and suggest it can be damaging to make such assumptions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 498.
MR. ROOS. I think we have a potential problem, though, withour economists, some of whom are rather like prima donnas who havetheir noses out of joint by being expelled--correctly, I agree withyou--from this meeting. And unless there is some agreed upon way ofhandling that, one of those fellows will go and tell somebody that thegag rule is on. I'm not disagreeing, Paul, with anything you havesaid, but I'd just like to get some agreement on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is potential disagreement or contention among the economists about being expelled from the meeting and the use of a gag rule. Mr. Roos expresses concern about their reaction and the need for a agreed upon way of handling it.


Passage number 499.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's certainly a relevant question.You obviously have to talk to your senior people. I guess we have toleave it to you to talk with discretion and convey to them certainlythe essence of the message that is more or less the common groundhere. I would talk with each of those people specifically about thisproblem. Make sure they understand it. And if you are satisfied theyunderstand it, you obviously have to talk about the policy decisions.I think you could use a certain amount of discretion in [notproviding] blow-by-blow accounts, which are inevitably distorted.Everybody goes out of the meeting with a different impression of whatwas said or even what was decided in some sense except to the extentthat it is written down. And people interpret every comment in thelight of what they think; in some instances it may be quite differentfrom what the fellow talking thought he was saying. And it might getdangerous when this kind of stuff gets talked about. I hope that wecan get away from [attendance at] these sessions being as narrow as itwas [today]. But maybe we can have it someplace in between for awhile.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It is primarily giving advice or suggestions on how to handle a situation and expressing hopes for a change in the future.


Passage number 500.
MR. FORD. If one is on the [morning] call and can't share[the policy decision] with our [appropriate senior staff], whoeverthat is, I don't see how we can have a meaningful thing to say otherthan to listen to the bell ring on the call. My people go to a lot of-56-11/16/82trouble to keep track of your procedures. As I understand it, if weare on the call, we are supposed to be a representative of the group;we do not reflect our own views but whether we think the policy isbeing instituted in accordance with whatever the decision was. To dothat we need somebody to try to track at least roughly how thecalculations and decisions are made.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their understanding of the procedures and expressing the need for someone to track the calculations and decisions in order to fulfill their role as a representative on the call.


Passage number 501.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think your senior people have to knowabout the mechanics of the decision and the essence of the decision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It appears to be a statement expressing personal opinion or belief.


Passage number 502.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, what about next time. Are yougoing to settle that now, or are you going to [wait].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about future plans, giving the option to settle something now or wait until later.


Passage number 503.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would welcome any suggestions that youhave. Let's not deal with them at the moment, but you can contact melater. We'll pick up this other issue later. Let's go eat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their willingness to receive suggestions and suggesting that they can be addressed at a later time.


Passage number 504.
[Lunch recess]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] tell it to me withenthusiasm and let me just give you one point that may or may not bein this memorandum. [Secretary's note: A copy of the memorandum,"Immediate Release of FOMC Decisions: Pros and Cons," from Messrs.Axilrod and Sternlight and dated November 12, 1982 has been placed inthe Committtee's files.] I can understand an argument that the waythe directives have been written it would be much less of a problemthan in other instances. But once that precedent is set, whateveroperating technique we use, whatever kind of directive we use, we'restuck with it, I think, forever. If we really were operating as weused to on an interest rate target and we announced a differentinterest rate every month--in effect came out of the meeting andannounced an interest rate--we would then be stuck with it and wecouldn't change it without a subsequent public announcement. Then Ithink we would be in great trouble. That's just one other extremeform. When we are giving a directive of the sort that we've beenusing, it doesn't have quite the immediate interest rate implications;it doesn't freeze us in quite the same way. But it does require thatevery time we have a special meeting in which a decision is made--however much of an emergency the situation is--we would have to putsomething out right away. And it might be exceedingly inconvenient.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing concern about the potential consequences of setting a precedent for announcing interest rates and the inconvenience it may cause for the Committee. However, there is no contradiction or disagreement with any other viewpoint.


Passage number 505.
MS. TEETERS. I don't think that's necessarily so. I'd saytwo things, Paul. If we have to have telephone conference meetings oremergency meetings, I don't think we have to announce them. The[dates of] FOMC meetings are public knowledge. And when we wereoperating under an interest rate target, the market usually found itout by noon the next day. What we had done was not a secret at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. TEETERS is simply offering an alternative perspective and explaining her point of view.


Passage number 506.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think they found out; they obviouslygroped for it. But those [directives] were not worded in such a wayas to [suggest that we would] stay there until the next meeting.There were certain criteria under which we could change. It wasn't11/16/82that the interest rates changed; they changed very little typically.But there were changes during the period which the market always wassearching out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information and describing a situation but does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 507.
MS. TEETERS. Well, I already have a call from The New YorkTimes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that Ms. Teeters received a call from The New York Times.


Passage number 508.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's great. Everybody just has tostay in this room and go three days without any [unintelligible].We have a bathroom facility right across the hall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about everyone needing to stay in the room for three days without any interruptions.


Passage number 509.
MR. BALLES. And meanwhile all the telephones in the buildingare tapped.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage stating that all the telephones in the building are tapped is a statement of fact and does not indicate any disagreement or debate.


Passage number 510.
MR. BLACK. Get me another sandwich, please.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker, Mr. Black, is requesting another sandwich politely, without any sign of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 511.
MS. TEETERS. I honestly don't think that [immediate releaseof our decisions] will do any harm. It would solve the problem ofleaks. And with a group even as large as this one--and the group wascut down from what it was--the idea that we can keep something asecret for seven or six-and-a-half weeks is really a big presumption,it seems to me. The way it's working now, if we do have these leaks--and there will be speculation, considering all the attention that hasbeen given to it--the speculation may finally come down to a consensusof speculation as to what we did or didn't do. In effect, we'regiving an advantage to the people who have a little inside knowledgeinstead of making it available to the public generally. And I thinkwe're better off, even if we want to change the way we write thedirective, if we make it publicly available. That doesn't mean thatwe are frozen into it. We can change our mind. We don't necessarilyhave to announce those changes in our mind. I think basically thepublic has a right to as much information as they can [receive] atthis point. I don't think the leaks are really going to disappear,Paul. I think that you're going to get caught as I once did.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. MS. TEETERS is expressing her opinion on the benefits of immediately releasing decisions and the potential harm of leaks. She also suggests that making information publicly available is a better approach.


Passage number 512.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If they don't, I'll disappear soon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage expresses a conditional statement, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 513.
MS. TEETERS. Well, one gets cornered in an odd way. I oncegot caught--not here--but something got partially leaked and areporter called me up and said "X happened." And I said "No, it wasX+1," and I immediately realized that I'd done the wrong thing. If wehave this speculation out there, we're going to get these wrongstories. And the temptation then becomes very great on people tocorrect those wrong stories.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is simply a story of a personal experience and the realization of the wrong action taken.


Passage number 514.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "That is correct" implies agreement and acknowledges that the previous statement or claim is accurate.


Passage number 515.
MS. TEETERS. We announce discount rate changes; we announcechanges in reserve requirements because we have to. I don't see thatthis is greatly different from that. Under interest rate targetingthey found out pretty well where we were. I think they have correctlyinterpreted what we've changed to this time around, with some help.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply explaining that announcing discount rate changes and changes in reserve requirements is similar to the current practice of interest rate targeting. There is no indication of disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 516.
-58-11/16/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is noleaks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states a date and mentions that there are no leaks. There is no indication of any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 517.
MS. TEETERS. I have heardoutside the System.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only states that someone has heard something "outside the System." There is no indication of any disagreement or conflicting perspectives.


Passage number 518.
MR. BOEHNE. I have an open mind on the issue of releasingthe directive. If it were up to me, I'm not sure how I would comedown. But I do have a question. Suppose the directive that theCommittee just approved were released this afternoon. What would thatreally tell the market. It says that the M2 [growth consistent withour objectives] is around 9-1/2 percent; there may be a little messagethere. It says that the funds rate range is 6 to 10 percent. Andthen it has a lot of other gobbledygook that could mean a lot ofdifferent things. Maybe somebody could just answer my question.Suppose the directive were released this afternoon. What kind ofinformation would that really convey. Or would there just beincreased speculation on what that directive really means in anoperational sense. How much would we have bought in terms ofsatisfying the public's and the press's appetite for knowledge aboutwhat we're doing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a question being asked by Mr. Boehne, seeking clarification on the potential impact of releasing the directive.


Passage number 519.
MR. CORRIGAN. I think one thing we would buy is inquiriesfor more information.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. Mr. Corrigan is expressing his opinion and suggesting that purchasing inquiries for more information would be a beneficial action.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 520.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, I think you have [a point]--a lot more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage as indicated by the phrase "I think you have [a point]." The speaker acknowledges that the other person has a valid argument or point, suggesting a difference in opinion.


Passage number 521.
MR. CORRIGAN. If they see the directive, they are going tosay: "Well, I want to see the forecast that it is based on and allthe rest of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 522.
"MR. MORRIS. What if we were in a situation where the economyhad picked up for a while. If we had announced a 6 to 10 percentfunds rate range after one meeting and we announced immediately afterthe next one that our range was now 8 to 13 percent, what sort ofmarket reaction would you expect in that kind of situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It is a hypothetical question posed by Mr. Morris, seeking information about a potential market reaction.


Passage number 523.
MR. PARTEE. Very little trading below 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that there is very little trading below 8 percent.


Passage number 524.
MR. FORD. You're positing that the band would be widened atboth ends.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "You're positing that the band would be widened at both ends" is simply stating a fact or assumption about the band being widened.


Passage number 525.
-59-11/16/82MR. PARTEE. He said 8 to 13 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states a statement made by someone.


Passage number 526.
MR. BOEHNE. I suspect what the Committee would do is that itwould gravitate toward even more vague directives.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boehne is expressing a suspicion about the potential actions of the Committee, but he is not presenting a conflicting opinion or engaging in a disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 527.
MR. MORRIS. Precisely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 528.
MR. BOEHNE. And then there would be a hidden meaning, whichwe'd all understand but the directive that we'd publish would give usso much flexibility that we could drive a truck through it a couple oftimes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is merely expressing their opinion on the level of flexibility provided by a directive.


Passage number 529.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Again, I think it would invite a lot ofprobing at the bottom [to determine] what the real decision was.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear disagreement or contention. It is simply stating that more investigation would be needed to determine the real decision.


Passage number 530.
MR. BOEHNE. Yes, that's the question I'm asking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that Mr. Boehne is asking a question. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 531.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I share your instinct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with and supports the instinct of the other person.


Passage number 532.
MR. RICE. Won't they do that now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 533.
MR. BOYKIN. In fairness to Nancy, her argument, though, isthat publication might tend to cause something that we were trying tomake happen anyway happen just a little sooner.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents a disagreement between Mr. Boykin and someone named Nancy. Nancy believes that publication might accelerate the occurrence of something they were already trying to achieve, while Mr. Boykin seems to have a different view on the matter.


Passage number 534.
MR. GRAMLEY. If it happened in a nice smooth fashion, thatwould be all right. I would not worry much about immediate release ifI were quite sure we were going to stay with the operating procedureswe now have. But we were talking earlier today about what will happenif [banks] begin to [pay] interest on all types of money. And I thinkthe answer to that is that we would have the same kind of problemtargeting on M2 that we now have on M1. It would make it very, verydifficult to do. And we may end up deciding that, in fact, what wehave to do is target on interest rates. And if we start targeting oninterest rates and say that this month, by golly, our interest ratetarget is 1 percentage point lower, the markets are going to goabsolutely bananas. And I'm not sure that's what we want.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing concern about the potential difficulties and consequences of changing operating procedures and targeting interest rates. There is no argument or disagreement with any other individual or viewpoint.


Passage number 535.
MR. PARTEE. I didn't think you'd ever say that, Lyle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MR. PARTEE expresses surprise or disbelief at Lyle's response, but there is no conflict or disagreement between them.


Passage number 536.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, the whole problem would be that we wouldcome up with a bunch of mush that could mean anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states an opinion about potential outcomes without any opposing views being presented.


Passage number 537.
MR. MORRIS. And we'd get to the point where we were back inthe Martin years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions "the Martin years," potentially referring to a past period, but there is no conflicting information or argument presented.


Passage number 538.
MR. PARTEE. If we got back to an interest rate target and wecouldn't put the target in the directive, we wouldn't be saying much.But that's a big if. It seems to me very likely that we'll alwayshave some proviso on interest rate movements. I certainly am totallydisenchanted about interest rate forecasting and I don't think I'llever return to it. But I think we'd have some proviso. And it would-60-11/16/82be measured relative to some objective performance indicator--maybenot money or maybe not even credit, Frank, but some objectiveindicator.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and discussing the likelihood of including a proviso on interest rate movements.


Passage number 539.
MR. MORRIS. If you eliminate both of those, you don't havean awful lot left.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris is making a statement about eliminating certain things.


Passage number 540.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I cannot determine if there is contention or disagreement in a passage without the passage itself. Could you please provide the passage?


Passage number 541.
 You have the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The Congress would just tell us to targetinterest rates also.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage, as it simply states a hypothetical situation about the Congress telling someone to target interest rates.


Passage number 542.
MS. TEETERS. I can't foresee that we're going to make anyradical change, even as much as 2 or 3 percentage points, at any givenmeeting. Even when we targeted interest rates, I think the most weever moved [the funds rate] was 1/4 to 1/2 percentage point. [Undercurrent procedures] we've been moving it a percentage point in a 400basis point range. We gradually move them up and down; I don't seethat we're going to get major market shocks or anything of that sort.We did have one major market shock and that occurred when we changedto reserve targeting and a [wide] band on the interest rate target.And the market survived; it was shocked but it did survive. And thenit settled down within the space of about a week. So, I don't seethat we would be giving away that much information.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their perspective on the potential for radical changes in interest rates and the impacts on the market.


Passage number 543.
MR. MORRIS. But the kind of problem I'm concerned about isthis: Let's say that we're in a period of uncertainty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 544.
MS. TEETERS. We always are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine without the complete passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 545.
MR. MORRIS. Well, suppose we think that whatever we aretargeting on is going to strengthen greatly between meetings, butwe're not sure. So, we give the Manager a wide funds range in whichto operate and he is supposed to use that range if the target showsgreat strength and not use it if it doesn't. In that case we would bepublishing a much higher upper limit, and the market would be likelyto move quickly toward that limit. Then if the events did not occurto justify the move, the Manager would not move the funds rate. Thenthe market would be stuck up here, and it would have to come downagain. This would produce increased instability in the money market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting a hypothetical scenario in which the Manager is given a wide funds range to operate within depending on the strength of the target. However, the speaker argues that this approach could lead to increased instability in the money market.


Passage number 546.
MS. TEETERS. There couldn't be much more instability than wehave right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses their opinion about the current level of instability without any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 547.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I tend to agree with that, but I retainthis great hope that it is going to settle down some day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The individual expresses agreement with the statement and also expresses hope for a future resolution, indicating a sense of optimism rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 548.
MR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I cannot provide a judgment on the content of a passage without the actual passage being provided.


Passage number 549.
 If we ever get into contemporaneous accountingand we really are targeting total reserves and controlling totalreserves--11/16/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we have any reserves left at thatpoint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement describing a hypothetical situation.


Passage number 550.
MR. BLACK. That's an "if." If we have a very wide federalfunds rate range, I wouldn't worry about telling the market except forone thing, and I think that's the first argument against it. I'm verysympathetic to what Nancy says, but [I don't like] the idea ofpolitical pressure being exerted upon the Committee to change beforethe policy is fully implemented. And asking anyone who has dissentedto justify his dissent when there's [as yet] no [written] explanationas to why he or she dissented in that directive, I think would be verydivisive. That is what bothers me, although all my predilections, ofcourse, are for releasing it because I hope we do get to that kind oftotal reserve targeting some day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 551.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me point out that we live in a world,a Washington world anyway, in which somebody has to trot up andtestify about last month's consumer price index, which has no policycontent at all. If we are going to announce our decisions after aFederal Open Market Committee meeting, I don't think it would be verylong before we had a congressional hearing scheduled that afternoon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about the potential consequences of announcing decisions after a Federal Open Market Committee meeting.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 552.
MR. BLACK. That's what really worries me. That's the verypoint that tips me against releasing it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Black expresses worry and disagrees with the idea of releasing something based on a specific point.


Passage number 553.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. John Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no way to determine contention or disagreement in the following passage without any provided context or information about the passage itself.


Passage number 554.
MR. BALLES. If I could respond first to Bob's concern: If Idissent or somebody else dissents, that would come out immediatelybefore the explanation came out as to why others had voted the otherway. The way our minutes of action come out now--if we can keep themin that abbreviated form, not citing individual views--I could see thedirective plus those minutes of actions being published on very shortnotice. And in my view--you might not agree--that would take care ofthe particular problem you were mentioning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply addressing Bob's concern and suggesting a potential solution to the problem raised.


Passage number 555.
MR. BLACK. Yes, that would be a lot better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black simply agrees that the suggested solution would be better.


Passage number 556.
MR. BALLES. To return to the various points that Nancy ismaking: I sent around a memo generally supporting her proposal, asyou may remember. It has occurred to me that there is another reasonfor supporting immediate release, but originally I was reluctant toput it in writing. I'm even reluctant to mention it now, but I'mgoing to nevertheless. It is bad enough to have leaks of the type wehad, say, in The Washington Post on October 8, but even worse in myopinion is the risk of a leak we may never hear about. And that issomebody with access to our policy record feeding it to a trader, aninvestor, or whatever. If anything like that ever happened and wasdisclosed, that would be such a major black eye to us that it wouldmake the leaks recently pale by comparison.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Balles is expressing his support for Nancy's proposal and sharing an additional reason for supporting immediate release of information.


Passage number 557.
-62-11/16/82MR. GRAMLEY. When that sort of thing has happened withgovernment statistics, though, the word gets around. The word getsaround because it has a market effect and other people in the marketsbegin to learn about it and they call in. I agree with you that itwould be a terrible black eye. But as far as I know, there is noreason to think that that would ever happen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 558.
MR. BALLES. I hope you're right, Lyle. I'm not all thatpositive myself. For example, though I don't have all the numberswith me--I wish I'd brought them--and I'm not sure how much they wouldprove implicitly what happened, my recollection is that the very dayafter our last FOMC meeting, Wednesday, October 6th, there was a majorrise in bond prices and stock prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about their own positive outlook and is providing an example to support their uncertainty.


Passage number 559.
MR. PARTEE. Starting at 3 p.m. in the afternoon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a specific time, 3 p.m. in the afternoon.


Passage number 560.
MR. BALLES. Yes, exactly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Balles is simply agreeing with a previous statement or providing clarification.


Passage number 561.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage "That's right." It is a statement of agreement or affirmation.


Passage number 562.
MR. BALLES. And I'm adding 2 and 2 and getting 4.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is simply stating a mathematical calculation without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 563.
MR. MORRIS. There was a statement by the Secretary of theTreasury on Wednesday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It only mentions a statement made by the Secretary of the Treasury.


Passage number 564.
MR. PARTEE. No, that was Thursday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The person simply states that the day in question was Thursday.


Passage number 565.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're talking about Wednesday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement acknowledging that the topic of conversation is Wednesday.


Passage number 566.
MR. BALLES. Yes, sir.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Balles simply responds with "Yes, sir" to indicate agreement or confirmation.


Passage number 567.
MR. PARTEE. The very next day, we had an afternoon rally.In fact, I went around to Joe Coyne and said "What's up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 568.
"MR. COYNE. The Secretary of the Treasury's comments were onWednesday morning.SPEAKER(.). Yes, they were.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The conversation between Mr. Coyne and the Speaker is simply stating a fact or acknowledging something that was said previously.


Passage number 569.
MR. MORRIS. Wednesday morning they were on the telerate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact about what happened on Wednesday morning.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 570.
MR. RICE. Peter, isn't it true that you get calls frompeople in the market saying that they know that other people havegotten privileged information.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "isn't it true" suggests that Mr. Rice is questioning the validity of Peter's statement, indicating a disagreement or skepticism.


Passage number 571.
MR. STERNLIGHT. We sometimes get calls that some statisticalrelease from Commerce or somewhere is out early, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of fact.


Passage number 572.
MR. GRAMLEY. That is the sort of thing I was referring to.When we have heard that, we've typically heard back from the market asto what the information is all about and where it probably came from.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Gramley is simply stating that when they have received certain information, they have typically heard from the market to determine the source and meaning of that information.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 573.
-63-11/16/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, these are the suspicions that I'vehad reported to me recently, more or less casually, but they areworrisome. They are statistical, such as what the money figures aregoing to be tomorrow. The last one was what the M2 figure was goingto be. Just to clarify what I know about this last episode: I hadbreakfast with the Secretary of the Treasury the morning after themeeting, as I do every week. The only thing I told him concerningwhat we had discussed was that we were going to put a lot less weighton M1 because of all the problems he knew about. We had a very short,two-minute or so discussion; he knew what the problem was. I alsosaid I was going to explain this to the public on Friday because Iwould be going to the Business Council and it would be a goodopportunity to put it in the right perspective. Two hours later, it'son the tape, because he literally walked out of that breakfast andwent to a meeting of the dealer bank association--of all things, apublic meeting--and said something about it. He said something vagueabout it when he was asked a question. What he said was accurate.But there it was. And then he didn't say anything else. Then KenBacon was snooping around. I don't know, but Joe Coyne's story isthat Ken Bacon was speculating on this privately, as many of thesethings go, and assumed that we might have to come to that decision.It got confirmed by what the Secretary of the Treasury said and he ranwith the story. He may not have had any other leak. The article waspretty accurate except for the headline, which said the FederalReserve was easing or something. That wasn't the point. That isobviously not what I wanted to say. But except for that firstsentence, it was a pretty accurate story. My speculation is that onereporter got something in the paper, which wasn't itself all thatdamaging, and it sent the other bloodhounds on the scent. They thengot more substantive comments directly, obviously, out of the FederalReserve. And that was the damaging thing, really. I was upset enoughabout the Secretary of the Treasury's performance and that story, butthe really damaging policy story was the one the next day, whichobviously did come from the Federal Reserve. I think it's a perfectexample of how one leak generates another.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, who appears to be a high-ranking official, is upset about leaks of information from the Secretary of the Treasury and the Federal Reserve. They express frustration with the Secretary of the Treasury's comments and their impact on the media's reporting. They believe these leaks have led to further leaks and damage to their policies.


Passage number 574.
MR. CORRIGAN. That's the problem. In terms of the argumentthat releasing the directive would take care of the leak problem, I'mconcerned that it will work the other way. If we put out thedirective on the day of the meeting, in the form in which it is nowwritten, we inevitably are going to get reporters snooping aroundasking "What does this really mean." and trying to getinterpretations. And we will end up with more confusion and not less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Corrigan is expressing concern about the potential consequences of releasing the directive on the day of the meeting, but there is no direct opposition or disagreement present.


Passage number 575.
MR. BALLES. Not if we don't talk to them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that there will not be any problem if they do not engage in conversation with someone.


Passage number 576.
MS. TEETERS. That's right. We don't have to take theircalls.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a fact without any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 577.
MR. CORRIGAN. That's easy to say. But over a period oftime--say we've put an absolute restriction on talking to the pressfor a week or something like that--that doesn't solve the problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention in this passage. Mr. Corrigan simply states that putting a restriction on talking to the press for a week does not solve the problem, without any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 578.
11/16/82MS. TEETERS. It would solve the problem though, Jerry,because by Friday it's a non-story.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement suggesting that a certain action would solve a problem and make it a non-issue.


Passage number 579.
MR. CORRIGAN. I don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any statement or indication of contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement from Mr. Corrigan expressing his lack of knowledge about something.


Passage number 580.
MR. MARTIN. No, anything about the Fed is a continuingstory.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that anything related to the Federal Reserve is an ongoing topic of discussion or interest.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 581.
 This is a continuing saga of the mysterious--MR. FORD. Wait a minute. I have to defend Nancy on this.The logic of it has to be that at the end of a month--with our nextmeeting only being a month away--they will have it. But somewherebetween releasing it the same day and after one month, it becomes anon-story. That is witnessed by the fact that we usually don't getstories about the minutes when we release them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "Wait a minute. I have to defend Nancy on this." indicates a challenge or disagreement with a previous statement or position.


Passage number 582.
MR. MARTIN. Yes, but by that time we've had another meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there will be another meeting after a certain time.


Passage number 583.
MR. PARTEE. Our theory on the [release date], though, Bill,is that the directive is no longer current. We don't release it untilafter the next meeting has occurred and there is another directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their theory about the release date of a directive.


Passage number 584.
MR. CORRIGAN. Until we've had another meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that another meeting is needed.


Passage number 585.
MR. PARTEE. So that's an old directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 586.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, the fact that somebody got someinformation and put it in the press did not reduce interest in thequestion of what was going on. It intensified it enormously. I thinkif we release the directive, which has in it some rather mysteriouslanguage about M2 and the fed funds rate ranges, and the language ischanged a little--if instead of "is" it says "remains" and "unusuallygreat" becomes "substantial"--then the phones will begin to ring offthe wall. People will ask: "What does this mean. Did you guys cavein or not." It just isn't going to change that problem at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the potential impact of releasing a directive with certain language changes.


Passage number 587.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is a growth rate figure there of x,so they will look at every figure. They will see if we are above orbelow X and ask if we are going to tighten up next week or three daysfrom now or, if not, why not. That's what the directive says.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage describes a directive that involves analyzing a growth rate figure and discussing potential actions based on whether it is above or below a certain threshold. There is no indication of opposing opinions or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 588.
MS. TEETERS. They do it anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about contention or disagreement; it only states that "they do it anyway," without indicating any conflicting opinions or conflicting actions.


Passage number 589.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They do it less, surely, now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "They do it less, surely, now" does not indicate contention or disagreement. Instead, it suggests a change in behavior or frequency over time.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 590.
MR. GUFFEY. I don't agree with those who say that releasingthe directive will avoid the leaks. I agree with those who say thatit might even increase speculation. But I'm a bit troubled with theproposal that we release the directive early, based upon the fact thatwe think we had a leak after the last meeting. I don't think that wecould control leaks by releasing the directive immediately after ameeting. I think the issue that has given rise to the discussiontoday can't be cured by an early release. I'd also add a detail:-65-11/16/82That we don't know how we are going to operate in the future and howthat directive might look and how we might have to move one way or theother in the intermeeting period. As a result of that, it seems to meto be paramount that we maintain that kind of flexibility. If wecan't control the leak problem by early release, then I would adopt amotto that has been used by others in the past and that is "If itain't broke, don't fix it." I would continue to do what we are doing,since we can't control the leak problem in my view, and I would notopt for early release.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In this passage, Mr. Guffey expresses disagreement with the proposal to release the directive early in order to prevent leaks. He argues that releasing the directive early may actually increase speculation and that it is not a solution to the leak problem. He also mentions the need for flexibility in future operations and concludes by saying that he would continue with the current approach and not opt for early release.


Passage number 591.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I hope we can control the leak problem.We may not control it by that device, and it may aggravate it, butthis institution has had a very good record on not leaking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses hope that the leak problem can be controlled and acknowledges that it may not be possible through a specific device, but emphasizes that the institution has had a good record of not leaking.


Passage number 592.
MR. GUFFEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 593.
 I'm just making the point that I don't think wewould cure it by early release--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I just wanted to clarify that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply clarifying their stance on the issue.


Passage number 594.
MR. GUFFEY. --so why try to cure something we can't cure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Guffey is stating a fact and not expressing any disagreement or contention. He simply asks why someone would try to cure something that cannot be cured.


Passage number 595.
MS. TEETERS. But this is the second one this year. Therewas a leak between the end of June and the 20th of July on theHumphrey-Hawkins report. This is the second time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about there being a second leak on the Humphrey-Hawkins report.


Passage number 596.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "That is right" is agreeing with a previous statement or assertion. There is no contention or disagreement indicated.


Passage number 597.
MR. FORD. I hear rumors--I don't know because I wasn't here--that we've had sporadic leaks over the years. You may be right thatwe have fewer leaks than, say, Treasury, but haven't we had problemswith leaks of this type for many years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact and seeking information.


Passage number 598.
MR. PARTEE. Very occasionally. It has been very rare.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker mentions that something has happened very occasionally and rare, indicating that there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 599.
MR. FORD. Are you saying there has never been a leak untilthe last two times.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MR. FORD is asking a simple question about leaks without any indication of disagreement.


Passage number 600.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 601.
 No, there have been--MR. GUFFEY. There have been a lot of other instances. Iremember when Dr. Burns was Chairman that we did have a leak or asuspected leak, and certain members of the staff were excluded for, Ithink, two meetings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply reflects a statement about past occurrences without any opposition or conflicting viewpoints expressed.


Passage number 602.
MR. ROOS. If you do this, you'll deprive a lot of retiredFederal Reserve people of a very important source of income, Mr.Chairman, trying to figure out what you folks are doing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement. The statement is simply expressing the potential consequences of a certain action without any opposing views or conflicting opinions being presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 603.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you're wrong. I think it wouldincrease the market. There would be text-analysis as well; we'd getall the English majors as well as the---6611/16/82SPEAKER(.). They couldn't use English majors, Paul.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "I think you're wrong" indicates that there is a disagreement between the speakers.


Passage number 604.
MR. WALLICH. I have been sympathetic to this proposal in thepast. It has a lot of merit. What gives me pause is the argument inthis memorandum about the impact on the policy process. We have someexperience with open meetings. The public sits right there. Theyscribble, but they're not allowed to speak and, as far as I can see,have no real impact on our deliberations. It certainly doesn'tembarrass me to say what I say. I have a sense that if I knew thenext day there might be a hearing or that there might be a great pressreaction, I would find it more difficult both to think and to decide,[particularly] to decide to do something drastic. Most of the timethere's nothing to it. It's the critical instances where one worries.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich expresses his sympathy towards a proposal and discusses his concerns about the impact on the policy process, specifically how public scrutiny might affect decision-making.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 605.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me put this in extreme form. Youreferred to these quiet little meetings we have in public. I'm notsure it has no effect at all, but those involve relativelynoncontroversial issues by and large. We discuss consumer credit andsome arcane regulations. Let me go on the other side of the spectrumwhere I've had a certain amount of experience. Those DIDC meetingsare a zoo. Anybody who does not think the substantive result iscontrolled by the fact that those meetings are held in public doesn'thave his head screwed on right. Now, we are not talking here abouthaving a public meeting, but I'm afraid it's a step in that direction.In a public meeting one cannot make effective arguments or explorealternatives. And you cannot get anybody to change his or her mindonce they have made a statement. And you end up with miserabledecisions, in my humble judgment. And that is [true of the DIDCmeetings] obviously because they are filled with enormous lobbyinginterests. You can imagine what interest monetary policy would have--not quite interest groups, and maybe that would diffuse them, butpolitical groups. If we ever got to that point, we could forget abouthaving any coherent policy except by subterfuge. Somebody would talkbeforehand and would announce that this is what the policy is going tobe and everybody has agreed to say yes or no. In my opinion, that'sthe way those things have to work, if [the group] is going to make anintelligent decision at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

The speaker is expressing disagreement with the idea of having public meetings and believes that they would result in ineffective arguments, inability to explore alternatives, and ultimately lead to miserable decisions. They also mention the influence of lobbying interests and political groups, which further supports the existence of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 606.
MR. MARTIN. I don't believe that the extreme public scrutinyof our every word and our every action and the pseudo-actions that areattributed to us has made us a better functioning organization. Iagree with those of you who say that immediate publication of thismysterious [document] would heighten the tension. The staff's memoindicates that the actual individual votes would be recited, and thatwould focus attention on individual differences. These are operatingstatements; they attempt to be helpful operationally. The public'sright to know, I think, extends to our objectives, our performance,our structure, our composition as individuals here, and ourbackgrounds. The public interest is not endowed in the operationalaspects of the organization. That's a different category. Theapproaches that we are taking to reduce leaks of information are11/16/82separate topics from this release [and putting us] in the spotlight.I would lean against the immediate release.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 607.
MS. TEETERS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It simply mentions "MS. TEETERS", which is not enough to establish any disagreement.


Passage number 608.
 Well, Pres, we already have computer systemsthat ring a bell and turn on a red light every time we enter themarket in various--MR. MARTIN. Is that good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the current existence of computer systems that alert them when entering the market.


Passage number 609.
MS. TEETERS. Well, it exists. They are not going to get ridof it. My question to Peter is: Would it make any difference in theoperation of the Desk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Teeters is stating a fact and then asking a question.


Passage number 610.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't really think so. There would betimes when an immediate release would have a market impact that wemight not want. At times it could help to bring about the desiredthrust in policy earlier. I may be out of order saying this, buthaving been associated with this for many years and having filed oneof the statements in that Merrill suit in which I took a position onthe ill effects of immediate release, I would say, after thinkingabout it long and hard for many years, that I don't think I could makethat same kind of statement today because of the different nature ofthe directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Sternlight is simply providing his thoughts and perspective on the topic.


Passage number 611.
MR. PARTEE. I did the same thing for the Board, Peter, and Ihave the same feeling. I couldn't support it now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker states that they have the same feeling but does not explicitly state what that feeling is.


Passage number 612.
MR. AXILROD. I did the same thing, but I haven't changed myview.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 613.
MR. BLACK. Two flexible people and one inflexible one.SPEAKER(.). You people with conscience.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement made by Mr. Black is a general observation about the personalities of three individuals. The response from the speaker does not indicate any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 614.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know whether it's worthwhilecarrying this on any further. I don't detect a strong consensus topublish.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 615.
MR. FORD. I want to call facetiously for a vote, so I couldbe recorded as voting with Nancy on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Ford expressing a desire to vote in a certain way for humorous or rhetorical purposes.


Passage number 616.
MR. RICE. I would like to propose facetiously that we put itout for comment.SPEAKER(.). For a year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting a proposal in a facetious manner, but there is no disagreement or argument present.


Passage number 617.
MR. WALLICH. It's very desirable to discuss this. Maybe weshould take it up again at a future time when things are not quite sotense. I think we are doing something that we shouldn't be doing ifthere weren't strong reasons. We owe the public. That is the keymore than the leak issue is the key. But I think the reasons againstit are persuasive at this time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 618.
-68-11/16/82MS. TEETERS. Henry, may I say that, given the center stagethat monetary policy has moved into in the past 15 years, I doubt thatwe will ever find the time when pressures are not on us again--when wewill be operating in a relatively quiet back-water sort of way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing doubt about a future scenario, but there is no argument or conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 619.
MR. RICE. I was just going to ask if the Bundesbank does nothold a news conference after each meeting in which the result was somechange in policy. If they change policy, they have a news conferenceimmediately after the meeting. Is that not true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking a question for clarification about the Bundesbank's practice of holding a news conference after each meeting where there is a change in policy.


Passage number 620.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. I feel as if I'm an expert on this,having consulted with my counterpart on this precise point. I'm notsure I know every detail. They do often have a news conference. Buttypically they are announcing a Lombard rate change or a discount ratechange or something like that. Of course, we announce that, too, ifwe make a change. That is the typical reason for their having a newsconference. If I remember correctly, they don't always have one evenfor those purposes. They specifically do not discuss open marketoperations, or their equivalent of open market operations, except in arare instance, which is the issue here. That is what I asked themabout. In fact, it has never occurred to them, according to him, tomake a public announcement--except on the rare occasion when they wantto--that they are going to provide more of less liquidity to thebanking system. Sometimes they do that, but they don't do it as amatter of course.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is providing information and explaining the practices of a particular entity or organization.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 621.
MR. BOEHNE. I was going to add on to Henry's statement. Ithink the reasons are convincing to a lot of people around the tablefor not releasing it. I suspect that we would have a hard timeconvincing outsiders of the validity of those reasons. I think we alldid hide behind the ideal that somehow [the release of the directive]would help rich people and give succor to the speculators, and I thinkthat served the purpose for us. If we stood up in public and tried togive a convincing speech on why we ought to do it [the way we do], Ithink it would be difficult. That doesn't mean that I'm notsympathetic to not releasing it; I'm saying that if we tried toconvince somebody from the outside, it would be pretty much an up-hillproposition.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Boehne believes that the reasons for not releasing the directive are convincing to those present at the table, but he doubts that they would be able to convince outsiders of the validity of those reasons. He suggests that the group may have hidden behind the idea that releasing the directive would benefit rich people and speculators, but acknowledges that publicly defending their decision would be difficult. This indicates disagreement or uncertainty among the group about whether the reasons for withholding the directive would be persuasive to others.


Passage number 622.
MR. WALLICH. The not helping speculators is a better publicposture. It is a less good argument.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement by Mr. Wallich suggesting that not helping speculators is a better public posture and a less persuasive argument.


Passage number 623.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is correct. Look, this memorandum,Mr. Altmann is reminding me, has no indication of confidentiality. Iwouldn't like to see it spread around simply because the argumentsthat seem to us persuasive may seem, precisely for your reasons, lesspersuasive to others.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses the lack of indication of confidentiality in a memorandum and expresses a concern about the persuasiveness of arguments to others.


Passage number 624.
MR. FORD. That says a lot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Ford.


Passage number 625.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I think it simply says that ourinterests may not entirely coincide with theirs. I would even go so-69-11/16/82far as to say that we presumably have the public interest closer atheart than all those people who have reasons for wanting to see adifferent answer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their belief that their own interests align more closely with the public interest than with those who have different reasons for wanting a different answer.


Passage number 626.
MR. BOEHNE. It says that central bankers have a wisdom thatexceeds those of the more normal few.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states that central bankers have a wisdom that exceeds those of the more normal few. It is a statement rather than a point of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 627.
MR. CORRIGAN. Is there any question of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker is asking whether there is any doubt or uncertainty about a certain issue.


Passage number 628.
MR. BOEHNE. No, not at all. I said it as a statement offact.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker states that there is no contention or disagreement.


