Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeOctober 4, 1983A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, October 4, 1983, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker,Mr. Solomon,Mr. GramleyMr. GuffeyMr. KeehnMr. MartinMr. MorrisMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. RobertsMrs. TeetersMr. WallichChairmanVice ChairmanMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, Corrigan, and Mrs. Horn, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Balles and Black, Presidents of the Federal ReserveBanks of San Francisco and Richmond, respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff Director and SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Oltman, Deputy General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Balbach, R. Davis, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, Prell,Scheld, Siegman,l/ and Zeisel, Associate EconomistsMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market Account1/ Entered the meeting after the action to approve the minutes of theAugust 23, 1983, meeting.10/4/83Mr. Coyne,l/ Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Kohn, Deputy Staff Director, Office of StaffDirector for Monetary and Financial Policy,Board of GovernorsMr. Lindsey, Associate Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Senior Associate Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMr. Forrestal, First Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of AtlantaMessrs. J. Davis, Keran, Koch, Mullineaux, and Stern,Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks ofCleveland, San Francisco, Atlanta, Philadelphia,and Minneapolis, respectivelyMr. Broaddus, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank ofRichmondMr. Pearce, Assistant Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of DallasMs. Lovett, Manager, Securities Department, Federal ReserveBank of New York1/ Entered the meeting after the action to ratify transactions in the SystemOpen Market Account.-2-Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofOctober 4, 1983[Secretary's note: The meeting began with the approval ofthe minutes of the previous meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply lists the attendees of a meeting.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 2.
]MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage doesn't provide any details or context for the statement, so it is unclear what the disagreement or contention might be about.


Passage number 3.
]MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.][Secretary's note: The Committee ratified the transactionsof the Desk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 4.
]MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It appears to be a statement by Mr. Kichline, without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments expressed.


Passage number 5.
]MR. BOEHNE. I wish I had a story that was different, justfor the sake of excitement, but I really don't. It seems to me thatJim has pretty well captured what is going on. We find that in ourDistrict things generally are improving. Even an area like Johnstown,Pennsylvania, which does not qualify as a garden spot, seems to befeeling pretty good. The unemployment rate has dropped from 25 to 20percent, so they think the recession is indeed over. Single-familyconstruction, however, is an exception. Philadelphia has either beenhit earlier or some special factors are going on there; there has beena really major drop in the last 30 days in housing construction. Someof it probably reflects the running out of the pent up demand thatexisted. But I think the mortgage interest rate is in an area wherethere is a great deal of sensitivity toward new mortgage activity.This weakness is largely in single-family construction, however, andis not in the multifamily area; that seems to be holding up.Just one point on business fixed investment: Normally inthis part of the recovery, one would expect to see a bigger pickup insteel activity. While there has been some, it's not as much as onewould expect. One of the reasons--at least an explanation that thesteel people give--is that with business fixed investment beinglargely concentrated in equipment, particularly office equipment, thatjust doesn't have the same steel content as other parts of thatcategory traditionally have had and, therefore, there hasn't been theincrease in steel orders. On inventories, for businessmen to say thatthey are building inventories I find is almost like saying they arefor inefficiency because they have been trained so much to cutinventories. But I do detect an increase in inventories as theconfidence level has increased. On the price side, we are picking upindications and stories of some price pressures in industries such aschemicals and paper and apparel. But the pressures seem to be veryspotty and bottlenecks seem to be very localized. One story I heardabout in the aluminum business is that, with the tandem trailers nowbeing legal, aluminum production has increased and there is a shortagein what are called aluminum logs that [are used to construct] thesides of those tandems because of the increase in demand. So, thereare some localized price pressures, but I certainly can see nothingin my area that would be of a generalized nature.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply providing information and observations about different areas and industries.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 6.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think there is muchdifference of opinion in the financial community about the currentsituation and the near-term prospects for economic growth. What Ifound interesting, though, was a private discussion I had the other10/4/83day with on the one hand and one I had with and[unintelligible]. The views varied sharply. and[unintelligible] believed that capital spending would continue in 1984along typical recovery [trends]; therefore, [for that reason], alongwith other factors, they concluded that interest rates will rise atleast 100 to 150 basis points over the next year. sees noevidence that capital spending will be that strong and he doesn'tbelieve that the inventory replenishment will continue beyond thespring. He says he doesn't believe it is going to return to astatistically normal ratio because he thinks it is ridiculously lownow and can't reflect completely the reality. And unless he is wrongabout inventory replacement, he believes that the recovery will peterout sometime toward the end of the first half of next year. I wouldsay that the view is probably a minority view in thefinancial community. There would be more people reflecting the formerview. And then there is a monetarist view, reflected by an Englishmanwith whom I had a conversation,He's saying that inflation in this country by the fourthquarter of next year will be between 8 and 10 percent and that theinflation rate in Germany also will be very high, based on hisapproach to analysis. So, in some ways, the question of 1984prospects and the so-called crowding out effect of the budget deficitis much more interesting than the current situation. But I don't haveany real difference of view from that which Jim expressed with regardto the current situation. I would add one comment on the currentsituation, which is that aside from the distorting effect of high realinterest rates on different sectors in the economy, there is also thedistorting effect of the exchange rate, which is making thecomposition of what look like normal overall figures somewhatdifferent than we've had before, with certain sectors still being verybadly impacted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that there are varied views among different individuals in the financial community about the current situation and prospects for economic growth. One person believes that capital spending will continue and interest rates will rise, while another person believes that capital spending will not be strong and the recovery will peter out. Additionally, the speaker mentions a monetarist view from an Englishman who predicts high inflation rates in both the US and Germany. Therefore, there is disagreement among these individuals about the future prospects and the effects of the budget deficit.


Passage number 7.
MS. HORN. We in Cleveland agree for the most part with thestaff's forecast. To the extent we see risks in it, we see the riskson the down side--that is, growth not coming through in '84 asstrongly as forecast for a variety of reasons. One reason, of course,is the outlook for investment--capital goods and heavy industry--whichis exacerbated by the budget. I just have a couple of comments tomake on that industry. I'm really focusing now on the components ofthat industry that we have in the Fourth District--steel, machinetools, heavy trucks, and mining related to metal production. Therehas been some turnaround but it has been modest. And I think thecontinued slowness in those industries is leading the managers to cometo some pretty hard decisions. Some are coming to the decision thatrecovery won't answer their problem--that their problem is deeper thanwill be dealt with by economic recovery. Those who haven't quite cometo that point yet at least feel that the recovery might be too slow tobe very helpful to them or that perhaps they are going to be crowdedout in this case. I think that's bringing them to some short-termsolutions; I don't think we see the examples yet of the long-termsolutions such as trying to get competitive in world markets and soforth. I suppose the worst of the short-term solutions, which we haveseen for some time, is a call for protectionism. But there are otherkinds of solutions as well. I suppose my remarks are inspired todayin part by the LTV steel situation--the merger between J&L andRepublic--which does seek to deal with problems in the short run byreducing capacity and by dealing with the overhead problem. Now, inthe long run maybe they aren't going to deal with labor contracts and10/4/83maybe they aren't going to deal with capital investment and a numberof the other tougher problems. I'm not sure what kind of financialstrength they're going to end up with after this merger, but I thinkit is at least one indication of an attempt that is going in the rightdirection toward finding short-run solutions to problems. We seeother less dramatic examples in the Fourth Federal Reserve District,too, of attempts to get their hands around the short-term problems--inmachine tools, for example. I just thought I would bring up thosecomments relative to capital goods and the outlook for heavy industrytoday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the potential risks and challenges in the outlook for investment and heavy industry in the Fourth District.


Passage number 8.
MR. MARTIN. Is concessionary [wage] bargaining a part of theso-called short-run solution. You didn't mention it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 9.
MS. HORN. I didn't mention it, and it certainly has beenhappening over a period of time in the Fourth Federal ReserveDistrict. I guess it's a mixed bag. There are some real concessions;some of the heavy companies, for example, have gotten escalatorclauses out of their [labor] contracts. But there is the problem thatthe union people who come to vote in the elections are the people whostill have the jobs and they can have a short-run attitude. We find,for example, that the Chrysler contract that recently was voted for 2to 1 across the country was voted 1 to 2 in the Fourth District theother way. So, I think it's a very mixed bag in terms of the laborconcessions. I don't read it as really being [in one] direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents observations and describes a mixed situation in the Fourth Federal Reserve District regarding labor concessions.


Passage number 10.
MR. RICE. In announcing the LTV merger did they say theyintended to reduce capacity in the industry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a statement made by MR. RICE regarding the LTV merger and does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 11.
MS. HORN. Yes. Well, [I'm not sure if] there was a publicstatement by the company or not. They certainly have been very clearin discussions that they are going to cut heavily into the capacity,particularly at Republic Steel but at J&L as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement. However, the phrase "I'm not sure if" suggests a degree of uncertainty from MS. HORN. Overall, the passage seems to state facts without any notable disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 12.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Two-thirds of the Chrysler workers in Ohiovoted against the 12 percent [wage] increase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The sentence states that two-thirds of the Chrysler workers in Ohio voted against the 12 percent wage increase, indicating that they do not agree with or support the proposed increase.


Passage number 13.
MR. PARTEE. What, they wanted more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 14.
MS. HORN. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not contain any statements or indications of disagreement or contention. It is a simple affirmation or acknowledgement of something that is correct.


Passage number 15.
MR. PARTEE. I didn't figure they wanted less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their understanding of a situation without any opposition or argument.


Passage number 16.
 [Laughter]MR. GRAMLEY. But looking at the wage picture generally, theastonishing thing is the extent to which we're still getting give-backs and freezes. The Board staff's latest memorandum on wageconcessions says that concession bargaining was extensive again in thethird quarter; at least 150,000 workers agreed to wage freezes or paycuts just in that quarter. And the latest wage concessions bring thecumulative number of workers who have acceded to give-backs so farthis year to around a million compared with two million in 1982. Ithink we still are getting indications of very, very substantialmoderation in wage rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is presenting information about wage concessions without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 17.
MR. PARTEE. And the aggregate wage figures are not goinganywhere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage just provides a statement without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 18.
10/4/83MR. GRAMLEY. That's right. Wage rate figures for the thirdquarter confirm what is going on in the union sector.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that the wage rate figures for the third quarter confirm a certain trend in the union sector.


Passage number 19.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you can look at that somewhatdifferently. There isn't any question that they are still gettingconcessions, but what is holding up the average. What are theygetting in areas where there aren't concessions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement made by one person discussing a topic from different perspectives.


Passage number 20.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I'm not sure the average is holding up.We don't have an employment cost index for the third quarter and theaverage hourly earning figures are a little difficult to read nowbecause the latest employment situation report has a big strike figurein it. I don't know what the August numbers will look like once thestrike effects are taken out, but indications for the third quarter sofar are for a slower rise in average hourly earnings this quarter thanin the previous one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the uncertainty and difficulty in interpreting the latest employment data.


Passage number 21.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But isn't it still close to 7 percentfor the country as a whole.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states a fact or observation and does not indicate any conflicting opinions or views.


Passage number 22.
MR. GRAMLEY. Hours. For the wages it's more like 4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a straightforward response without any conflicting perspectives.


Passage number 23.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's 4 percent but a lot of industries,such as the utilities industry, [are higher]. I'm just looking atsome figures here that somebody gave me on collective bargainingagreements and they are all more than 6 percent; many of them are 8percent. That's down 1 or 2 percentage points from the peak levels inan industry that isn't under exceptional pressure. They can alwayspass it on to the customer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating some figures and observations about the percentage levels in different industries.


Passage number 24.
MR. GRAMLEY. We're going to get that in industries where the[competitive] pressures are not there. But they are surely beingcounterbalanced.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any form of disagreement or contention. It simply talks about the balancing effect of competitive pressures in industries.


Passage number 25.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you remember what happens when thesepressures go away. The next report could have an expansion. Wagescould settle down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a hypothetical situation.


Passage number 26.
MR. BOEHNE. There are more industries where that restraintis not present than where it is. Just look across the board. In theheavily unionized heavy industry types of companies you find that.You don't find it much in the financial sector; you don't find it inthe service sector generally.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states that there is no disagreement or contention. It simply presents a statement about the absence of restraint in certain industries compared to others, specifically mentioning the financial sector and the service sector.


Passage number 27.
MR. WALLICH. I think there is an enormous catch-up demand inall these areas where concessions have been made. It's natural thatthey regard that as a temporary calamity and will try to catch upagain. Chrysler showed that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, is expressing his opinion that there is a strong demand in areas where concessions have been made and that the companies will try to catch up again. The mention of Chrysler is likely used as an example to support this idea.


Passage number 28.
MR. MARTIN. There is an institutional element in this toothat is coming up, particularly next year, and that is the turnover inunion leadership. In more and more cases the senior captains of thoseunions are retiring and new faces are appearing. And there's going tobe a certain amount of motivation among those folks to make the recordshow that those old boys, and old women in some cases, had gottentired. I think that's a factor that we have to watch in 1984.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the turnover in union leadership and the potential motivation of new leaders to make a strong showing.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 29.
-4-10/4/83MR, FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, we don't have any esoterictales either to report from the Sixth District. We would generallyagree with Jim Kichline's estimate. I think the Southeast pretty muchmirrors what is going on in the rest of the country. The economycontinues to expand, although there are a few sectors that are showingsome signs of slowing. Consumer spending remains pretty strong,although the drought and the unseasonably hot weather affected notonly farm prices but consumer spending as well because there were notthe usual back-to-school purchases. Industrial employment iscontinuing to rise. We're looking at some reversals, particularly inthe forest industry. [That experienced by] Georgia Pacific, whichrecently moved to Atlanta, is very much apparent to us in thatparticular industry. Higher mortgage rates have reduced sales of newhomes from the levels that were attained earlier this summer. Itseems to me that 13-1/2 to 14 percent rates are about the choke pointfor most people for new homes as well as existing homes.In the financial sector we've had pretty good deposit andloan growth, although it has been weaker than in June. It's going tobe interesting to see what the results of the deregulation move onOctober 1 will be. I believe that somewhere in the Bluebook orGreenbook there was an indication from the staff that there was notgoing to be as much hype in advertising for these new instruments asthere was before. We don't expect it to be very extensive in Atlantaor in the Southeast, but we do think that it's going to take off tosome extent--that there is going to be more advertising and moreattempts to draw funds through these instruments into the banks andthe S&Ls. Tourism is showing some signs of ebbing particularly incentral Florida, and in the Miami area the tourist industry is adisaster. They are doing very badly and that's true not only in MiamiBeach and Miami but in Dade County generally.If we had some concerns to express--where we would differfrom the staff estimate--it would be on the up side. We think thatperhaps there has been some underestimation of the strength of theeconomy. That is certainly true in our area; we get people talkingabout this quite a lot in our section of the country. After all,throughout this third-quarter period we did have some strikes, such asthe AT&T strike, which I think had an effect on the economy. We hadthe hurricane in some parts of the country. I think we have to takethat into account. So, we would be a little concerned that the third-quarter number is perhaps on the low side and might be revised upward.There is considerable concern in our District, as I'm sure there is inother Districts, about the [federal budget] deficit, and there's agreat deal of concern in the export-related industries about thestrength of the dollar. Interestingly, inflation in two of our majorcities, Atlanta and Miami, is running about 1.3 to 1.4 percentagepoint above the national average, so that's a concern. Because ofalready existing inflation in those cities and the threat of increasedfood prices as a result of the drought, we see some pressure onprices.One other thing I might mention is related to industrialproduction and capital expansion. Some of the contacts we've had withindustrial development agencies around the District indicate to usthat a lot of the capital expansion is being designed to improveexisting productivity rather than to meet additional product demand.And finally, Mr. Chairman, there is a good deal of concern in Atlanta10/4/83and Miami about the Eastern [Airlines] situation. Governor Martin'sremark about concessionary bargaining certainly bears on this. Thisis a good example of the union leaders not being supported by theirown people. I'm not sure they're in the old man/old lady category butthe flight attendants, for example, are now coming forward andindicating that perhaps they would rather have wage concessions thanhave Eastern go under. In other words, they are tending to believemanagement rather than their own union.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses concern that the staff estimate of the strength of the economy may be underestimated and suggests that the third-quarter number may be revised upward. This contradicts the staff's assessment. Additionally, there is concern about the federal deficit and the strength of the dollar, which implies disagreement with current policies.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 30.
MR. PARTEE. I thought the indication was that that was non-union people.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "I thought the indication was that that was non-union people" suggests that there is a difference of opinion or conflicting information about whether the people mentioned are part of a union or not.


Passage number 31.
MR, FORRESTAL. No, the flight attendants are unionized. Andthey have been mounting a petition in both those cities, Atlanta andMiami, to accept some form of wage concession. They are saying FrankBowman ought to be believed that the losses are going to be extensive,and it's better to have a 15 percent pay cut than no job. Where thepilots and the others in that company are, I'm not sure. Obviously,the effect of anything happening to Eastern would be devastating inour part of the country because Eastern and Delta account for about 90percent of all traffic out of Atlanta's airport. So, we're watchingthat situation pretty carefully.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker shares information and observations without expressing any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 32.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: You have not provided a passage for me to analyze. Please provide the passage so that I can determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 33.
MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I've been looking for somesigns of crowding out in the staff projections; I don't see anythrough 1984. Presumably, if nothing is done on the budget deficit,we will reach a point where the total demand for credit is going torequire some reduction in housing, but apparently that is not going totake place in 1984. I assume it's because the corporate financinggap, which is projected to be negative this year, is very small nextyear. Have you attempted to calculate when this day of reckoning isgoing to be if it's not in 1984.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is simply expressing his observations and assumptions about the lack of crowding out in the staff projections.


Passage number 34.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me interject a question or a comment.I don't understand this "either/or" crowding out theory. It seems tome that interest rates are relatively high and that the deficit isrelatively high and there's already crowding out in some sense[unintelligible] more investment and more housing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing confusion and seeking clarification about the "either/or" crowding out theory. They then present their understanding that the interest rates and deficit are both high, suggesting that there may already be some form of crowding out happening.


Passage number 35.
MR. MORRIS. Well, what I meant is the level of crowding outthat would require a substantial reduction in housing from the currentlevel.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Morris about the level of crowding out and its potential impact on housing.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 36.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Their projection shows a reduction inhousing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The word "reduction" suggests that there will be a decrease or decline in housing. It indicates a disagreement with the idea of an increase or growth in housing.


Passage number 37.
MR. MORRIS. They show 1.8 million starts in the last quarterof '84.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a number of starts in the last quarter of '84.


Passage number 38.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, we don't have a good answer to yourquestion. I would say that, from our point of view, interest ratesare significantly higher now than they would be in the absence of a$200 billion average deficit on the part of the government. So, inthat sense, clearly there is some degree of crowding out. You'requite correct in noting that what holds this forecast together in notseeing really bad things materializing early on in 1984 is a very10/4/83strong business picture. That is, internal funds generation in theforecast is very strong; profits growth is very high. And investment,while growing, simply doesn't match what we're seeing on the businessside. So, the combination really of the foreign sector--foreigninflows--plus business savings has been able to offset what would bemore apparent crowding-out effects. You're right that in the forecastwe don't see at this point a collapse in housing. [Housing demand]clearly is not growing much and it's lower than one might haveexpected otherwise. Consumer borrowing, I might note, is very strongin this forecast. Looking at this now, one of the problems, it seemsto me, is that while we have reduced business borrowing--the negativefinancing gap--we have very strong consumer spending and consumerborrowing in this forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing an explanation and analysis of the current situation without contradicting or challenging any previous statements.


Passage number 39.
MR. BOEHNE. Isn't part of the answer that when we thinkabout crowding out we have a mind set that goes back to the days ofRegulation Q. And now, with interest rates largely deregulated, thereisn't an abrupt point where funds just simply aren't available; it's amore gradual situation. I don't think we're going to see a fellowjump out of a box and say: I'm Mr. Crowding Out. It seems to me it'sgoing to be much more gradual. Interest rates will be higher thanthey otherwise would be and there will be distortions in the mix ofGNP; I think we have some of that right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It is a statement made by Mr. Boehne expressing his perspective on the gradual nature of crowding out in relation to interest rates and the mix of GNP.


Passage number 40.
MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to add to what Ed justsaid. I think there are some signs on the horizon already of thiscrowding out. It's true that housing starts nationally continued togo up in August, but in the state of Oregon, for example, there was noincreased production of lumber even in the face of that. Sales weremade out of fairly high levels of inventory at the plant level and atthe retail level, and that's because they expect the corner to beturned in the near future. They look at such things as what is goingon in the sales of new single-family homes, and in that area therewere declines two months in a row--in July and August. The lumberindustry feels that that becomes a harbinger of what is going tohappen in the near future to housing starts. Once a housing start isunder way, of course, [the builder] has to complete that house. So,even though the demand may be weakening in terms of ultimatepurchases, housing starts continue to look solid for a while. But Ithink this indication that sales of new single-family homes arealready starting to decline, down two months in a row, is a concretesign that the squeeze is being put on that industry by high interestrates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing additional information and supporting evidence to support the argument that there are signs of crowding out in the housing market.


Passage number 41.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What has happened to lumber prices in thelast few weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple question asking about the change in lumber prices.


Passage number 42.
MR. KICHLINE. They've been coming down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact without any conflicting opinions or contradictory information.


Passage number 43.
MR. MORRIS. The answer is that they haven't looked into '85far enough. Pretty clearly, the problem is going to come when thecorporate financing gap starts to grow, and that means a counter-balancing decline in housing to permit that financing to take place.And the question is: When does that process start.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Morris explaining his point of view on a particular issue.


Passage number 44.
MR. RICE. Also, partly in support of Frank, over the nextyear we're projecting a slight decline in long-term interest rates.That would argue against any buildup of crowding out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Rice is providing additional information in support of Frank's argument.


Passage number 45.
10/4/83VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Are you speaking of long-term--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not contain any statements or indications of contention or disagreement. It is simply a date followed by a question.


Passage number 46.
MR. RICE. We're projecting a decline in long-term interestrates of about 1/2 percentage point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Rice without any opposing views or contradictory information.


Passage number 47.
MR. PARTEE. We vary quite a bit from Wojnilower and Kaufman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that their perspective differs from that of Wojnilower and Kaufman without expressing any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 48.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Let me ask whether the staff has gonethrough a hypothetical scenario that I tried to go through, veryinconclusively. That is, next year we're probably going to be runninga trade deficit of about $110 billion and a current account deficit of$70 or $80 billion. What happens if, notwithstanding the high levelof interest rates, expectations regarding exchange rates changeradically and we see the exchange rate falling substantially. Thathas implications of a reversal--a major reduction or a completecessation--of net capital inflows. Now, what's the effect on interestrates. As we analyze it, there probably would be some upwardmovement, but there would be an improved differential in the dollarmarket against the Eurodollar market and there would be reflows fromthe Eurodollar market brought in by the banks. The composition of thecapital movements would change substantially. The interest rateeffect probably would be not too significant here at home and/or wewould have a dramatic change in the exchange rate. But I want to besure of this kind of analysis. If anybody on the staff wants tocomment on what they think the impact, if any, would be from this ondomestic interest rates, I'd be interested in hearing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for input and analysis from the staff regarding the potential impact on domestic interest rates from a change in exchange rates.


Passage number 49.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, you might want to separate the questionabout what will happen as a natural course of events as distinguishedfrom what might happen. I was, in fact, sitting here asking myself aslightly different question: What if the dollar declines more rapidlythan we now anticipate in the forecast. That would tend to have anexpansionary effect on the economy just because aggregate demand goesup. Once you get the impact of that larger decline on the currentaccount, you are going to get an increase in aggregate demand in theeconomy. And through that mechanism alone, leaving aside the directeffect on prices, you're going to have some inflationary push. Youmight argue from that standpoint that there would be an inducedincrease in the average level of interest rates coming from the higherlevel of nominal income. Now, there is always the timing problem:The dollar initially falls and there's not going to be any change inthe short run in the current account. So, whatever the net capitalinflow is going to be, for a period the lags that most economiststhink are there will continue to be there. It might have somecompositional effects. Whether it would take the form of flowsthrough banks or inflows through the flow of funds, I'm not quitesure. Whether the intervention and purchase of government securitiesin itself through different channels will affect the general level ofinterest rates is a more difficult question to answer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing a hypothetical scenario and considering the potential effects of a faster decline in the value of the dollar on the economy. They acknowledge the timing problem and express uncertainty about the specific mechanisms through which these effects would occur.


Passage number 50.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Can you see any clear effects on themonetary aggregates resulting from the changes in the composition ofthe flows.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply asking the reader if they can observe any clear effects on the monetary aggregates based on changes in the composition of the flows.


Passage number 51.
MR. TRUMAN. Whenever we're asked the question from Congresswe tend to say no. I guess what you're saying is that there is atendency for some magnitudes to rise more rapidly than others. Mostof the research would suggest, at least for the United States, that10/4/83the exchange rate is not an argument in the demand for money equation,so you have trouble getting it into there. Now, whether you get aneffect from the nature of the flow, I think Mr. Axilrod might say thatit would tend to be washed out by the operations of the Desk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing different perspectives and research findings on the relationship between exchange rates and the demand for money.


Passage number 52.
MR. AXILROD. The only thing I would add is that to thedegree foreign private investors are less anxious to be in dollars andtheir dollar holdings that are in the money supply, like overnightEurodollars, are replaced by foreign government purchases of U.S.Treasury securities--if that's the form of the capital inflow--then,of course, we get minor effects on M2 and M3. But they would berelatively minor, I would think. And they might be replaced by banksgetting that money from domestic [sources].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply adding information and providing their opinion on the potential effects of foreign government purchases of U.S. Treasury securities.


Passage number 53.
MR. PARTEE. But again, Steve, I want to emphasize Ted'spoint about nominal income. I think there could be a very markedeffect on nominal income mostly through higher prices, and interestrates could move quite a bit if we have a 30 percent drop, say, in thevalue of the dollar. I think it is a hazard, but it's more indirectthan it is verifiable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 54.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 55.
MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, in the Eleventh District we areseeing the economy very much the way Jim outlined it. If there is asurprise, it is that [economic activity is] coming back a littlestronger and probably a little faster than we had originallyanticipated. In housing, of course, single-family housing is verystrong, particularly in the Dallas/Fort Worth area and that's expectedto continue; in multifamily housing, we're probably getting into adangerously overbuilt situation. Our consumer sales are running alongpretty well. In energy there seems to be a turnaround. In Texas, wehad a 22 percent increase in rig count last month and in New Mexico a20 percent increase. Of course, that was from very, very low levels;but there is activity in the oil patch again. In terms of [drilling]permits, in July we had about 2500 permits in Texas and in August wehad 10,000. We attribute that to the fact that starting September 1there was a $100 permit fee to drill a well versus $25, and apparentlythe people who drill oil wells worry about $75. I'd find it a bitsurprising if that would really account for that large an increase.In agriculture, of course, the drought has been mentioned. It's amixed situation; on balance in agriculture we still might have afairly good year down our way. I guess it depends on whether you'reeast of the Pecos or west of the Pecos. Those west of the Pecos,particularly the cattlemen, are having some very, very severedifficulties. I was talking toand he told me he was taking a thousand head of cattle to market thisweek because he just didn't feel he could afford to feed them. Hesaid he expected to get about $300 a head and what really upsets himis that when he goes back to restock next year he figures he will bepaying $600 a head. I sympathize with him, but then he has 2,000 headeast of the Pecos that he thinks he can try to get through the winter.As they say down there in the South: Some people lose a thousand headand the big boys really get hurt. So, we'll see how that turns out.In talking of the crowding out and whether we are lookingpast 1984 to 1985, I have a couple of comments I picked up last week:The conversation among home builders, particularly in Texas, is that10/4/83they are going to be doing all they can for the rest of this yearbecause 1985 is going to be a disaster in home building. That's thetype of terminology they were using. Then, I was talking to thepresident of an electronics firm and he said [business] this year isbetter than anticipated. Their plans call for a very good 1984, butthey don't know how to plan for 1985. They are very, very concerned.So, the overall sentiment seems to be that things are going alongwell, the economy is coming back, and this will continue through 1984.But the very real question mark seems to be what 1985 is going to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is primarily giving their observations and opinions on the state of the economy in their district.


Passage number 56.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information or statements that suggest contention or disagreement. It simply provides the name "Mr. Keehn."


Passage number 57.
MR. KEEHN. I want to add that I think a recurring theme oncapital goods--certainly in the fundamental heavy capital goodsindustry--in the Middle West is that the situation seems to be veryslow. I think the decline is beginning to level out somewhat but at avery, very low level. At this point, there is no discernibleimprovement. Some of the people who are directly involved in thesecompanies are beginning to think the recovery may pass them byaltogether. As people see increasing comments about a recession in'85 and '86, I think there is some concern that they won't actuallyexperience a pickup in the heavy capital goods side. As aconsequence, they are beginning to focus on interest rates. NancyTeeters was in Milwaukee a week or so ago and we heard a lot aboutinterest rates there. I think they really do feel that if we can getrates down, we could sustain a recovery that would bring someimprovement on the capital goods side. But that continues to be veryslow to move up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 58.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're not suggesting that we call that"crowding out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 59.
"MR. KEEHN. Not quite yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 60.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 61.
MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, in terms of the economicsituation and the commentary that one picks up, at least as you moveaway from Wall Street and Constitution Avenue, the thing that hasstruck me most of all in the past month or two is the extent to whichthe overall international situation has crept into Main Street. Someof that grows out of the LDC debt problem situation and the IMFlegislation. It's truly incredible to me how much attention thesubject of the IMF legislation gets in places where I would not haveexpected it. It's quite astonishing. But I think beneath it whatperhaps is really going on is the extent to which our trade account,our exports and imports both, really is having a perceptible impact onpeople in ways that are quite new to them. At our last meeting one ofour directors told a story that I think in some way captures thisbest.It was quite obvious as he was talking that they have hadan informal policy to buy American for a long time. I think he saidthat they historically have bought everything by way of equipment thatthey use from an outfit down in your District. They had to replace asingle piece of machinery that he described as a $900,000 piece ofequipment. They put it out for bid and got the bid back from theircustomary supplier for $900,000. But they got a bid from a Germanfirm for $500,000. Obviously, the difference between $500,000 and-10-10/4/83$900,000 had crossed the threshold point where this outfit could livewith their informal buy American policy. If I am reading the tealeaves right, I don't think that situation, while it's obviously justone anecdotal case in point, is unrepresentative of what is going on.Indeed, when you talk about the capital goods industry in the fourthquarter in the Seventh District, I just wonder to what extent thisphenomenon at the margin may be making a very, very big difference interms of what they are seeing versus what they might normally expectto see. And certainly this is also true in the agricultural sector,both in terms of exports of agricultural goods and in terms of importsof agricultural machinery; it's hitting on both sides. I don't knowwhat it means but Karen Horn mentioned it: I do think that it beginsto get the smell of a very perceptible but creeping element ofprotectionism that is now out there in a way that I have not seen it.I don't know what it means beyond that, but it is something clearlydifferent in terms of attitudes and commentary about the economy andthe financial system.On inflation and concessions and all that, I am inclined tothe view, at least for the moment, that bankruptcies even when they'requite removed from a particular situation--whether they're in theairline industry or piano manufacturers who have decided to get intothe financial business--are still having an effect on wage behaviorthat's fairly pervasive. But I am not at all sanguine that the wagesituation couldn't turn around very quickly in the context of thesesubstantial cash flows and profits that are being generated by thebusiness sector in general. On agricultural prices, the fellows inour Bank who look at that agree with Mr. Kichline that we're lookingat [increases of] 7 or 8 percent. Some of our directors who areinvolved in the agriculture business are on the low side of that. Thecommentary we get from them rather forcefully suggests that most ofthe official forecasts, including the Agriculture Department's ownforecast, have not adequately taken into account the manner and way inwhich the PIK program is going to free up very substantial quantitiesof inventory that have to go into the marketplace. By and large ourdirectors who are involved in agriculture have a more optimisticoutlook in terms of the inflation in agricultural prices, although insome cases it may be more pessimistic from their own self interestpoint of view. Abstracting from this overall international thing, myown view continues to be that in the near term--and by that I meanout, say, to the middle of 1984 anyway--the risks or dangers orwhatever you want to call them are on the up side. What that reallymeans in the context of Frank Morris' question--I think he wasquestioning when crowding out really will become a problem as opposedto the kind of problem it is now--is that it is probably going to besooner rather than later. And, that's about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is mainly the speaker expressing his observations and opinions.


Passage number 62.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not contain any statement or indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 63.
MR. BLACK. The press has been devoting a great deal ofattention to discussing the possible slowdown occurring in theeconomy. But as we've gone around the table here, I think JimKichline and others have captured this very well with regard to thestraws in the wind, which leads me to think that this a pretty normal,healthy sort of recovery and one that still doesn't need an undue[effort] on our part to prop it up. It looks as if the recovery ismoving into a more mature stage now, and even abstracting from theshortage in automobile inventories and the elimination of some of the-11-10/4/83sales rebates, I think consumer spending has slowed some and housinghas clearly slowed a great deal and probably will slow more. But nowwe are moving into the stage where I would think that inventoryrebuilding and some expansion in capital expenditures would begin toassume part of that role. Really, the only weak thing of anysignificance that I see in the economy is the export sector. Eventhat looks a little better in that we have more signs of a pickupabroad now than we had maybe a month or so ago. I think we are inpretty good shape. I do agree with Jerry that there is a growth inprotectionism in places we never expected to see, and I share his fearthat these wage pressures are going to mount before we expect them to,although they do look darn good at the present time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Black, expresses his view that the economy is in a normal and healthy recovery phase, with some slowdown in consumer spending and housing, but potential growth in inventory rebuilding and capital expenditures. Although he acknowledges concerns about the export sector and potential wage pressures in the future, he overall believes that the economy is in good shape.


Passage number 64.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roberts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 65.
MR. ROBERTS. I don't want to repeat what has been said. I'dlike to associate our District viewpoint with the staff view except tosay that we think the '84 prospects are probably for a little lessreal growth and a little more price pressure. I have a couple ofcomments from our District that might be of interest to you: Autoproduction is going up very well. Chrysler has added [unintelligible]employees in the last two weeks. Chrysler, Ford, and General Motorsare all in the expansion phase of their production in the District.They seem to be very optimistic about future sales potential,particularly for large cars, which is where they have shortages thatare affecting their sales at the moment. GM has put an enormousamount of money into a new plant in Wentzville, west of St. Louis, andhas yet to produce a car. These are front wheel drive cars and GM ishaving some difficulty with their quality but they are expected tocome on line soon. head of a majorindependent oil company that he'sreasonably sanguine about the outlook for energy prices, even in theface of a probable disruption of supplies from the Middle East,because of the large amount of indicated shut-in production. He saidthat for the first time there's enough shut-in production outside theGulf states to offset essentially anything that could happen in theway of reduced supplies from [the Middle East].I had the principal homebuilders in our area in for lunchrecently and they classified themselves as a hardy group of survivors.They certainly were guarded in their optimism and made comments aboutthe distortions in the national figures on home building that reallyshould be related to areas such as Dallas and conceal more difficultmarketing problems in mature areas such as St. Louis. But they thenwent on individually, almost without exception, to speak of theirrecent land purchases and their plans for expanded building over thebalance of this year and next year. They said home prices are upabout 6 to 8 percent from a year ago and that, admittedly, there hadbeen some pressures on them a year ago but not a whole lot. Theydidn't sell much but when they sold something the price hadn't beendown. There is concern about rising materials costs, notwithstandingthe indicated drop in the cost of lumber; several of them mentionedthat the sharply higher cost of lumber was affecting them. Overall,I'd say the expansion continues in our District, but we are getting afew more downs than ups for a while, and the agricultural area remainsseverely depressed from the effects of the drought.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 66.
-12-10/4/83MR. RICE. Could I just ask why you expect increased pressureon prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a question asking for an explanation.


Passage number 67.
MR. ROBERTS. Well, I suppose we are concerned about thebuildup in liquidity in the economy and the lag effect we expect to beassociated with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their concerns about the buildup in liquidity and the lag effect that they expect.


Passage number 68.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Not enough information is provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 69.
MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, there are two things that worryme about the staff forecast. One is that it is so similar to a widevariety of forecasts that exist in the private sector. The staffprovided us with the usual summary of forecasts that they follow--Chase, Wharton, DRI and Merrill Lynch--and it's amazing how closeeverybody is. Real growth next year ranges from 4.2 to 4.7 percent;inflation rates measured by the deflator are somewhat higher than thestaff's forecast but are very uniform at a little over 5 percent;everybody expects the unemployment rate to drop to somewhere around8-1/4 percent by the end of 1984; and interest rates are expected tostay about where they are or maybe go up a little, but certainly notvery much by the standards we've seen in recent years. You know, wheneverybody forecasts the same thing, something is bound to be wrong.There has to be something coming along that we have not foreseen.The second thing that worries me is that the outlook seemsjust too good to be true. And if I could lay out the way I want it orwhat can reasonably be hoped for in terms of a course of economic andfinancial development next year, what I would hope for is a growthrate that slows down to the range of 4 to 5 percent--enough to makefurther progress on unemployment and not so rapid a growth rate togenerate any unusual inflationary pressures. I'd want a combinationof developments that keeps interest rates about where they are orgoing down a little, pushing off any serious crowding out problemuntil 1985 and beyond. I've listened to the comments around the tableas to which way the risks go, and the sentiment tends to be that therisks may be on the up side. I've asked myself [that question] and Iwould assess the risks as fairly well balanced. But I would agreethat the thing we ought to worry about most from the standpoint ofpolicy is not that we will get a weaker economy but that we will get astronger one with more inflation. If we get a weaker economy, myfeeling would be that we have enough pent up demand for housing andfor consumer durable goods that, with a moderate decline in interestrates which certainly would not be unwelcome, we could keep therecovery going. But if we got a considerably stronger recovery andmore inflation and began to get significant pressures in creditmarkets with money growing very rapidly, we would have to resist.Then we would have significant problems. So, really, I hope thingswork just the way the staff forecasts. But what I worry about most isthat the recovery might be stronger with more inflation later on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is a disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, expresses concerns about the staff's forecast being too similar to other private sector forecasts, suggesting that something might be overlooked. He also worries that the outlook is too good to be true and expresses concerns about the potential for a stronger recovery with more inflation later on.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 70.
MS. TEETERS. I want to go back to Frank Morris' questionbecause I think we are beginning to see some evidence of crowding outand I think we see it in interest rates. The table on page 5 of the[Greenbook] supplement shows that the federal funds rate has gone up56 basis points since its recent low in May, and the longer-termTreasury securities--the 3-year, 10-year, and 30-year Treasuries--havegone up 2 to 3 times the change in the short-term rates. Then we seethe decline of 37 basis points in the fed funds rate since the last-13-10/4/83FOMC meeting and almost no decline at all in the rates on longer-termsecurities. So, I think we're seeing the crowding out in terms of theincrease in long-term rates. And those longer-term rates may becrucial to getting the type of recovery that the staff forecasts.That hits housing and it hits capital goods. And it may be thatthat's what will show up as the crowding out. You also remember thatin the July/August refunding the Treasury had quite a bit of troubleselling longer-term issues, and the rates had to go up in order [forthe market] to digest those issues. So, I think we're seeing a newform [of crowding out]--one that hasn't been recognized before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Teeters, argues that there is evidence of crowding out in interest rates, specifically in longer-term Treasury securities. She believes that the increase in long-term rates is evidence of crowding out and suggests that it may have negative impacts on housing and capital goods. However, it is not clear if others agree with her assessment as the passage does not include their responses or opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 71.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The report in theTenth District is not unlike others that have been given around thetable. That is, retail sales have remained fairly vigorous; theagricultural sector is under some pressure although I would note thatin our District it involves only the corn and soybean crops whereaswheat has not been affected since it was harvested before the droughtreally hit. On the other hand, the PIK program has maintainedliquidity within the financial system that finances the agriculturalsector. Perhaps the greatest impact would be on those suppliers tothe agricultural sector--I'm talking about farm machinery and othermanufacturers who are doing no business now and do not expect to intothe next year. Energy, mining, and housing, of course, are very muchas has been described in other Districts.I was interested in Governor Gramley's comments because Iagree that [the forecast] is almost too good to be true. I disagreeonly with his last comment in that I think the risks may be on thedown side instead of the up side. I too would hate to see a lot ofvigor show up in 1984 because it would present the problem that hedescribed. By the same token this forecast seems to me to be largelybased upon two or three assumptions: that consumer spending willremain very vigorous; that capital spending will come on very early in1984; and, lastly, that the dollar will decline and thus improvesomewhat the export market and our balance of trade problem. We haveseen the saving rate return to the 5 percent level; if that were tocontinue or go up to some level closer to historical experience, thenI assume that consumer retail purchases would be muted somewhat.Similarly, fixed investment may not come on. It appears that theremay be a change in the way companies plan their fixed investment.That is, if I understand it correctly, it used to be that we would seefixed capital investment coming on [stream] at a utilization rate inthe area of 80 to 85 percent. It seems to me that [businessexecutives] are much more cautious now, having come out of a three-year recessionary experience, and are not going to be as quick to makethose capital commitments. Lastly, as to the dollar, the staff--and Ithink everybody--has been expecting a dollar decline over the lastyear, and it really hasn't happened. I just note that part of theforecast is based upon agricultural export levels that our peoplejudge will not be achieved either in 1983 or 1984. They are lookingat an annual export level of about $36-$37 billion in 1983 and I thinkthe USDA just announced a figure of roughly $34-1/2 billion. Now,that [difference] is not big in magnitude but for 1984 I think thestaff is projecting an agricultural export number of about $40 billionand our people think that it likely would be in the $35 billion rangeor thereabouts. And it is going in the wrong direction, which is onepoint that I want to make. I like what I see but I would suggest thatthe risks may be on the down side rather than the up side. I don't-14-10/4/83think that suggests anything in terms of action by the Federal OpenMarket Committee at this meeting, but I'm not sure that all is as goodas it may appear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Guffey disagrees with Governor Gramley's comment that the forecast is too good to be true, suggesting that the risks may be on the downside instead of the upside. He also mentions that the staff's projection for agricultural exports may not be achieved and that the risks may be on the downside.


Passage number 72.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Based on the given information, I cannot determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage about Mr. Balles as there is no actual passage provided.


Passage number 73.
MR. BALLES. Well, things do seem to be going very welloverall. And yet in the spirit in which Lyle Gramley raised thequestion, I wonder: Is Murphy's law--Murphy's law being that ifsomething can go wrong, it will--going to operate. I travelled around5 Pacific Basin countries in the last month and one of the questionsthat kept recurring very frequently--to which, admittedly, I didn'tknow the answer--was: Are we going to get through this next 12 to 18months without some sort of a major financial backlash or crisis as aresult of the LDC international debt problem. And for those of us whoweren't around at the IMF meeting I just wonder, Mr. Chairman, if youor someone else can fill us in on what seems to be the picture withregard especially to the manageability of the international debtposition of particular countries south of the border.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a personal wonder and asking for information.


Passage number 74.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't I defer that until we getthrough this go-around on the business situation, and I'll be glad toaddress it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting deferring the mentioned topic until they deal with the current business situation.


Passage number 75.
MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, I'd just like to make a commenton the international value of the dollar. I was rather startledyesterday to learn that the forecast has a 15 percent depreciation inthe value of the dollar and that depreciation only stabilizes thedeficit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by MS. TEETERS about her reaction and concern regarding the forecasted depreciation of the dollar and its impact on the deficit. There is no conflicting viewpoint presented in the passage.


Passage number 76.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, we do get a bigger impact in1985. It's probably a difference of about $6 billion in 1984, whichwould be relatively modest.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a difference in impact between two years.


Passage number 77.
 If you make an assumption of asubstantially--MS. TEETERS. What do you mean by "substantially," Tony, 30percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question seeking clarification on the meaning of the term "substantially."


Passage number 78.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, let's say 25 to 30 percent asagainst 15 percent. I think it would give you only about a $6 billionimprovement in 1984 but the improvement is much, much larger in 1985.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not presenting any form of contention or disagreement. It simply presents different percentages and the potential improvement in different years.


Passage number 79.
MR. PARTEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The word "yes" in this context seems to be a simple affirmation or agreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 80.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, as we said yesterday, Governor Teeters, itdepends a lot on what you assume as you go out [in time] about howgrowth is proceeding here and abroad. If we continue with growth hereat or above the average rate abroad, which is consistent with manyforecasts, then you have to catch up with that. That's basically thereason why that 15 percent depreciation doesn't give us much more thanstabilization as we go out. But if we return to a more normal--whatone might perceive to be more normal--cyclical position, it wouldinvolve probably having faster growth in foreign countries than here.Then we would need less of a further depreciation in order to bringthe current account deficit down substantially.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker presents two different scenarios - one where growth is consistent between the speaker's country and abroad, and one where there is faster growth in foreign countries. These scenarios have different implications for the depreciation needed to bring down the current account deficit.


Passage number 81.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not mention any statements or opinions made by Governor Wallich. Thus, there is no contention or disagreement present in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 82.
-15-10/4/83MR. WALLICH. It's hard to make a coherent case one way orthe other that differs from the staff position. I would say that thestaff forecast differs [from other forecasts] in one significantrespect: namely, that it has lower inflation. If it has lowerinflation, then given interest rates that are somewhat similar to whatother forecasters have, we would have a higher real interest rate. Idon't know to what extent that in turn enters into the projection ofinvestment spending. But as for the present level of investmentspending, as has been pointed out, it's very bad in the heavy capitalgoods area. I think overall we can't say that the business fixedinvestment is bad. On the contrary, it seems to be a little largerthan it has been in other expansions. Evidently, there's a greatshift in the nature of the investment away from the smoke-stack typegoods that one observes in the middle of the country to hightechnology-type equipment. But secondly, and this was veryinteresting, maybe the heavy equipment area is additionally hit by thelarge current account deficit--that is, the weakness in our tradebalance which, of course, takes the form of imports of things fromabroad that we didn't usually import previously. I think the netexport area is really the greatest [source of] weakness in theeconomy. If we didn't have that, we would have a much strongerexpansion. I'm concerned in the same area as Nancy is but maybe aboutthe opposite things. Suppose that the dollar does not go down asprojected and as has been projected many times by now. In that case,of course, that gap in the trade balance becomes worse. Now, I agreethat we're subject to the possibility of shocks from the developingcountries or from wage developments, perhaps incited by large profits.These things are unpredictable. We're getting into the area whereprofessional economists tend to see a lack of demand over the horizon.As far as one can see, things are not too bad. Beyond that, one can'ttell what is going to keep the economy going. I would say that thisis probably an economic recovery cyclically like all others. If itlasts two years, it would have been short; if it lasts over threeyears, it would have been very good. And if we cannot see it clearlylasting longer than three years, that would not be a great surprise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that the staff forecast has lower inflation, which leads to higher real interest rates. However, the speaker questions how this affects investment spending and suggests that business fixed investment is not bad overall. The speaker also expresses concern about the current account deficit and its impact on the trade balance. Additionally, the speaker raises the possibility of shocks from developing countries or wage developments. The speaker acknowledges that professional economists see a lack of demand in the future, but also states that the current economic recovery is similar to others in the past. Therefore, there is contention and disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 83.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "Governor Partee" does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 84.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I agree with the staff forecast. I thinkit's very plausible. I usually have something to point out but nowthat they have the saving rate up some I don't have any complaint atall with it. And it has even occurred to me that the forecast couldbe right, Lyle. I really don't see anything in the domestic economythat would be terribly upsetting. Possibly something could come outof this Eastern [Airlines] situation and we could get a lot of labordistress and a lot of stoppages in transportation. But that's a longreach. The really different thing about this projection compared toearlier ones is the big trade deficit. I would take it that the tradedeficit is our maximum contribution to increasing the prosperity ofthe world economy because we're importing a lot and not exportingmuch. And I guess that's what we would want if we see a very weakgrowth economy. And we certainly do seem to see one. I've beenamazed as I read both the New York reports and our own on countrydevelopments that there really hasn't been a strengthening around theworld as I thought there would be as the summer went on. Indeed, [theworld economy] is beginning to look a little weaker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is expressing agreement with the staff forecast and does not raise any objections or contradict any points made.


Passage number 85.
-16-10/4/83VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There's a disproportionatelyfavorable impact on our trade from our large imports from Canada andJapan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presenting a fact about the trade impact of large imports from Canada and Japan.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 86.
 There's a relatively small impact on Europe and--MR. PARTEE. Well, Japan doesn't look particularly strong.And, of course, Canada still has 12-1/2 percent unemployment. So, Ijust don't see too much there. But I think if something is wrong withthe forecast, it's in that area--some result of the very, very unusualtrade deficit and the very unusual potential for a drop in the dollar.And that's going to upset the apple cart. I can't say what it is, butthat's the area I would refer to as the most problematic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee disagrees with the statement that there is a relatively small impact on Europe and expresses concerns about the strength of Japan and high unemployment in Canada. He also suggests that there may be something wrong with the forecast related to the trade deficit and potential drop in the dollar, which he believes will upset the situation.


Passage number 87.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you see these signs of slowing downabroad over the summer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 88.
MR. TRUMAN. We just got a revision in the German industrialproduction figure, which was adjusted in July. It went down not 0.9but 2.8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a revised figure for German industrial production. There is no conflicting information or opposing viewpoints presented.


Passage number 89.
 That's a--MR. PARTEE. Italy, France, and England are often mentioned.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that Italy, France, and England are often mentioned.


Passage number 90.
MR. TRUMAN. In the United Kingdom, the action yesterday todrop interest rates by about 1/2 percentage point when their monetaryaggregates are above target is interpreted as meaning that they, too,were seeing things weaker than they had hoped. And France and Italyhave adjustment problems. So, there's not much over there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states facts and observations without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 91.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Of course, I've been sitting at meetingswith these fellows and they told me for a week how good things wereand that they were getting better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. The speaker is simply describing their personal experience of being at meetings where others expressed positive views about a situation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 92.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's the line they've been taking.The Chancellor of the Exchequer told me that he thought [the UKeconomy] was going to be even better in the second half than in thefirst half, which most people are saying is not so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The statement "most people are saying is not so" indicates that there is a difference of opinion or disagreement about the expectation of the UK economy being better in the second half.


Passage number 93.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Answer: No

Explanation: The given passage "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" does not provide enough information to determine if there is any contention or disagreement. Without additional context, it is not possible to ascertain if there is any disagreement or contention surrounding Chairman Volcker.


Passage number 94.
 A big increase in the GNP in Germany inthe second quarter--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, the best one can project, Iwould assume, would be 2 percent real growth in 1984 for the Europeancommunity. And it may fall short of that. I think the biggestthreat--and I know we'll get into that later--is not the exportproblem that we're having in our current account deficit but somethingprobably happening in the LDC indebtedness situation that will triggersome major ripple effects around the world.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is stating a prediction about the potential growth of the GNP in Germany and discussing a potential threat related to LDC indebtedness.


Passage number 95.
MR. MARTIN. I'd certainly like to join in that [assessment],Tony. When you look at country after country and what they haveagreed to under IMF constraints, in each case one can make the pointthat they have to solve their own problems--the deficit has to comedown, and the subsidies, etc., etc. When one looks across the wholeless developed world one wonders how they can increase their exportsand how they can slash their imports--not just reduce them but cutthem to the bone--and what happens after they cut them to bone. Wehave this whole section of the planet continuing to operate andjointly [trying to] solve their problems, and it seems to me thatinevitably there are going to be great difficulties. And this-17-10/4/83Argentina thing is a very political action in appearance but there aregreat, great possibilities for disturbances arising out of that sideof it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 96.
MR. PARTEE. Maybe we need a larger trade deficit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions a statement made by Mr. Partee without any opposing or conflicting viewpoints being expressed.


Passage number 97.
MR. MARTIN. Maybe we do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation:
The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement expressing uncertainty or possibility.


Passage number 98.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. From that point of view we need aneasier monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement suggests that the speaker is advocating for an easier monetary policy.


Passage number 99.
MS. TEETERS. That's right. The best thing we can do forthem is lower the interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is stating their opinion and there is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 100.
MR. BALLES. I agree, Pres, and that's why I raised thatissue for some discussion here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage indicates agreement between Mr. Balles and the President, without any indication of disagreement or contention. Mr. Balles states that he agrees with the President's point, suggesting a shared perspective rather than a disagreement.


Passage number 101.
MR. MARTIN. When you look at the [projected] increase in ourexports from the second quarter to the fourth quarter of 1984, given a15 percent change [in the value of the dollar] and stipulating allthese matters, but assuming that the IMF pattern will work, that wewill get the [increase in IMF] quotas, and that we will get the $6billion and another $7 billion in credits--. The assumptions arecumulative. They simply in my mind do not add up to a world recovery.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It merely presents a statement and the speaker's thoughts on the matter.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 102.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's a pretty strong statement. Iwas about to say that I was struck by everybody's optimism around thetable. Now you tell me there's no world recovery. It seems to methat the business news has been quite mixed recently and everybody isperfectly willing--maybe with your exception--to look through this andsay [the economy] is really very good or reasonably good and is goingto continue. All the economists who can't see over the horizon areperfectly willing to see out to the next 18 months anyway--at leastthose around this table--and say that things are going to be fine, ororderly, or whatever. Now, I do think that has a bearing on ourcurrent policy decision. I'm not sure that the news is all thatuniformly good statistically, but I hear a lot of optimism around thetable on balance. And it may be right. I'm not arguing that it'swrong. That's just the conclusion I take from the discussion aroundthe table: Ignore all these soft figures. People are feeling prettygood.But looking out into the future and questioning what can gowrong, I think a lot of things can go wrong, none of which can beeasily incorporated into a forecast of the kind that the staff has tomake. I would put this debt problem at the top of the list, and letme return to that. But let me just make a comment about the oilsituation, just on the other side of Mr. Roberts' comment. If wereally had a disturbance in the Middle East, which people worry aboutnow in terms of the Iraq/Iran war getting more aggressive andinvolving an impairment of the oil flow from the Gulf area, I think itis true that, looking at the United States position alone, we importrelatively little [from Iraq and Iran]. And one could say that ifthat supply were almost cut off, we could probably make up that gaprelatively easily. I don't remember the exact figures but the MiddleEast still supplies 35 percent of the world's oil or something likethat in exports.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges the optimism expressed by others around the table regarding the economy, but expresses doubt and raises concerns about potential problems in the future. They mention the debt problem and the possibility of a disturbance in the Middle East affecting oil supply as potential issues that could go wrong. Therefore, there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 103.
-18-10/4/83MR. TRUMAN. It's a little more than that, probably.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply includes a statement with no conflicting viewpoints or opposing opinions.


Passage number 104.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There would be tremendous shortageselsewhere in the world.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. It simply states that there would be shortages in other parts of the world.


Passage number 105.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 106.
 And our price--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Activating shut-in capacity or whatever inthe United States wouldn't make a dent in that situation and the priceimpact could be very large if it really happened in a major way. Ithink this is a completely unpredictable kind of event, but I don'tthink that we can consider ourselves [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is expressing the opinion that activating shut-in capacity in the United States would not have a significant impact on the situation and could potentially have a large price impact if it did happen. The statement also acknowledges that the event is unpredictable.


Passage number 107.
MR. ROBERTS. Paul, I think Bob Sweeney's projection wentlike this: If Iran and Iraq had no production at all, [thedifference] from the decreased levels at which they now operate couldbe offset by shut-in production. He assumed that the Saudi productionwould be protected by the United States. That's the big differencehere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Roberts, is simply stating his understanding of Bob Sweeney's projection. There is no indication of conflicting views or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 108.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that may be if just Iran and Iraqwent. That's a big assumption--whether it can be confined to them. Istill think there might be a bit of a problem, but you're talkingabout a more manageable [situation]--not U.S.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests that there might be a problem even if only Iran and Iraq are involved, while someone else argues that it would be a more manageable situation without the involvement of the US.


Passage number 109.
 production, I don'tthink, but Mexican, Venezuelan, and Nigerian might get through--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply mentions the possibility of Mexican, Venezuelan, and Nigerian production being able to get through.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 110.
 And the fighting would spread intothe Gulf and straight to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If they ever reach peace there, we'dprobably have a surplus. I guess that's something one can't evaluate.This exchange rate problem and our export problem are all mixedtogether. As many people have said, it's a new ingredient. I don'tknow whether to worry more about the exchange rate remaining high ordeclining precipitously. I think either would give us very realproblems. This wage situation is very uncertain in my mind; itdepends upon psychology and expectations. I get ultimately buoyed upwhen I see some figures and ultimately discouraged when I analyze some[other] figures and the lack of any big adjustment, as I suggestedearlier, in industries that have not been severely impacted by therecession--the financial industry and the utilities industry to nametwo. All of these things don't tell me very clearly what policyshould be.But let me return to the debt issue for a moment. The brightspot there, of course, continues to be Mexico. Even there it has tobe looked at with some degree of realism, I suppose. Their externalfinancial condition is substantially better. They have a certainamount of cash; they haven't drawn upon all the bank loans they candraw upon. They will be in a position to go back to ask the banks forsignificantly less money next year, even assuming their imports rise.And they probably will get lower rates in the process. If everythingelse goes smoothly there, it will probably be a simpler process thanit was last year. But at the same time, even looking at Mexico alone,there aren't many signs apparently of an increase in economic activitythere. They're still at the bottom in terms of their own domesticbusiness picture and they've had a more severe contraction than theprogram planned in the first place. It's not unlikely, I suppose,-19-10/4/83when you begin making a vigorous adjustment that it will go a littlefurther than you estimated. That's part of the reason why they lookso much better--fairly dramatically--externally. They have even fewerimports than they were assuming when they took the contractionarymeasures. Of course, we're feeling the other side of that in ourtrade picture. But still, I think one could say that they are in aposition to [have] some expansion consistent with financial stabilityif nothing else goes wrong among their neighbors or elsewhere in theworld. That prospect isn't exactly safe; we have had Brazilstruggling for months and months. And partly because they have beenstruggling for so many months, I think the political support for astrong adjustment program has deteriorated within Brazil. They had apolitical setback a few weeks ago when the Congress reared up andrejected a wage law. That is of no substantive significance initself, but the opposition demonstrated that it could reject the wagelaw and by implication that they intended to reject the wage law thatis the centerpiece of the Brazilian program.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In this passage, there is contention or disagreement regarding the evaluation of the exchange rate problem and the wage situation. The speaker states that they are uncertain about whether a high or declining exchange rate would be more problematic, and they express uncertainty about the wage situation depending on psychology and expectations.


Passage number 111.
 Now, that--MS. TEETERS. How much longer does that have to run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple question asking for a specific time duration.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 112.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it has a month-and-a-half or so torun at the maximum. They might do it by avoiding a vote. There maybe some maneuvering to have a vote and try to get it passed, but it'sa very tenuous situation. Mainly because of that situation, I thinkthe prospect of getting any short-term financing into Brazil hasevaporated, and their arrears are getting bigger and bigger; and theyhave arrears of the kind that will produce nonperforming loans overthe third quarter. I don't know if that's any disaster, but it willbe an interesting psychological test of the market when banks have toreport nonperforming Brazilian loans in some magnitude. On the otherhand, we did manage to put together in principle a basic financingprogram for Brazil if they carry through on their adjustment program.That money wouldn't be available before the end of the year, but inprinciple the outlines of that--a combination of bank money and publicmoney--are set to go forward. It will not go forward unless theycarry through on the adjustment program, and that is very much inquestion. As I suggested, it may not go forward anyway because westill have a big problem of getting all the banks to join in. Thelead banks have agreed in principle; they haven't gotten all the otherbanks to agree yet. But it's going to remain a quite tenuoussituation. Argentina is in a particularly political period before anelection. It has been mentioned that they already have taken actionsthat are inconsistent with their IMF program and it's a question as tohow long they can be said to be in compliance with it. The actualspecific tests of that program have not yet been violated, lookingback, but it's virtually certain that they will be, looking forward.The [situation] has heated up internally in terms of negotiations withthe banks to the point that they put the central bank governor in jailyesterday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes 

Explanation: There is contention and disagreement in the passage regarding the prospects for short-term financing in Brazil, the success of their adjustment program, and the compliance of Argentina with their IMF program. The passage presents different perspectives and uncertainties, hence indicating contention or disagreement.


Passage number 113.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That ought to be an IMF compliancestandard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "That ought to be an IMF compliance standard" expresses a suggestion or recommendation without any indication of disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 114.
MR. PARTEE. That's an unusual hazard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee about an unusual hazard.


Passage number 115.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's indicative of the hazards that theyrun. I don't know [the details]; all I read was a newspaper report-20-10/4/83that he's too friendly with the foreign banks. But it is someindication of the difficulty of managing these programs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It discusses a potential hazard and difficulty in managing programs without providing any contrasting opinions or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 116.
MS. TEETERS. Didn't a judge down there overturn one of therestructurings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 117.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, he made a constitutional rulingagainst one of the provisions; it had to do with a waiver ofsovereignty as I understand. It says Argentina can't do that, andthat's a point the banks have insisted upon in these arrangements.And apparently some more particular political incentives are operatingon that judge as well. But, it is illustrative of the enormousproblems that are both real in the terms that Governor Martin wastalking about and political and organizational in terms of the numberof people that have to get involved. This, for instance, was a judgein the southern part of Argentina. I don't think it was any greatplot, but I think he is in opposition and is a radical fellow whoapparently just acted on his own.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 118.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Also, Gonzalez del Solar told me that[the judge] acted under the influence of the Argentine Air Force whoare very powerful in the Terra del Fuego region where he is located.They are very militantly nationalistic and angry at the United Statesand Great Britain. Now on the other hand, [unintelligible] told delSolar before he got arrested that they seem to feel that the[unintelligible] Sandinista candidate as well as the radical candidateare both going to play this debt issue very moderately. That was theview as of a week ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It presents two separate pieces of information without any apparent contradiction or contradictory viewpoints.


Passage number 119.
 And he certainly didn't get arrested by thosegroups; he got arrested by--MR. MARTIN. But look at the risks involved, as we discussedthem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact ("he got arrested by MR. MARTIN") and then acknowledges a previous discussion of the risks involved.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 120.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. These are not the only countries involved.Some of the medium size countries in Latin America are not in good,though not in terrible shape. Chile, Peru, Equador--none of them isin good shape, but they maintain their equilibrium. Venezuela hasbeen taken care of and an election is coming up, so it should beeasier; but there are still very tense political pressures. And thereare countries elsewhere in the world, notably the Philippines andNigeria, that are on the verge of real problems. The Philippinessituation is obviously complicated by their political problems on alarge scale, quite apart from their economic problems. That makes itvery difficult to deal with the economic problems.The risks [in this country] are at least as large as theyhave been and in my judgment may be larger. I don't know what thedefinition of crowding out is, but the only way I can see reallyimportant short-term relief--by short term I'm talking about a year orso--would be to have interest rates decidedly lower. The chances ofhaving interest rates decidedly lower with the budget deficits of themagnitude that we are running do not seem self evident to me. Growthobviously is terribly important, but growth acts over a period ofyears. To get real leverage on their external flows in the short run,interest rates would act over a period of a year if we had a decidedreduction in them. Because their debts are so big, Latin America Isuppose would get $4 to $5 billion of debt relief if we had a couplepercentage points reduction in interest rates. We would not get-21-10/4/83anything like that from the growth side in that kind of time period.Yet, it is hard to be optimistic that that is going to come about. Isee nothing there but their continuing to hang on by their fingernailsfor the indefinite future. As for these special IMF programs,Governor Martin, I think it is worth saying--IMF or not--that theconstraint is the shortage of finance. And if we didn't have an IMF,I suspect they would be involved in even more contractionary programssimply by force of circumstances if they were unable to raise themoney abroad. So, it's a risky picture from that side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that some countries in Latin America are maintaining their equilibrium, but also states that the risks in this country are at least as large as they have been and may be larger. The speaker also expresses doubt that interest rates will be lowered and expresses pessimism about the future, saying that there is nothing but continued struggle for these countries.


Passage number 121.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There is the view in the world--I'mnot sure it would be so at this table--that if a major internationalfinancial problem is triggered, let's say, by Brazil or Argentina orsomething, that the Federal Reserve is basically the lender of lastresort in the world. So much of the debt is dollar-denominated that alarge part of the world, including France, would look to the Fed toease monetary policy immediately and very drastically. I'll leave itat that, but I hear that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presented as a perspective or view held by some, but the speaker does not express any disagreement or opposing viewpoint.


Passage number 122.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, I've heard it too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement evident in the passage. The speaker simply states that they have heard something as well.


Passage number 123.
 The foreign--MR. ROBERTS. Me too. It's very disturbing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply expresses agreement and concern about something without any indication of controversy or disagreement.


Passage number 124.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In fact, one very distinguishedmember of the financial community told me that if Brazil were toannounce a standstill or default, whatever you want to call it, thatinterest rates would immediately fall in the market in New Yorkbecause everyone would expect that the Fed would have absolutely noalternative but to ease policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is explaining the potential outcome or reaction in the market if Brazil were to announce a standstill or default.


Passage number 125.
MR. WALLICH. If countries defaulted on interest, since theinterest is more than what they've been borrowing, they would actuallybe able to import more, assuming that nothing else intervened. Ourbanks would not get their income and the consequences would betremendous. But just in terms of what the picture is for them, theyfeel that they could import more if they stopped borrowing and payingthe interest.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Wallich explaining a hypothetical scenario.


Passage number 126.
MR. MARTIN. From whom.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 127.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but that assumes that they canstill get IMF help.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The phrase "but that assumes that they can still get IMF help" suggests a contrasting viewpoint or disagreement regarding the possibility of receiving IMF assistance.


Passage number 128.
MR. WALLICH. Do you think we'd deny them imports.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 129.
MR. MARTIN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Based on the information given, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The given text, "MR. MARTIN," does not provide any context or content to make a judgment.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 130.
 I'm asking--MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't know. How would they get bridgefinancing for it. And if they move the cash to the United States,wouldn't the banks take it. It would be a very difficult period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates contention or disagreement as the speaker raises questions and uncertainties about obtaining bridge financing and potential consequences of moving cash to the United States.


Passage number 131.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, sure. And the trade creditswould stop and a lot of other things would stop. So, I think they'dhave a real crisis on the import side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing their opinion on the potential consequences of certain actions, and there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 132.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think these countries have assumed thatit would not be very easy or they wouldn't be trying as hard as theyare. Brazil's vulnerability is clearly oil imports. If the oil-22-10/4/83imports dry up for two weeks, they're out of oil. That's notliterally true in the sense that there is a little more stock thanthat. But considering what has to be kept in the pipeline and soforth, they'd be in real trouble.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply provides information about Brazil's vulnerability to oil imports and the potential consequences if those imports were to stop for two weeks. There is no contention or disagreement present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 133.
MR. MARTIN. And [there would be problems in] the flow offoodstuff and spare parts after a period in which the inflow offoodstuff and spare parts has been down. They already have cut theirimports. Add on to that a difficulty of importing--GOVERNOR WALLICH. I tell them that too because I have tomake a case. I just want to say to you that the case is not veryconvincing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Governor Wallich states that the case being made is not very convincing, indicating a disagreement or lack of agreement on the issue being discussed.


Passage number 134.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not very convincing to whom.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a neutral statement questioning the persuasiveness of something.


Passage number 135.
MR. WALLICH. It's not very convincing to them that theywould not in some sense be better off if they defaulted. They willhave tremendous difficulties. They'd be sued; they'd be taken tocourt; planes and ships would be attached. Whether it would reallybecome impossible to import, I don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply raising doubts and uncertainties about the consequences of defaulting.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 136.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know either. But so far, theyhave not been willing to take the chance. That's what you can say.So far as the rest of the IMF meeting is concerned, let me say thatthere has been a lot of stuff in the newspapers. The tone, from whereI saw it--and maybe I didn't see it all--was reasonably good. TheUnited States took what was considered to be a very tough linespecifically on some of these IMF issues. A lot of the rest of theworld didn't like it much and certainly some of the developingcountries didn't like it much. But there was a tendency to say thatwe had to do that because of the IMF legislation, so we got excusedfor a lot of things we ordinarily wouldn't be excused for, I suspect.There was a feeling, which I don't think is entirely true, that it waspolitically necessary in the United States. The people were quitehappy that the President very strongly supported the IMF legislationin a very uncompromising way publicly--more strongly than he hadbefore in a public statement of this sort. That was accepted at facevalue and thought to be very, very encouraging. There was a greatdeal of worry about whether we will in fact vote for the IMF packagein the end and a lot of concern as to what would happen if that fails.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage mentions that the United States took a tough line on IMF issues, but the rest of the world, particularly developing countries, did not like it. This shows a disagreement or clash of perspectives on the IMF issues.


Passage number 137.
MS. TEETERS. But he hasn't signed the letter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact that the person mentioned has not signed the letter.


Passage number 138.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He's presumably negotiating that letter.I don't know whether he will send it or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not showcase contention or disagreement as it simply states uncertainty or lack of knowledge about whether the letter will be sent or not.


Passage number 139.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only includes the title or position of Vice Chairman Solomon, which does not provide any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 140.
 Send this to the--MS. TEETERS. Seventy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple instruction to send something to Ms. Teeters.


Passage number 141.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Seventy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 142.
MS. TEETERS. Seventy times.Axilrod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement indicated in this passage. It seems to be a simple statement made by Ms. Teeters.


Passage number 143.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How long are you going to talk, Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 144.
-23-10/4/83MR. AXILROD. 15 to 20 minutes on this special presentation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states the duration of a special presentation.


Passage number 145.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll let you talk for 15 to 20 minutesand then we'll have coffee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply outlines a plan or schedule for a conversation, with the speaker being given a set amount of time to talk before a break for coffee.


Passage number 146.
MR. AXILROD. There's a package of material--charts onvelocity, in which chart 1 is the Ml velocity--and I'll be referringto those charts. I'll be giving a special presentation on velocitywithout necessarily any implications for current policy. Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is merely stating that Mr. Axilrod will be giving a presentation on velocity without implying any current policy implications.


Passage number 147.
Chairman, I have no more than a very few comments on current policy,but I would delay making them if I--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what order you're going in.You're going to talk about velocity first and then current policysecond.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 148.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, on velocity for around 15 to 20 minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Axilrod.


Passage number 149.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "All right" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply a phrase expressing agreement or approval.


Passage number 150.
MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement made by Mr. Axilrod.


Passage number 151.
]MR. PARTEE. Satisfied.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states that someone named Mr. Partee is satisfied.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 152.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have a question. These velocities onchart 8 look a little different--maybe it's a difference in scale--than those on chart 1. Are they computed differently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker is pointing out that the velocities on chart 8 appear different than those on chart 1 and wonders if they are computed differently. This suggests a difference or disagreement in how the velocities are determined or presented.


Passage number 153.
MR. AXILROD. No, I do have a lag in the middle panel onchart 1 and there is a scaling difference and they start in 1969.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about a lag in the middle panel and a scaling difference starting in 1969.


Passage number 154.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Chart 1 isn't lagged, is it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple question and does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 155.
MR. AXILROD. No, I don't have the lags in chart 1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement from Mr. Axilrod does not indicate any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 156.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But it's on a four-quarter basis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "But it's on a four-quarter basis" is a statement of fact or clarification.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 157.
MR. AXILROD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The statement "Yes" implies that there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 158.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only mentions "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" without providing any further information or context to suggest any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 159.
 Four quarters on--MR. AXILROD. No, they're both quarterly. They should beexactly the same except that it's lagged on one chart andcontemporaneous on the other and I shortened the time period and putM2 and M3 down for reference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing an explanation and comparison of two charts, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 160.
MR. BLACK. The scales are a lot different.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the scales are different without presenting any conflicting ideas or arguments.


Passage number 161.
MR. AXILROD. There is a difference in scale but there shouldbe no difference in the numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is stating that there is a difference in scale, but there should not be a difference in the numbers. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 162.
MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I have a great respect for Steve'sanalysis. In fact, his report was so interesting that I wish to askhim if he would provide us with a copy of it so that we can study anddigest it. Until I've had a chance to do that, I wouldn't want tomake any immediate response or rejoinder other than to say that hisconclusions leave us with a considerable dilemma. The bottom line onhis conclusion--that it's premature to place much more weight on Ml at-24-10/4/83this time--is somewhat contrary to the paper that I distributedfollowing our last FOMC meeting. The dilemma that I see is that theBoard staff's response to our paper, which has not been circulated tothe rest of you yet, pretty much agreed with the second majorproposition in the paper that I distributed. Here's a quote from apaper from Steve that was prepared [by Board staff] and had to do withthe fact that there is no discernible relationship in recent yearsbetween M2 and M3 on the one hand and future income on the other:"Indeed, there does not appear to be any significant statisticalrelationship between M2 and nominal GNP." So, perhaps it'sappropriate to be cautious about saying that we can restore faith inM1 or put it up higher in priority in terms of our goals. But at thesame time, let's not overlook the fact that we've been dealing withtwo other intermediate targets, M2 and M3, and putting more weight onthose for quite a few months now. And I think all of us knew, orshould have known, that there was darn little relationship betweenthose two particular intermediate targets and the rest of the economy.So, M1 may be far from perfect but the alternatives are even worse.And that's the dilemma. Pending the chance to really cogitate andthink about Steve's paper, I'd prefer to defer any other comments orrejoinder until I've had a chance to do that. But I congratulate himon the excellent work that he's done here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 163.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, may I make a comment. PresidentBalles did refer to a staff paper which actually had been sent, ofcourse, to your staff in the spirit of professional economicdiscussion. The bulk of it was the technical analysis of theeconometric methods used in the estimating procedures. There was asmall part of it in which the people went on to provide some testsabout whether M1 or M2 would be better. I would not read thoseresults--and I'm not sure that that paper would be circulated inexactly this way to the FOMC--as indicating in any way that Ml wasgood over the last year and a half. The part that you were referringto was a set of theoretical, not empirical, estimates of various kindsof elasticities and what one would have to have for Ml relative to M2for M2 to be better. I think the econometric evidence that I referredto here does show that the prediction values of M2 and M3 were nobetter than M1 in predicting GNP in 1982. In 1983, from someperspectives perhaps it was a little better; it turned out quite well,maybe by accident, because on average M2 and M3 don't do as well asMl. But M2 didn't miss the first-quarter and second-quarterpredictions by [much]; on average, it was less than 1 percent at anannual rate. The [predictions] went far off in the third quarterbecause of the first-quarter distortion in M2. So, I think it's quiteright that M2 and M3 didn't become better as Ml got worse, but theydidn't get nearly as bad as Ml relative to their past experience inthis particular period. This is a transition period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily a clarification and explanation of the content of a staff paper.


Passage number 164.
MR. BALLES. Well, if I may: I think we probably both agree,Steve--if you don't, say so--that the main reason for the precipitousdrop in Ml velocity in '82 and the first part of '83 was a paralleldecline that took place in both inflation and hence in interest rates.And bottom line, our expectation is--and admittedly this is a forecastand not yet a fact--that the slight improvement that we've seen in Mlvelocity in the second and third quarters is about to become more thanslight as we go into the fourth quarter. In fact, our forecast for M1velocity in the fourth quarter is about a 4 percent increase. Ifwe're right, and time will tell, we are really on the verge of Ml-25-10/4/83bouncing back to a point where it can be used and would be superior toM2 and M3. But, as I say, that remains to be seen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their own viewpoint and inviting the other person to disagree if they have a different opinion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 165.
MR. WALLICH. I find it difficult to rely on velocity as ameasure of the usefulness of an aggregate because if velocity isvariable but determined by factors that can be measured in relation toit, principally interest rates, then the demand function for thataggregate will be stable even though velocity is not. And it seems tome that we have to factor that in before we judge the aggregates. Thedemand function I guess is pretty standard in the profession but haslately been buried among researchers. And I think efforts should bedirected toward getting a better grip on what is the right moneydemand function than on the stability of velocity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, is expressing his disagreement with the common reliance on velocity as a measure of the usefulness of an aggregate. He argues that velocity being variable does not necessarily mean the demand function for that aggregate will also be unstable. He suggests that researchers should focus more on understanding the right money demand function instead of the stability of velocity.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 166.
MR. BALLES. I would agree with that, Governor Wallich. Infact, one of the main thrusts of the paper that I distributed wasthat, in our view at least, demand for M1 has not been unstable inrecent times--that what we witnessed in '82 and in the first part of'83 was not a shift in the demand for money but a movement along agiven demand function as interest rates came down and people wantedmore money. That's not the same as a shift in the demand for money;that's moving along a demand function. And therein, I guess, lies oneof the differences in analysis between us and Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Balles, states that his view is that the demand for M1 has not been unstable in recent times. This contrasts with the analysis of Steve, who likely has a different perspective on the stability of M1 demand.


Passage number 167.
MR. AXILROD. Well, I think Ml demand may be highly interestsensitive at this point. The alternative estimating methods can giveyou somewhat different results over the long run than obtained in yourexcellent staff paper. I wouldn't doubt that in this transitionperiod Ml elasticity is a lot bigger because I think the NOW accountshave introduced that because of the ceiling rates and the relatedmovement of market rates and ceiling rates. So, it appears we havethat. The main point I was trying to make for the Committee was thatif indeed it is true that the Ml demand is highly interest elastic--and I don't think it is over the long run though I think it may benow--to the degree that's true the value of Ml as a target, even ifyou can predict the demand, is reduced. It is not such a good targetfor you any more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Axilrod is explaining his thoughts on Ml demand and how it may have changed over time. He acknowledges that there may be different results obtained from alternative estimating methods, but he does not argue or disagree with the staff paper. He also acknowledges that Ml demand may be more interest elastic in the transition period, but he does not argue against it. He simply states that if Ml demand is highly interest elastic, it may reduce the value of Ml as a target. There is no contention or disagreement in his explanation.


Passage number 168.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I apologize, but I cannot provide a response as there is no passage provided in the question.


Passage number 169.
]MR. AXILROD. Then, when interest rates go down, because theeconomy is weaker than you have projected, you have to let money growa lot faster than your target. So, it isn't serving the function of afixed target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a cause and effect relationship between interest rates and the growth of money in relation to economic projections.


Passage number 170.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're back to targeting interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the focus has returned to targeting interest rates.


Passage number 171.
MR. AXILROD. Right. Intuitively, if there was no interestelasticity to money demand and income was weak, then you could holdthis fixed target and income would be dragged back up. There would bea lot of interest rate variation. That gets to be the problem ifmoney is as highly interest elastic as your paper makes out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is discussing a hypothetical scenario and expressing concerns about the potential consequences of high interest elasticity of money.


Passage number 172.
MR. BALLES. Well, one of the things that I found fascinatingabout the technical paper that was distributed was that the Board'sstaff found fault with the way we had computed interest elasticitygoing back to the mid-1960s, but there seemed to be no disagreement inthe two methods that your staff used leading toward a conclusion that-26-10/4/83interest elasticity had shown virtually no change. The interestelasticity of M1 has shown virtually no change following theintroduction of NOW accounts in January of '81 and Super NOW accountsin January of '83. I was quite impressed by those flat lines. Thatwas one of the things that we had concluded: that the introduction ofNOWs changed interest elasticity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their fascination and agreement with the findings of the Board's staff regarding interest elasticity.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 173.
MR. AXILROD. I think there are some technical disputes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The mention of "technical disputes" suggests the presence of differing opinions or arguments related to technical matters.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 174.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you have some disagreement there.Do you have 2 minutes on current policy, Mr. Axilrod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that there is disagreement by saying "I think you have some disagreement there." Furthermore, the mention of "2 minutes on current policy" suggests a potential debate or differing opinions on the topic.


Passage number 175.
MR. AXILROD. Well, Mr. Chairman, it's very brief since theaggregates are so comfortably within their ranges. We really had ahard time thinking of alternatives for the Committee to consider.Alternative B, of course, was based on current reserve conditions,which we've interpreted as borrowing centered around $650 million, andan associated funds rate probably around 9-1/4 to 9-1/2 percent.Alternatives A and C are somewhat easier and somewhat tighter,respectively. But even so, the degree of ease and tightening aspresented there is not so much as to push the aggregates outside theirlong-run ranges; Ml, M2, and M3 remain within the ranges from now tothe end of the year. The logic of presenting alternatives within ourusual structure--where aiming at a higher money growth leads to lowerinterest rates and a lower money growth to higher interest rates--tomy mind yields somewhat anomalous results under current circumstancesunless there are vast differences in opinion about the staff outlookfor the economy or about the demand for money. For instance, giventhe economic outlook, there is no apparent need to force money up ordown in the ranges by significant changes--at least premeditated orfore-ordained changes--in reserve restraint or reserve paths. Thequestion would seem to be more whether if money were moving up in therange, or even above it, the Committee would wish to tighten. And ifmoney were moving down, would the Committee wish to ease and to whatextent. It's somewhat opposite from the way the specs are presentedand the logic of it. Given as much uncertainty as still prevailsabout the meaning of the aggregates that are the focus of policy, itseems to me that the answer to the policy question still involves anassessment of the economy and emerging financial conditions. Thus,the directive as structured at the last two meetings, with a sentencethat in effect serves as a proviso--permitting reserve adjustments tofaster or slower money growth depending on the economic outlook andfinancial conditions--seems appropriate assuming that whatever optionis adopted is an option that keeps money growth comfortably within therange.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining the different alternatives and their impact on the aggregates, and stating that there is no significant need to force changes in reserve restraint or paths. There is no conflicting opinion or disagreement presented.


Passage number 176.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With that I think we ought to have adoughnut.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement expresses the speaker's personal opinion or desire for having a donut.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 177.
[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You all heard Mr. Axilrod's opinion thatthe real question is what to do if these various aggregates begingoing off track. The implication is that there isn't much to do atthe moment. Although he didn't say it explicitly, I suppose thatsuggests some version of alternative B, which he interprets as nochange for the moment, assuming nothing goes off track. I will raise-27-10/4/83that question anyway, as to whether that's a reasonable startingpoint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker questions Mr. Axilrod's opinion and implies that they have a different perspective. They also mention raising a question about the reasonableness of Mr. Axilrod's starting point.


Passage number 178.
MR. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, I think that's a very goodstarting point and I would recommend that we pursue that path. Myonly concern would be that we not let the growth of the aggregatesdiminish from these suggested rates in October through December, whichare well above where we've been recently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Roberts, is expressing agreement and support for the suggested rates. They do express concern about potential diminishing growth in the aggregates from October through December, but this does not indicate disagreement with the suggested rates.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 179.
MR. PARTEE. I think that's probably the question isn't it,Paul--whether they are going to snap back in the way projected.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is indicating a question or uncertainty about whether something will happen as projected.


Passage number 180.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think we know. That's whatSteve was saying: We have to get some guidance on what happens ifindeed [monetary] growth either snaps back and goes above or goesbelow. Presumably, there would be some implication for moving and therate of speed at which to move. How aggressively to move is a nicequestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage expresses uncertainty and a need for guidance, but there is no clear disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 181.
 If we start where we are, which is at this peculiar $650million borrowing level that we talk about but which has never been inexistence--MR. AXILROD. In the past three weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about a borrowing level that has never been in existence.


Passage number 182.
MR. PARTEE. The fundamental borrowing level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the statement made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 183.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is going on in the market today, bythe way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is simply asking for information about the current state of the market. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 184.
MR. STERNLIGHT. The funds rate is firm at 9-1/2 or 9-5/8percent--a slight improvement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that the funds rate is firm at a specific rate, indicating a slight improvement.


Passage number 185.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're on track with $650 million now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply states a fact about being on track with $650 million.


Passage number 186.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Borrowings have been running closer to $1billion this week. Banks may want more excess reserves than we'reallowing for. Our projection has us slightly above the [reserve]path, which is staying put, and getting some RP withdrawal that willput us closer back to the path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating some facts and projections.


Passage number 187.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, we had $647 million one week; andthat was the week before we went to a $650 million [objective].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating the amount of money they had in one week.


Passage number 188.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the week before we went.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply states a fact about the timing of an event. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 189.
MR. BLACK. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black simply confirms that something is correct.


Passage number 190.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't want to speed you alongfaster than you want to go, but are we starting roughly where we are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their concern about rushing the other person but also seeking confirmation about the starting point of a conversation or situation.


Passage number 191.
MR. BOEHNE. May I ask a question about where we are. Iunderstand the $650 million; I think I understand why we shoot at $650million but don't hit it. But are we talking in terms of a federalfunds rate of 9-1/4 percent as being what we think is roughlyconsistent with $650 million of borrowing or are we thinking of 9-1/2percent as being consistent with it, or what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is asking for clarification and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 192.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, 9-1/4 percent is what Mr. Axilrodsays, but I don't consider that a vital part of the decision. I don't-28-10/4/83know exactly what [funds rate] is consistent with it down to the lastquarter point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that they don't consider the mentioned percentage to be a vital part of the decision and they acknowledge their lack of knowledge about the exact consistency of the funds rate.


Passage number 193.
MR. AXILROD. Borrowing since the last Committee meeting, aswe said, varied between $650 million and $1.6 billion. And forpractically all of that time the funds rate on a weekly average basiswas within 5 or 6 basis points of 9-1/2 percent. Then one week itdropped to a little over 9 percent. So, the relationship has beenquite loose.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating facts about borrowing and interest rates without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 194.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the best answer I could give toyour question is that $650 million implemented over a period of time,with a reasonable excess reserve figure, would probably give you afederal funds rate averaging less than it has been averaging.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The author is simply providing their opinion on the best answer to the question.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 195.
MR. PARTEE. A little less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The word "less" suggests that there may be disagreement or a differing opinion about the amount being discussed.


Passage number 196.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Somewhat less; how much less I don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "how much less I don't know" is expressing uncertainty or lack of information, rather than presenting a conflicting opinion or argument.


Passage number 197.
MR. BLACK. I liked your starting position better than theone you moved to subsequently, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black is simply expressing his preference for the initial position taken by the Chairman.


Passage number 198.
MR. RICE. Did it change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply presents a question being asked by Mr. Rice without any conflicting points of view.


Passage number 199.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not aware that it changed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that the speaker is not aware of a change, indicating a lack of information rather than disagreement or contention.


Passage number 200.
MR. BLACK. I thought it did--just a tad, it seemed to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response is a statement of opinion without any opposing views or conflicting arguments being presented.


Passage number 201.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm talking about $650 million borrowingand using the specifications of alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presenting specific information about a borrowing of $650 million and the use of the specifications of alternative B.


Passage number 202.
MR. PARTEE. That sounds fine to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee expresses agreement with the previous statement, indicating that he is in agreement with what was said.


Passage number 203.
MR. RICE. Me too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only includes a statement of agreement, indicating that the speaker agrees with whoever they are speaking to.


Passage number 204.
MR. BOEHNE. It seems to me that the risks are probably moreon the side of continued undershoots just because, looking back overthis, if we get a string of undershoots we usually get them in a row;and if we get overshoots, we get overshoots in a row. It seems to methat we're more in the midst of a string of undershoots so, for nointellectual reason at all, my gut tells me that we probably have alittle more chance for continued undershoots than we do overshoots.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion and speculation based on their gut feeling.


Passage number 205.
MR. PARTEE. The trouble with that is the undershoots endsometime.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by MR. PARTEE.


Passage number 206.
MR. BOEHNE. They do end sometime.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "They do end sometime" is a simple fact and does not express any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 207.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I have no particular feeling on thatone way or the other. But I do feel we have to discuss how we willreact to either undershoots or overshoots. I'm only in stage one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states their lack of feeling on a particular matter and suggests discussing how to react to potential outcomes. They also mention being in stage one, which does not indicate disagreement or contention.


Passage number 208.
MR. BOEHNE. My sense is that if we continue to get weakness,we ought to probe down with the borrowing. I don't have a problemwith that. I would have a problem, however, if we suddenly got a lotof strength; I would not automatically want to probe up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Boehne is expressing his perspective and preference regarding probing down or up with borrowing, based on the outcome of the situation.


Passage number 209.
-29-10/4/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you're just a little ahead of thegame. Let me come back to you and ask my original question: Do wewant to deal with those questions that you're dealing with against thestarting point of basically $650 million of borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that the other person is "just a little ahead of the game" and suggests revisiting their original question.


Passage number 210.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think that's the only thing to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is expressing a personal opinion or belief.


Passage number 211.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that seems to represent the generalfeeling. Okay, Mr. Boehne, go ahead. Did you say if monetary growthfalls short [of expectations], you want to react pretty quickly and ifit goes above, you want to react more slowly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply summarizing the general feeling and then asking Mr. Boehne to clarify his position on reacting to monetary growth.


Passage number 212.
MR. BOEHNE. That's basically right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Boehne is agreeing with the statement or idea being discussed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 213.
MR. PARTEE. I don't agree with that. I would be evenhandedand I would react to an appreciable change in the aggregates in eitherdirection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Partee, states that he does not agree with something, indicating a disagreement or contention. The passage does not provide enough information to determine what exactly he disagrees with, but it suggests that there is some level of disagreement present.


Passage number 214.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I'd want to be evenhanded but I wouldwant to try and interpret [the aggregates] in light of what washappening in the economy. If I saw a weak money number for Octoberprospectively and a very strong set of September employmentstatistics, then I'd relax and let that happen. If, on the otherhand, the money growth were strong in October and the Septemberemployment statistics came in very weak, then I'd want to go in theother direction. But I'd want to have a lot of input from thinking ofwhere the economy is going.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their approach to interpreting economic data and making decisions based on that interpretation. They mention considering different factors and adjusting their actions accordingly, but they do not mention any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 215.
MR. MARTIN. I think the fragility of the world debtsituation is such that probing downward makes sense. I think that isthe major risk to our recovery on a three-year basis; it's a majorrisk to the world's recovery; and it's a major risk to the financialinstitutions, particularly the commercial banking institutions in thiscountry in terms of write-offs and their possible contraction ofcredit in a different sense than we use that term. Therefore, I wouldbe very cautious in probing upward and quite willing to probe down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and viewpoint but does not mention or address any conflicting perspectives.


Passage number 216.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just mention a descriptive pointthat bothers me a little, but it's going to be dealt with in thepolicy record. If we do begin as we just said--that we remainbasically unchanged--presumably the directive will say we remainunchanged. The last directive said we remained unchanged. In theory,we have eased a shade since the last meeting but both directives saythings are unchanged.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing a minor concern about a descriptive point and discussing the consistency of previous directives.


Passage number 217.
MS. TEETERS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I cannot analyze a passage without any context or content provided. Please provide the passage you would like me to evaluate.


Passage number 218.
 But we haven't--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It all would be clear enough if theborrowings actually had been lower recently, but in fact they weren't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The author is simply stating a fact about the recent borrowing levels not being lower as expected.


Passage number 219.
So we're saying we are remaining unchanged in a somewhat easierposture that isn't evident--MR. PARTEE. And may become so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they are staying the same in a more relaxed manner, which may not be immediately apparent to others.


Passage number 220.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --to anybody who is not inside our heads.How do we explain this in the policy record.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the difficulty of explaining something to someone who is not familiar with our thoughts.


Passage number 221.
-30-10/4/83MR. BOEHNE. Well, we have to do the borrowings. We couldsay something like "taking into account the somewhat lower reserveconditions." We would say about where that level is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the need to make borrowings and suggesting mentioning the lower reserve conditions in the statement.


Passage number 222.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What level. The trouble is the lastfigures right up to this meeting are higher in terms of borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact that the borrowing figures leading up to the meeting were higher. There is no contention or disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 223.
MS. TEETERS. We average them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that "we average them."


Passage number 224.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we say reserve conditions. I don'tpresent this as a major substantive point; it's just a littlesomething that has to be cleared up, and it's a little difficultbecause they--SPEAKER(.) How about "maintain the somewhat easier tone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they need to clarify something, but acknowledges that it is not a major point of contention.


Passage number 225.
"MR. RICE. But it's within the tolerance limits of unchanged.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact without any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 226.
That's [conveying] the point that we can still say unchanged eventhough there has been substantial--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not saying there is a substantiveproblem but I think there is a completeness-of-the-record problem. Wehave gone from--it wasn't much of a change--$800 million or somethingin borrowings in our minds to $650 million and it's all labeled asunchanged.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their concern about a completeness-of-the-record problem, without stating that there is a substantive problem.


Passage number 227.
 And, in fact, the statistics went from $800 million to $1billion in the last--MR. BALLES. Weren't there a lot of quarter-end pressures inthat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the statistics going from $800 million to $1 billion. The interruption by Mr. Balles does not introduce any disagreement either.


Passage number 228.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I know why it happened.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states that the speaker knows why something happened, but it does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 229.
 All I'm saying isthat some clever writing--not clever in the pejorative sense--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. John Berry's article in TheWashington Post, I think, goes in that direction. He quotes from thedirective and says that the flexibility of how the Desk interprets"maintaining the existing degree of restraint" is becoming enormouslywide.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 230.
MR. PARTEE. He neglected the fact that the Desk checks withthe Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the lack of contrasting viewpoints or conflicting statements.


Passage number 231.
MS. TEETERS. No, he didn't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "No, he didn't" simply denies or contradicts a previous assertion without showing any argument or conflicting point of view.


Passage number 232.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Oh, it came through pretty clearly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Oh, it came through pretty clearly" simply expresses agreement or acknowledgment of a clear message.


Passage number 233.
MS. TEETERS. But can we use the words "decrease slightly".If we got to $650 million, we would be down almost $300 million in theborrowing average for the month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement of financial information without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 234.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any statements or indications of contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the person "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" without providing any context or information to suggest disagreement.


Passage number 235.
 We could say that, but that's a littlemisleading too in terms of our--MR. PARTEE. How about "maintain a slightly easier posturewith respect...
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The person is suggesting an alternative way of phrasing something, but there is no clear disagreement or conflict between the speakers.


Passage number 236.
"-31-10/4/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The nice thing to say would be "seeks tomaintain the slightly easier posture implemented over recent weeks,"but it wasn't implemented.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting or opposing ideas. It simply states that a particular posture was not implemented, without any conflicting viewpoints or disagreement.


Passage number 237.
MR. BALLES. How about "intended for recent weeks".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This statement does not express any form of disagreement or contention. It is a question asking about the phrase "intended for recent weeks" without indicating any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 238.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's exactly what it is: maintain theslightly easier posture intended but not implemented.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any evidence of contention or disagreement. It is a statement describing the current situation without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 239.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, we're quibbling about words now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Gramley's statement suggests a discussion or debate over semantics rather than a disagreement.


Passage number 240.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 241.
 I didn't--MR. GRAMLEY. I understand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that they did not do something, and Mr. Gramley acknowledges that he understands.


Passage number 242.
 In terms of the way this shouldhit the public later on, I think we'd be much better off if we saidunchanged and then--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I just raised this because I thinkit needs some description in the policy record. It would not be inthe directive itself unless somebody can think of very clever wordingfor the directive.But I diverted us from this other discussion. What I haveare some views that if things come in weaker, we ease a little, ifit's quite natural on the aggregates. And if things come in tighterwe would be either reluctant or we'd be symmetrical, all dependingupon the business situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 243.
MR. MARTIN. And the international situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply introduces a topic, the international situation, without expressing any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 244.
MS. TEETERS. Well, I happen to be depressed about theinternational situation; I think it has gotten increasingly fragile inthe past couple of months. And the best thing we can do for them isto get lower interest rates. If we have the opportunity to lowerthem, I think we should do it. So, I would probe downward as much aspossible and be reluctant to raise the rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses their personal opinion about the international situation and suggests lowering interest rates as a potential solution. There are no conflicting viewpoints or arguments presented.


Passage number 245.
MR. KEEHN. We do have a meeting next month and one wonderswhether anything is going to happen between now and then that we haveto worry too much about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is more of a speculation or pondering about whether anything significant will occur before the next meeting.


Passage number 246.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, if we continue operating as wedid here, there is a certain degree to which the Chairman and the Deskand Steve are exercising a bit of discretion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement about how they are currently operating.


Passage number 247.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All this is simple enough unless thebusiness news diverges from the monetary aggregates news. If we havethe kind of thing Lyle was talking about, all the [business] numberswould be coming in quite buoyantly but the monetary numbers couldremain low for another month and we might be quite happy about thatand not want to do anything. If the business news is mixed or weakand the aggregates are low, it's quite clear what we do; and viceversa, it's quite clear what we do. If we get these mixed signalsfrom the two sides, it's a little more difficult.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply discusses different scenarios and the actions that would be taken based on the information received. There is no conflicting information or conflicting opinions presented in the passage.


Passage number 248.
MR. MORRIS. Then you could handle that in a conference call.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. One person suggests handling something in a conference call, but there is no opposing view or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 249.
We could make a directive based on an existing understanding that ifwe get the kind of---32-10/4/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can't deal with every possiblecontingency here. We can have a call, but we can get some feel forthe situation anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the possibility of making a directive and acknowledging that not all contingencies can be accounted for.


Passage number 250.
MR. GUFFEY. It's not meaningful, I think, for this shortintermeeting period but how would the markets read this directive ifwe say "maintain the existing degree of restraint" and have theaccompanying language for [moving] up and down [from that], when theysee after the next meeting that the quarterly targets at least for M2and M3 were raised at this particular meeting and [we say] nothinghappened.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any explicit contention or disagreement. It simply presents a question about how the markets might interpret the directive.


Passage number 251.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Have they.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the given passage, there is no contention or disagreement. The statement "Have they" appears to be a question, without any conflicting opinions expressed.


Passage number 252.
MR. GUFFEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the given passage without any provided context or content.


Passage number 253.
 Well, they won't--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The numbers we would put in here, Isuppose--. Oh, the 1/2 percentage point [difference]. Supposeinstead of saying 8-1/2 and 8-3/4 percent, we just say 8-1/2 percent[for M2 and M3] and 7 percent [for Ml].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the numbers that will be used to represent different percentages.


Passage number 254.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, to be sure, the two have gone up only 1/2percentage point from the third quarter to the fourth quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact about the increase of two unspecified factors.


Passage number 255.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They're up 1/2 percentage point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 256.
MR. GUFFEY. But it [represents] some ease. My question, andmaybe somebody can answer it, is: How would the market interpret that30 days from now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any disagreement or contention. It only presents a question and expresses a desire for someone to answer it.


Passage number 257.
MR. AXILROD. The October 1st deregulation is enough almostto explain a 1/2 point, I would think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage presents a statement by Mr. Axilrod, stating that the October 1st deregulation is enough to explain a 1/2 point. There is no evidence of contention or disagreement in this statement.


Passage number 258.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think they would pay any attentionto a 1/2 point [difference].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It only expresses the speaker's opinion on whether or not someone would pay attention to a small difference.


Passage number 259.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What they will pay more attention tois if they see the fed funds rate decline to below 9 percent in thisperiod and then they see the release of a record that says "maintainthe existing degree of reserve restraint." Then they would besurprised, possibly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements. It is a statement about what people would be surprised by in a given scenario.


Passage number 260.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, if the money supply were low, I thinkthey would say: Okay, you said if the money supply came in low, you'dease a little.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion or speculation about what would happen if the money supply were low.


Passage number 261.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But if the money supply were stillwithin the target but in the upper half, then I'm not sure they wouldunderstand that we were not being a little more secretive in easing.But I don't think it's a major point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 262.
MR. PARTEE. Well, the staff projects pretty strong growth inthe money supply; I wouldn't think it likely that the funds rate woulddrop by much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: While there is a difference in opinion between the speaker and the staff projections regarding the future funds rate and money supply, the passage does not explicitly mention any contention or disagreement between individuals. It simply presents the speaker's skepticism based on the staff projections.


Passage number 263.
 In both the market and the net borrowings, it seems tome to--MS. TEETERS. Well, it depends on velocity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any statement that indicates contention or disagreement between the speaker and Ms. Teeters. It simply states that the speaker believes something about the market and net borrowings, and Ms. Teeters responds by saying it depends on velocity.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 264.
-33-10/4/83VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If the real economy were showingsigns of weakening, even though the money supply was still in theupper half but within the range, it might still be a situation wherewe would do some easing. That's a mixed case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage presents a scenario where the real economy is weakening, and there is a discussion about whether easing monetary policy would be appropriate in this situation. Some people may argue for easing, while others may disagree and suggest other courses of action. This difference of opinions makes it a mixed case.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 265.
MR. PARTEE. That's even another combination--high money anda low economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker is pointing out that combining high money with a low economy creates another combination, implying that there might be a disagreement or contention regarding the effects or desirability of such a combination.


Passage number 266.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's not likely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "It's not likely" does not present any conflicting viewpoints or opinions. It simply expresses a low probability of something happening.


Passage number 267.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The more I look at that first sentence themore it bothers me in terms of being misleading. I'm afraid the moreaccurate thing to say would be "The Committee seeks in the short runto decrease slightly the degree of reserve restraint evident in themarket in recent weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and stating their perception of the situation. There is no opposing view or conflicting statement presented in the passage.


Passage number 268.
"MS. TEETERS. Yes, that's the record.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the record is confirmed as correct.


Passage number 269.
MR. MORRIS. Why not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement or question from Mr. Morris, which does not indicate any disagreement or conflicting views.


Passage number 270.
MR. GRAMLEY. Right. When you say "reserve restraint" areyou talking about the funds rate or are you talking about net borrowedreserves or borrowings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 271.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Net borrowed reserves or the borrowings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply defines "net borrowed reserves" as "the borrowings."


Passage number 272.
MR. GRAMLEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Based on the given passage, there is not enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 273.
 It seems to me if we put out a directive--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We did have one whole week where netborrowed reserves came in less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of observation or opinion.


Passage number 274.
MS. TEETERS. The month averages out as $450 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a fact about the average monthly amount of money. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 275.
MR. STERNLIGHT. There were three recent weeks when theborrowing was about $700 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a fact about the borrowing amount being around $700 million for three recent weeks. There is no contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 276.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. This is because the passage only includes the name "Mr. Axilrod" and does not provide any further information or statements that could indicate disagreement or contention.


Passage number 277.
 The lowest week was way back on September 9thwhen we had virtually--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me look at these figures. Maybeit's not as bad as I thought it was. What are they. Read off therecent borrowings and the net borrowed figures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is looking at figures to determine if the situation is as bad as they initially thought.


Passage number 278.
MR. AXILROD. Adjustment plus seasonal borrowing for theAugust 24th week, which was the week of the meeting, was $1.1 billion;August 31st it was $1.2 billion. Then it was $757 million, $647million, $1,589 million or $1.6 billion, and then this past week $739million. And this week they're probably going to be somewhere around$800 or $850 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents information about the amount of adjustment plus seasonal borrowing for different weeks.


Passage number 279.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. Now, what was [net borrowed].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply asks a question.


Passage number 280.
MR. AXILROD. The net borrowings, doing quick subtraction inmy head, would be: $600 million August 24th; around $700 millionAugust 31st; then close to zero; around $220 million; $1.3 billion;and last week $317 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is simply stating the amount of net borrowings on different dates. There is no contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 281.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And this week it should be what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It does not present any conflicting ideas or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 282.
-34-10/4/83MR. AXILROD. Now, the market takes out the seasonal though.This week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that the market takes into account seasonal trends or patterns.


Passage number 283.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. $300 million or so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "$300 million or so" does not provide any information or context that could lead to contention or disagreement. It is simply an estimation or approximation of an amount without any specific details or argumentative points.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 284.
MR. AXILROD. This week we're aiming at $200 million. Yes,it's $450 million and $650 million, so probably we're very close to$200 million. We may hit it with higher borrowing or higher excess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker initially states that they are aiming for $200 million, but then mentions higher amounts of $450 million and $650 million, indicating that there is some uncertainty or disagreement about the target amount.


Passage number 285.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, maybe that's not so bad. If youtake out that one figure and give weight to net borrowed reserves, wehave been distinctly lower than we were.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply presenting an alternative perspective or point of view.


Passage number 286.
 I don't know when we were--MS. TEETERS. But take the monthly nets. It was +10 in May;-200 in June; -370 in July; -609 in August; and about -450 inSeptember.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a sequence of numbers without expressing any opinions or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 287.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's one month. But I guess wecould almost say "The Committee seeks in the short run to maintain theslightly lesser degree of reserve restraint achieved in recent weeks"if [the numbers] come out [as expected] this week. We had two weeks,then, of a low net borrowed figure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not showing contention or disagreement. It is discussing a specific time period and the actions that will be taken based on certain conditions. There is no conflicting opinion expressed.


Passage number 288.
MR. AXILROD. The other fact, Mr. Chairman, is that in Julynonborrowed reserves dropped about 0.3 percent and dropped 9 percent[in August]. In September, based on the data as of the end of lastweek, they will rise around 4 percent because there's a small drop inborrowing. So, the nonborrowed is turning up in September afterdropping.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating facts and providing data without expressing any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 289.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I think it's "sought in recent weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Sternlight is expressing his own thoughts or opinion, so there is no opposing viewpoint or conflicting statement present.


Passage number 290.
"MR. GUFFEY. I think that's right. Can we use the word"sought" in recent weeks instead of "achieved".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply suggests replacing the word "achieved" with "sought" without facing any opposition or disagreement from anyone else.


Passage number 291.
 That's exactly right;everything else would--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, maybe we just say that and explainit in the [policy record].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests agreement and a possibility for further explanation.


Passage number 292.
MR. STERNLIGHT. The policy record can refer to thedifficulties with the Treasury balances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement as it is simply stating that the policy record can refer to difficulties with the Treasury balances. There are no opposing viewpoints or conflicting arguments presented.


Passage number 293.
MR. AXILROD. Well, you could say "the slight easing inreserve positions" and point to the nonborrowed going up as wasreflected mainly in drops in short rates other than the funds rate,which was affected by all these other things. Because the other shortrates are down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing an explanation and discussing the relationship between reserve positions, nonborrowed rates, and short rates.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 294.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, except right now as we're meetingthe funds rate is quite high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "the funds rate is quite high" implies that there is disagreement about the current level of the funds rate.


Passage number 295.
MR. AXILROD. No, I mean it was reflected in other shortrates apart from the funds rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the reflected short rates were apart from the funds rates.


Passage number 296.
MR. MARTIN. Now we're talking about rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 297.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then we say we're aiming at those rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states an aim without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 298.
-35-10/4/83MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The given passage does not contain any information or statements that indicate disagreement or contention. It appears to be a random sequence of characters and does not convey meaningful content.


Passage number 299.
 No, I meant the easing in reserve conditionswas reflected--MR. GRAMLEY. I can't imagine that market participants wouldlook at numbers like net borrowed reserves, borrowings, and the fundsrate and decide that what we've been trying to do is to hit a targetfor net borrowed reserves. The numbers are all over the map, as arethe borrowing figures. They saw the funds rate average 9.4, 9.4, 9.5,9.5, 9.5, and 9.0 percent [in recent weeks]. And to say that marketparticipants are going to look at what we say and then compare it withthe borrowing numbers seems to me a little strange.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and confusion about how market participants might interpret certain numbers and statements.


Passage number 300.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Really, I'm not sure what you're saying.That one week screwed it up. Otherwise the borrowing number and thenet borrowed both are distinctly lower than they were earlier.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their uncertainty about what the other person is saying and then simply stating that the borrowing number and net borrowed are lower than before. There is no disagreement or argument presented.


Passage number 301.
MR. GRAMLEY. Yes, but they're all over the map. The rangeruns from $647 million to $1.6 billion on borrowings. And for netborrowed reserves it's from 0 to $1.3 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a range of numbers for the rangeruns and net borrowed reserves without presenting opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements.


Passage number 302.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" simply refers to a person's title or position, without any indication of disagreement or argument.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 303.
 Yes, that one week--MR. GRAMLEY. Well, it isn't just one week. Throw out thatone week and now the range on borrowings goes from $647 million to$1.2 billion and on net borrowed reserves from 0 to $700 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In this passage, there is a clear disagreement between the speaker stating "That one week" and Mr. Gramley, who contradicts by saying "Well, it isn't just one week." This indicates contention or disagreement.


Passage number 304.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The $1.2 billion goes back to the earlierperiod; that's before we moved. In the last five weeks there's onlyone week that's way out of line.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is stating facts about the distribution of money, but it does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 305.
MS. TEETERS. Well, the net borrowed on a monthly basisreflects what we've done, if you average out the weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a fact without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 306.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Could we put it this way. Could wesay: "The Committee seeks to maintain the existing degree of reserverestraint, compatible with the slight easing in market conditions inrecent weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is presenting a question about the intentions of a committee in maintaining reserve restraint.


Passage number 307.
"MR. MARTIN. That "compatible with" sounds like ratetargeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Martin, expressing his opinion or interpretation of something.


Passage number 308.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Because we have seen some easing inmarket conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is a simple statement of fact and does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 309.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions Chairman Volcker without providing any information or context for there to be contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 310.
 Yes, but I think the problem--MR. PARTEE. I like the word "maintain" and I like the words"slightly easier.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses a contradictory opinion by stating "Yes, but" before sharing their own thoughts on the matter. This indicates disagreement or disagreement with the previous statement.


Passage number 311.
" Any connective that makes it possible--MR. RICE. Anything that makes those reconcilable is allright with him.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It appears that MR. RICE is open to any solution that would make things reconcilable.


Passage number 312.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What we have written down here at themoment is: "The Committee seeks in the short run to maintain theslightly lesser degree of reserve restraint sought in recent weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating what the Committee aims to do in the short run, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 313.
"MR. BLACK. Should I put that down or will you change it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification or confirmation.


Passage number 314.
-36-10/4/83MR. WALLICH. Then we have to explain how we came to seek adifferent one than we said in the previous directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clearly stated contention or disagreement.


Passage number 315.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" simply presents a factual information, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 316.
 I think what we've done is distinctlycompatible with the previous directive, but I--MR. PARTEE. Yes, because it's consistent with weakaggregates in the light of business conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is agreement in the passage. The speaker states that their actions are compatible with the previous directive, which indicates agreement. Furthermore, MR. PARTEE acknowledges this by saying "Yes."


Passage number 317.
MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, should we heed the Biblicalpassage "Seek and ye shall find".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement present in the passage. The speaker is asking whether or not they should pay attention to the biblical passage "Seek and ye shall find," implying that they are considering its value or applicability.


Passage number 318.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Eventually.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 319.
 [This wording] isn't perfect,but then--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement presenting an opinion about the wording without any conflicting opinions mentioned.


Passage number 320.
 [Unintelligible] other interest ratesin the markets generally, so why can't someone try to explain why--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think by implication you're saying weare aiming at interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 321.
MR. MARTIN. Mention rates and they think we're targetingrates. Mention M1 rebasing and they think we're targeting Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that when certain terms are mentioned, people may misunderstand or interpret them as something else.


Passage number 322.
MS. TEETERS. Well, we've mentioned enough different thingsin that length of time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement made by Ms. Teeters about the various topics that have been discussed.


Passage number 323.
MR. BLACK. They might think it means the discount rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 324.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anything we put in there is going torequire some explanation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that anything that is put in a certain place will require some explanation, without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 325.
MR. GUFFEY. But the policy record can explain that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Guffey is simply stating that the policy record can provide an explanation.


Passage number 326.
MR. PARTEE. Sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "Sure" indicates agreement or confirmation rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 327.
MR. GUFFEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is impossible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without having access to the text in question.


Passage number 328.
 Really, it's not--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Unless there's strong objection--I don'tthink we're talking about any substance in what we're trying to dohere--I'll put in this language: "The Committee seeks in the shortrun to maintain the slightly lesser degree of reserve restraint soughtin recent weeks." We'll explain in the policy record that we hadproblems with Treasury balances and the market was a little easier.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention among the speakers. It simply states the speaker's opinion or suggestion.


Passage number 329.
MR. GUFFEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without any context or the passage itself, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 330.
 That's also consistent with what we would havedone because of the way the aggregates came in from the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I don't think there's any trouble inrationalizing it with the previous directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that their actions and reasoning align with the previous directive, indicating agreement rather than disagreement.


Passage number 331.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 332.
 There will be indicators of somewhat lesserreserve pressures on the net borrowed--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is except for that one week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is subjective and does not present any disagreement or contention. It is simply stating that there will be indicators of slightly reduced pressure on borrowed reserves, except for one specific week.


Passage number 333.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Mr. Axilrod, without any information about his opinions or any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 334.
 Yes, if we look at September and August onaverage, net borrowed is a little less than---37-10/4/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. Who can add some enlightenment asto how we should react to contingencies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for input or suggestions on how to react to contingencies.


Passage number 335.
MR. BLACK. I'll just say symmetrically, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that Mr. Black will say something symmetrically.


Passage number 336.
MR. BALLES. Paul, I'd like to support the proposition madeby Governor Martin a little while ago that if we have a chance toprobe toward a little lower rates, we should do so for the reasons heset forth, which I find not only cogent but very worrisome.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. In fact, the speaker, Mr. Balles, is expressing agreement and support for the proposition made by Governor Martin. He finds the reasons set forth by the Governor to be both cogent (logical) and worrisome.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 337.
MR. CORRIGAN. There's a Catch-22 here, though. My concern,as I said before, is that, if anything, the economy may be strongerthan the forecast and then inflation might be greater than theforecast. I think that way because in some ways the focus now shouldbe 1984 rather than just the fourth quarter of 1983. Personally, Iwould be happier if we came out someplace closer to between "C" and"B" rather than "B." I think the Catch-22 is very important becauseif the economy is stronger and inflationary pressures are greater,then we get Frank Morris' collision sooner rather than later. And ifthat happens, we will not have helped the LDC problems; as a matter offact, it works the other way. I get troubled by this whole argumentthat says that the solution to the LDC debt problem is [for us] toease monetary policy. The real solution is beyond our control: It'sa tighter fiscal policy. But I think there is some danger inoverplaying that and ending up with just the results that we're tryingto avoid.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses concern about inflation being greater than the forecast and argues against easing monetary policy as a solution to the LDC debt problem. This suggests a disagreement with the argument that easing monetary policy is the solution.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 338.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I agree with that to the extent that if weget too aggressive--and we're talking in a limited range here, Iunderstand--and take too many risks of having the aggregates and theeconomy moving up on us, it may help to bring a little glimmer of hopeto the LDCs for three weeks, but then we will put an arrow throughtheir hearts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The statement "I agree with that to the extent that if we get too aggressive...and take too many risks..." implies that the person speaking partially agrees but also disagrees with the idea being discussed. They believe that being too aggressive and taking too many risks will have negative consequences for the LDCs, contradicting the idea of bringing hope to them.


Passage number 339.
MR. PARTEE. You know, Paul, I think this language in thenext sentence is just perfect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is expressing his opinion that the language in the next sentence is perfect, indicating agreement or satisfaction.


Passage number 340.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I think the language covers it allright.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and certainty that the language being discussed adequately covers a certain matter.


Passage number 341.
MR. PARTEE. The language, you notice, does not qualify lessrestraint but it does qualify more restraint by saying "somewhat" morerestraint. And I think maybe that's a reasonable compromise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply suggests a reasonable compromise by using the word "somewhat" to qualify "more restraint."


Passage number 342.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't have any trouble with thelanguage. I agree that the language in its general way covers whatwe're talking about. But it doesn't mention the internationalsituation explicitly. I don't know whether that's wise anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker states their agreement with the general coverage of the language but raises a question about whether it is wise to not explicitly mention the international situation.


Passage number 343.
MR. PARTEE. I don't either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of disagreement or contention. It simply states that "MR. PARTEE" agrees with the previous statement.


Passage number 344.
MR. BALLES. Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The given text does not present any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 345.
 Chairman, this dialogue here--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is the phrase "other factors bearingon the business and inflation outlook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply mentioning the existence of "other factors bearing on the business and inflation outlook."


Passage number 346.
"MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, in terms of whether we probe oneway or another, it is at least my sense that we would be probing-38-10/4/83toward a little lower rates only on the condition that the Ms come insomewhere outside the range shown in alternative B. If anyone wasmaking a different proposal than that, I didn't understand it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 347.
MR. PARTEE. That was my understanding too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage simply states that Mr. Partee agrees with the understanding mentioned earlier. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 348.
MR. BALLES. So, we aren't talking about making major overtmoves to accelerate the rate of monetary growth, which I agree wouldbe untoward. We'll never get to 1984 if we have a big LDC debt crisisin the fourth quarter of 1983. I think we have to deal with thesethings one at a time. I'm not talking about any extreme measures, buta shading in favor of easing a bit in the immediate future if we can,given the behavior of the aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 349.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where is October [Ml] starting from interms of the September level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 350.
MR. AXILROD. The latest figure published for the 21st isjust barely above the August level. On September 28th a furtherincrease is what we would forecast and, for what it's worth, a ratherstrong increase on October 5th. There's some doubt about all that.But that would give you an October level well above--by about $5billion--the September average level, which would suggest a strongOctober growth of a little over 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating some figures and mentioning that there is some doubt about them, but they are not actively arguing or disagreeing with anyone else's opinions or statements.


Passage number 351.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Over 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information that can be construed as contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a numerical value without any conflicting opinions or contrasting viewpoints.


Passage number 352.
MR. AXILROD. But we're not projecting that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. Mr. Axilrod's statement is presented as a straightforward statement of fact without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 353.
MR. PARTEE. You had 6-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or indications of contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement of fact or dialogue between two individuals without any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 354.
MR. AXILROD. Most of the forecasters don't believe it andthe rest of the projections assume a drop after the October 5th week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the belief or assumption of most forecasters, followed by the assumption made in other projections.


Passage number 355.
But if that [unintelligible]--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me give you a calculation, which youdon't have. Given an assumption that the 28th is a little higher thanthe 21st, if you increased it by $1-1/2 billion a week in October,would it be over 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 356.
MR. ROBERTS. Yes, because $2.8 billion is 6-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any elements of contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the percentage of $2.8 billion.


Passage number 357.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is impossible to determine from the given information whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Additional context is needed to make a conclusion.


Passage number 358.
 I think $1 billion a week--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the average.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a fact without contradicting or opposing any other viewpoint.


Passage number 359.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, I'm sure it would be. I'd have to work itout.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is responding positively to a statement or suggestion.


Passage number 360.
MR. CORRIGAN. That would be almost 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement of a percentage without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 361.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, that would be very high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply agrees with the statement being made.


Passage number 362.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it depends upon where you start.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply suggests that the answer or outcome may vary depending on the starting point or perspective.


Passage number 363.
The average--MR. AXILROD. We'll just make the calculation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions making a calculation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 364.
-39-10/4/83MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, if I may: There are an awfullot of uncertainties out there. And it would seem to me that thecontingencies that might arise--for example, the LDC crisis orsomething like that--can be dealt with on a conference call and aspecial meeting of the Committee. But I really have two concerns.One is the strength of the economy. As I said before, we tend to seethe economy growing more rapidly than perhaps other forecasters. Theforecast for the second quarter was certainly not very accurate. Itcame in at 9.7 percent, appreciably above what people thought. So,that's a worry that I think we ought to have. The other concern to meis that [we ought not just] look at the growth of the monetaryaggregates over the last couple of months alone but back up and lookat what has been happening to monetary growth since August of 1982.In the period from August '82 to June '83 we had very rapid monetarygrowth. So, it seems to me when we're deliberating about a specificpolicy option, we have to take into account those two periods of time.Because the aggregates in the short term--and I guess even in the longterm--are within the targets, there doesn't seem to be any particularneed to have a more restrictive policy at this time. On the otherhand, since we have had some accommodation--some ease in the monetaryaggregates and some base drift, I might add, in rebasing--I think itwould be premature to ease at this time. So, I would opt for a targetsomewhere between "B" and "C." If we did that, we would be able tocome in somewhere near the middle of the range for Ml. If my numbersare right and if that kind of policy were followed, it seems to methat Ml growth would still not be restrictive over the long term. Mlcould grow at a little over 6 percent from September to December andstill reach the midpoint of the target range. That still would implyfourth quarter-to-fourth quarter growth of about 10.4 percent, so sucha policy is still not restrictive in any sense. What it comes down toin my mind is that we ought to opt for a steady-as-you-go policy andnot change policy at this time. And as I say, the contingencies thatmight arise can be dealt with specifically.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The individual expresses concerns about the strength of the economy and argues that the current policy should not be changed. They also suggest a target somewhere between "B" and "C", indicating disagreement with other potential options.


Passage number 365.
MR. ROBERTS. But "B" already has the fourth quarter down to5.6 percent, dependent upon December being at an 8 percent growthrate. I'd go the other way and say the risk is that it's going to betoo tight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 366.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we have decided on the $650million, generally interpreted as $600 to $700 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating a range of values that is generally agreed upon.


Passage number 367.
MR. GUFFEY. What does that mean, Mr. Chairman. Why set arange for borrowing at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply includes a question by Mr. Guffey asking for clarification on a topic. There is no evident contention or disagreement in this statement.


Passage number 368.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, sometimes strange things go on withexcess reserves or otherwise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that strange things can happen with excess reserves without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 369.
MR. GUFFEY. It has no meaning. It's not a constraint up ordown. We merely build the path on $650 million; I don't understandthe range for the borrowing that we incorporated last time. To meit's meaningless.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 370.
 The policy that--MR. STERNLIGHT. We use the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a policy and the other speaker does not offer any opposing views or challenges to the statement.


Passage number 371.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, you start out at the midpoint of the rangeand that's the only thing you really use until there's someconsultation that suggests that the aggregates are coming in-40-10/4/83differently [than expected] and then you drop the borrowing. The lasttime we set the range at $700 to $900 million and then we went to $650million. And that wasn't a policy decision of this Committee; it wasdone in consultation with the Chairman. Why set a range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the process of determining a range for borrowing and how it can be adjusted based on consultation and changes in aggregate data.


Passage number 372.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's be clear; there may be someconfusion about it. My interpretation is that this directive says weease if things are coming in low or we tighten if they're coming inhigh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply clarifying their interpretation of a directive and expressing that there might be confusion surrounding it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 373.
 I don't interpret that as staying within the range that wasset, which is an operating--MR. GUFFEY. No, and that's my point. If it doesn't have anyimplication for staying within the range, why set a range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage because the speaker's point contradicts the initial interpretation. The first speaker believes that staying within the range is implied, while the second speaker argues that it is not necessary.


Passage number 374.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's not a big point to me. Itdoesn't make much difference, but sometimes we get in there and weask: Shall we stick explicitly at $650 million this week when thingsare very tight and excess reserves are going to be high, or do weallow for a little higher excess reserves this week because that lookslike what's going to happen. A little more borrowing or a little lessis just fiddling around from week-to-week. I don't know whether itadds much; it's not a big deal one way or the other.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker states that it doesn't make much difference and that it is not a big deal one way or the other. They express neutrality and a lack of strong opinion on the matter.


Passage number 375.
MR. PARTEE. It gives you a little movement around the mean.I might remind you that we're talking about a number that is not evenin the directive. So what difference does it make whether it's apoint or if we think of it as being a range of $100 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee is providing information and asking a rhetorical question, but there is no disagreement present.


Passage number 376.
MR. WALLICH. Well, would the path then also have a range of$100 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply a question being asked by Mr. Wallich.


Passage number 377.
MR. STERNLIGHT. If we use the individual weekly paths, theyhave a specific value over time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is a neutral statement of fact and does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that individual weekly paths have a specific value over time.


Passage number 378.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have a distinction in my mind between atechnical reaction to the patterns that are developing during theweek, which has no real significance in terms of what we're aimingfor, and whether we're really making a [policy] move, however small,because the aggregates are high or low. And it is meant to conveythat. I don't care--we've operated both ways--whether we use a numberor [a range]. It doesn't make much difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their personal distinction and preference, but there is no argument or conflicting viewpoint present.


Passage number 379.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage. More context is needed.


Passage number 380.
 As I understand it, part of thattechnical problem--the reason for that modest shift in the borrowingassumption--can be that the System suspects there's a miss in theprojection because of some peculiar movement in the fed funds ratewhich doesn't seem to be explained, unless there is some--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll do it anyway because we're alwayssitting there saying: Well, which way are we going to miss. Whichway are we likely to miss this week and which way are we going to bemost misleading if we miss. So, we lean a little one way or the othersometimes. And we do that whether we put down $650 million or whetherwe put down $600 to $700 million. That kind of gives the range forthat, but it's not a big deal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the technical problem of a borrowing assumption and how they make projections based on that assumption. They mention that sometimes they lean one way or the other in their projections but clarify that it is not a significant issue.


Passage number 381.
MR. AXILROD. Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 382.
 Chairman, in answer to your question: Ifwe were so unfortunate as to have those $1-1/2 billion [weekly]-41-10/4/83increases--you remember $1 billion is to the top of the range, 9percent--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It clearly goes higher than the range,depending on where you start.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing information and clarifying that the increase goes beyond the range if the starting point is higher.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 383.
MR. AXILROD. On the assumption that there's a furtherincrease in the week of the 28th, it would get you 14 percent growthif it steadily grew $1-1/2 billion through the course of that month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents a hypothetical scenario about the potential increase in growth. It does not provide a definitive statement, but rather a speculative statement, indicating a possibility of further growth.


Passage number 384.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It sounds as if even if it were $1billion, the growth would be pretty high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is stating a hypothetical scenario and expressing an opinion about the expected growth rate.


Passage number 385.
MR. ROBERTS. Oh yes. The latest week is right on theSeptember average.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This statement is a simple affirmation without any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 386.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The latest week is on it, so if the nextweek is up--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the latest week is included and mentions the possibility of the next week being "up," without making any conflicting claims or arguments.


Passage number 387.
MR. ROBERTS. So if it's up, we're already above.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 388.
MR. AXILROD. We're not assuming that. You might say thefourth quarter we have there is consistent with what our local moneymarket model would be projecting and roughly, not very far off, whatthe quarterly model would suggest. We've allowed for a bit of shiftout of NOW accounts or demand deposits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 
Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the projections for the fourth quarter are consistent with their local money market model and roughly align with the quarterly model. They have also made allowances for a slight shift out of NOW accounts or demand deposits.


Passage number 389.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What about the broader aggregates. Arethey starting low or high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply posing a question about the broader aggregates without expressing any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 390.
MR. AXILROD. I'd have to find that nonexistent sheet. I'dhave to go through the same exercise. M2 has moved up steadily overthe course of September, so that would be starting on the high side ofthe average. And similarly for M3. Roughly, the early October levelthat we're estimating is [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 391.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you're telling me the chances arethat we're going to be starting a little on the high side on all theseaggregates, which makes it sound to me as though the chances are thatOctober may come in a little high rather than the opposite.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 


Passage number 392.
MR. AXILROD. We put M2 and M3 a little high, again justallowing for the brief effect of this deregulation. But our modelssuggest growth in nontransactions balances in the 9 to 10 percentarea--not really exceptional on a monthly average basis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the information and findings from the models.


Passage number 393.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does this figure that you have in allthese alternatives allow anything for deregulation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question about whether the figure presented in the alternatives allows for deregulation.


Passage number 394.
MR. AXILROD. Well, as I was trying to say, in October we'veallowed a little. We started allowing nothing and then after seeingsome of the newspapers where there has been some advertising, in NewYork and other places like that, we've allowed some.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that initially, nothing was allowed but later, some advertising was permitted.


Passage number 395.
MR. GUFFEY. But only for M2 and M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Guffey is simply stating that the information applies only to M2 and M3.


Passage number 396.
-42-10/4/83MR. AXILROD. Well, we pushed down Ml a bit in [October], notmuch more than roughly 1/2 to 1 percentage point on our estimate ineither case. It's a very small effect, but some effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact about the impact of pushing down M1 in October.


Passage number 397.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could get pretty good growth in M2 andM3 in October. I guess that ought to be mentioned in the record as aminor effect. Well, I don't know whether we need to go any further.Unless somebody wants to change his or her mind, we're interpretingthis in any event at around $650 million [in borrowing]. I don't muchcare whether we call it $600 to $700 million or around $650 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing their interpretation of the data and expressing their indifference to the specific amount.


Passage number 398.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, you did ask one question about howwe would treat overshoots and undershoots and I said symmetrically. Iwonder if everybody agreed that we ought to react as quickly to anundershoot as to an overshoot or vice versa.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Black, followed by a question about agreement from the rest of the group.


Passage number 399.
MR. PARTEE. I don't think they did.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states the opinion of Mr. Partee.


Passage number 400.
MR. BLACK. I don't think they did either. There was a rangeof [views].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: In the given passage, Mr. Black is expressing his own opinion by stating that he doesn't believe "they" (presumably a group of people) shared the same perspective as him. However, there is no explicit mention of contention or disagreement with someone else's viewpoint. The passage simply presents Mr. Black's individual belief.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 401.
MR. MARTIN. I don't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The phrase "I don't" indicates a disagreement or opposition to something.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 402.
MR. GRAMLEY. Yes, there was a range of views.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. This is indicated by the phrase "range of views," suggesting that there is disagreement or differing perspectives on the topic being discussed.


Passage number 403.
MR. PARTEE. But if you literally look at this language, Ithink it's not too bad.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a positive opinion about the language.


Passage number 404.
MR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage mentions "Mr. Black" but does not provide any information or context that would indicate contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 405.
 The language sounds fine but the--MR. PARTEE. Well, the language is more permissive on thedown side than on the up side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The phrase "the language is more permissive on the down side than on the up side" suggests a disagreement or contention. It implies that there is a discrepancy or imbalance in the language being discussed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 406.
MR. BLACK. Well, I didn't read it that way. In that case,it doesn't sound fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black states that he did not interpret something in the same way as someone else, implying a difference in opinion or understanding.


Passage number 407.
MR. MARTIN. Oh, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple affirmation or agreement.


Passage number 408.
MR. PARTEE. Oh yes, there's a modifier "somewhat" on the upside.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "Oh yes, there's a modifier 'somewhat' on the upside" is a straightforward statement without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 409.
MR. GRAMLEY. "Somewhat" is all we ever do between these[meetings] anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement made by Mr. Gramley implies that the activity between meetings is limited and does not involve any form of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 410.
MR. PARTEE. Well, it's just that little [nuance].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a mild observation or comment about something.


Passage number 411.
MR. BOEHNE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 412.
 Bob, have you learned--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's pretty subtle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking Bob if he has learned something, and then makes a comment about it being subtle.


Passage number 413.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You could underline it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given statement is a directive and does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 414.
MR. GRAMLEY. I wouldn't wish to change the language, eventhough I believe in going much less symmetrically, to make itconsistent. I think everybody reads into these changes in languagemuch more than they ought to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any obvious contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, is expressing their personal opinion about language and how people interpret changes in language. They mention that they don't want to change the language but believe that people tend to attach too much meaning to language changes. This statement does not indicate disagreement with anyone or any specific argument.


Passage number 415.
-43-10/4/83MR. PARTEE. I said it originally in order to solicit Pres'ssupport but now I've said it to elicit your support on the other side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 416.
MR. BLACK. Well, I'm not voting, obviously.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply states that they are not voting, making a neutral statement.


Passage number 417.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only hesitancy I would have is that Iwould think we're more or less symmetrical but I would accept GovernorGramley's caveat that before we do anything we look and see whetherthe business picture tends to be consistent or inconsistent with theway the aggregates are going.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It mentions a hesitation and an acceptance of a caveat, but there is no explicit disagreement between the speaker and Governor Gramley.


Passage number 418.
MR. PARTEE. Well, that's clearly true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with the statement made.


Passage number 419.
MS. TEETERS. Yes, that explains it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response "Yes, that explains it" simply acknowledges that the previous statement or explanation provided is satisfactory.


Passage number 420.
MR. BOEHNE. Also, we should look at incoming information onthe distortions that the deregulation might have on the aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the need to examine incoming information on the potential distortions that deregulation might have on the aggregates.


Passage number 421.
MR. PARTEE. Well, that's a new thought.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states that Mr. Partee finds the thought to be new.


Passage number 422.
MR. GRAMLEY. We don't really expect it to be enough tobother to put that in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement without any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 423.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we are probably covered on that ifwe make some mention in the policy record that we expect a smalleffect in the next few weeks but we don't expect it to amount to much.If we decided it mattered a heck of a lot, we would take it intoaccount.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any signs of contention or disagreement. It is discussing a possible course of action without any conflicting opinions or arguments being presented.


Passage number 424.
MS. TEETERS. We were so accurate on the MMDAs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The sentence states a fact about the accuracy of the MMDAs, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 425.
MR. GUFFEY. I would come out on the side of being a bitasymmetrical in the sense of not reacting to higher growth of theaggregates during this upcoming intermeeting period simply because theprojections indicate that we're going to be within the long-run rangesunless the aggregates just explode on us. Then I think we'd have aconference call and do something about it. The other point is that wedo have a federal funds target range of 6 to 10 percent and we're inthe upper part of that already. And as a result, that range would notlet us react to strong growth really as quickly as we could, it seemsto me, if the aggregates came in somewhat lower. So, I would notreact aggressively on the up side, if at all, but I would be moreinclined to react in this intermeeting period on the down side if wesaw the aggregates coming in a lot lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is expressing the speaker's personal opinion and approach to reacting to the growth of aggregates during the intermeeting period.


Passage number 426.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, a further technical clarificationon M2: That nonexistent kind of weekly M2 has not been rising as fastin the most recent weeks relative to a normative weekly growth as Ml.So, if after the week of the 28th it grew at a rate which if sustainedover time would give you 10 percent for a year, it would give you anOctober of around 9 percent. So, it's not biased as much toward anupward thrust in October.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 427.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think we've gone as far as we can.I think we're verbally hitting the shadows. There is a slightimplication of asymmetry in the language and I don't think there'smuch more we can do. We shouldn't start tinkering with that, I think.I don't know what more we can do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion that the limit has been reached in their communication efforts, and they are unsure about what else can be done. They also suggest that it is not advisable to make any further changes or modifications.


Passage number 428.
-44-10/4/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know whether I can postulatethe median opinion as being a little less quick on the trigger on theup side than on the down side, all other things equal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 429.
MR. ROBERTS. Very little less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage does not explicitly show a strong disagreement or contention, but the phrase "very little less" suggests some level of disagreement or difference in opinion. The use of "very little" implies that there may be a slight disagreement or discrepancy in the point being discussed.


Passage number 430.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess we can vote. We're voting for thespecifications of "B" rounded off to 8-1/2 percent, with a mention inthe policy record that 8-1/2 percent was shaded up a bit because ofderegulation but we don't expect the effect of deregulation to be verysignificant. In explaining that first sentence we would indicate inthe record that we had tended to ease a little. Otherwise, all thelanguage is the same with the substitution of 8-1/2 percent for 8percent and that new first sentence I read. There's a 7 percent whereit was 7 percent and borrowing is $650 million or thereabouts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the specifications and details of a vote.


Passage number 431.
MR. BALLES. Would you say that again please.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Balles simply asks for something to be repeated.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 432.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm saying you're voting on the directiveas it is with an 8-1/2 percent and a 7 percent number in there andwith a new first sentence as I read it before: "The Committee seeksin the short run to maintain the slightly lesser degree of reserverestraint sought in recent weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The passage indicates disagreement or contention because the speaker is stating their opinion on voting for the directive with a new first sentence and specific percentage numbers, suggesting that there may be differing opinions or conflicting views among the committee members.


Passage number 433.
"MR. BERNARD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It only mentions Mr. Bernard without providing any additional information or presenting any opposing views.


Passage number 434.
Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Guffey YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Martin YesPresident Morris YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesPresident Roberts YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have a tentative schedule for nextyear to which it is my understanding nobody has objected. And wethought we might begin on Monday next time even though it's in themiddle of the quarter and discuss the inflation outlook in a littlemore depth. Let's start the next meeting on Monday afternoon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 435.
MS. TEETERS. What's the date.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply asks for the date.


Passage number 436.
MR. BERNARD. November 14th.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a date and the speaker's name.


Passage number 437.
MS. HORN. Mr. Chairman, I am giving a speech on Mondayafternoon at the ABA, but you're suggesting having an FOMC session onMonday afternoon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a schedule conflict.


Passage number 438.
MS. TEETERS. What did you want to discuss in more depth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Teeters is simply asking what the topic of discussion is.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 439.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Inflation and the outlook. Expect todiscuss inflation and come equipped to debate the issue, includingmaybe what we were intending to discuss, which is where we should goon inflation in a 5-year time perspective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of phrases like "come equipped to debate the issue" and "which is where we should go on inflation" suggest that there are differing opinions on the topic of inflation and its outlook in the future.


Passage number 440.
-45-10/4/83MR. KICHLINE. Whatever you like.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is simply a coded reference, and without the key to decode it, it is impossible to determine the content or any potential disagreement.


Passage number 441.
MR. PARTEE. To zero, I thought.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Partee seems to express his personal belief or understanding without any indication of a disagreement or contention.


Passage number 442.
MR. KICHLINE. We thought we were going to cover some ofthese issues in depth in the spirit of trying to look at alternativeviews of the determination of wages and prices, as well as some of theissues that are debated among folks here as well as outside theCommittee. For example, does the speed of activity matter indetermining inflation and a few other issues.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they had planned to discuss various issues, such as the determination of wages and prices and the impact of speed of activity on inflation.


Passage number 443.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's all fine. And you're alsogoing to explain how we can get to a zero rate of inflation in thenext--I'll be modest and say the next 5 years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker states that they think everything mentioned is fine and expresses agreement with the idea of achieving a zero rate of inflation in the next five years.


Passage number 444.
MR. BLACK. Be more symmetrical.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The speaker is simply giving a directive to someone to be more symmetrical. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 445.
MR. CORRIGAN. No, it's a matter of being less symmetrical.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of opinion or explanation, without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 446.
MR. BLACK. Yes, in the other direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 447.
MR. MORRIS. How many recessions can we assume.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not mention any statement or argument that could cause contention or disagreement. It simply poses a question about the number of recessions that can be assumed.


Passage number 448.
MR. MARTIN. How much unemployment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions Mr. Martin and his inquiry about unemployment.


Passage number 449.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. How many recessions do we need.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking about the number of recessions needed.


