Passage number 1.
 MR. FISCHER.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Okay.  We’re going to begin with our first topic, “Long-Run Framework for Monetary Policy Implementation,” and let me ask Simon to start us off on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple exchange of words where Mr. Fischer makes a motion and Chair Yellen thanks him for it.


Passage number 2.
 MR. POTTER.1  Thank you, Madam Chair.  We will be referring to the materials titled “Long-Run Framework for Monetary Policy Implementation.”   The briefing today summarizes the work of three foundational workgroups on the foreign experience, lessons from the crisis, and money markets that was distributed to the Committee over the past few weeks.  As you know, this is a System-wide effort with important contributions from a number of divisions of the Board and all of the Reserve Banks.  Today, in addition to the presenters at the table—Brian Doyle, David Altig, and Beth Klee—we have Patricia Zobel, Ed Nosal, and Susan McLaughlin seated behind us, who were the co-leads for these presenters.  They’ll also be available to answer questions. In slide 3 of your rather thick presentation package, you can see the key goals of the project that were agreed to almost one year ago.  These goals have obviously been influenced by the experience of advanced-economy central banks over the past 10 years or so.  The foundational workgroups were designed to put this experience into a structure that will feed into the two framework workgroups, which are focused on interest rate targets, operating regimes, and the balance sheet.  Our current plan is for the framework workgroups to present their findings at the November meeting.  The feedback that you will provide today and in November will inform the staff’s work on evaluating comprehensive frameworks that will be presented to the Committee further down the road. The next slide shows an additional set of objectives for alternative operating frameworks.  Objective 2 on promoting efficient, effective, and resilient money  1 The materials used by Messrs. Potter, Doyle, and Altig and Mses. Klee and Remache are appended to this transcript (appendix 1).  markets will be an important focus of the presentation today.  As also noted on this slide, the Committee’s normalization principles and plans provide an additional set of criteria when it comes to the size and composition of the SOMA portfolio.  Brian will now present on the foreign experience.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information about the workgroups and goals of the project.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 3.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I have a question, and I don’t know that the staff has the answer to it or that I have an answer to it.  The framework objectives basically imply that this is about monetary policy implementation, it’s about financial stability, and it implies that financial stability is important in terms of thinking about what the right framework is.  But then, when we come down to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, a framework should involve holding “no more securities than necessary to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively.”  So one seems narrower than the other, and I just was wondering how the staff was thinking about that.  Let’s imagine that we have a monetary policy framework that has huge benefits for financial stability but might require somewhat more securities.  Do we think that the policy normalization principles are cast in stone, or could they be potentially modified.  I just would like the staff’s view on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker raises a question about a potential conflict between the framework objectives and the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans. They suggest that the framework objectives prioritize financial stability, which may require holding more securities, while the Policy Normalization Principles state that no more securities than necessary should be held. The speaker asks if the Policy Normalization Principles could be modified to accommodate the potential benefits of a framework that prioritizes financial stability.


Passage number 4.
 MR. POTTER.  I’m not sure that’s a question for the staff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Potter simply expresses uncertainty regarding whether the question is appropriate for the staff.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 5.
  [Laughter] VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Let me ask it this way:  Is there a tension between these two things.  They do seem a little bit in opposition to one another.  And I think it would be  interesting, as we discuss this, to decide:  Do we really believe the framework should be broad and include financial-stability objectives, or should it be narrow and just focused on monetary policy implementation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests a tension or disagreement between two opposing ideas: whether the framework should be broad and include financial-stability objectives or narrow and focused solely on monetary policy implementation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 6.
 MR. TARULLO.  Madam Chair.  My recollection, Vice Chairman Dudley, is that when we were talking about that stated principle of normalization, there was a little bit of back-and-forth within the Committee, basically saying that’s an issue that does have some tension in it because you could interpret effective monetary policy as meaning:  You don’t want a monetary policy that creates financial instability, because that would require reactions later.  But my recollection is, we self-consciously tabled the tensions inherent in that issue, and so my sense was that it’s precisely one of the things that this exercise is going to have to address.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker mentions that there was a "little bit of back-and-forth within the Committee" and that there are tensions inherent in the issue being discussed. This suggests that there was disagreement or contention among the members of the Committee on how to interpret and address the issue of effective monetary policy.


Passage number 7.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes.  I just wanted to get that out on the table. CHAIR YELLEN.  Questions for the presenters.  Let me see, President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 8.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  My question is on the international side, and it relates to one of the things that came out of the crisis, nonbank SIFIs, which wasn’t something that most countries were thinking about before the crisis.  For most countries, those were insurance companies and broker-dealers, depending on whether they were included or not included in commercial banks.  Do other countries make liquidity available to anybody classified as a SIFI.  Are we unique in that respect, or is that fairly common internationally.  So, for example, we had GE, we have insurance companies, and we’re viewing them as systemically-important institutions, but we’re not giving them access to the discount window, which presumably means that even though they are systemically important, we’re not worried about liquidity problems with those organizations or we’re choosing not to address that.  Are we unique among the countries that you interviewed, or perhaps this may be a little too institutional.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply someone seeking clarification and information about the practices of other countries regarding nonbank systemically-important financial institutions (SIFIs). The passage does not present any conflicting viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 9.
  MR. DOYLE.  No, not at all.  There are some central banks that have extended their counterparties beyond banks, even beyond broker-dealers.  The Bank of England is one example that has, in effect, explicitly said:  Our framework is to give liquidity insurance to anyone we feel is systemically important for liquidity, subject to liquidity shocks, and is adequately regulated.  And so the Bank of England allows, for example, for CCPs.  Another case is the Swiss National Bank’s inclusion of insurance companies, although I am not sure whether it is explicitly thinking about SIFIs.  In fact, the Swiss National Bank also includes banks that aren’t actually operating in Switzerland but might be operating in Swiss franc markets.  So it takes regulation in the euro area, regulation in the United Kingdom, as being adequate for its purposes in order to lend to those institutions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing examples of central banks that have extended their counterparties beyond banks and broker-dealers.


Passage number 10.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage contains an exchange between Mr. Rosengren and Chair Yellen without any evident contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 11.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I have two questions.  One is for Dave Altig.  This has to do with the narrative about the lessons of the crisis.  The paper, I think early, mentions sales of U.S. government securities and the extent to which we resorted to that to sterilize and offset the effect of lending programs on aggregate reserves, in order to avoid driving interest rates down.  Then, later on, the paper seems to drop that option and says we didn’t have any way to do that.  And my sense from the narrative is that we didn’t sell all the securities we could have, and it wasn’t clear why not.  Now, I know some were pledged or lent out in the TSLF, right.  But my sense is, not all of them, but I guess I could look that up.  Did we sell or encumber all of the U.S. Treasury securities we could have.  If we didn’t, why did we stop short of selling U.S. government securities at the time we did.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is some contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, seems to be questioning the narrative presented in the paper and expressing confusion about why the option of selling U.S. government securities was mentioned but then dropped later on. He is also questioning why the Federal Reserve did not sell or encumber all of the U.S. Treasury securities it could have at the time.


Passage number 12.
  MS. MCLAUGHLIN.  We sold quite a few securities.  Between March and May of 2008, we sold about $8 billion or $9 billion in bills, which is about 45 percent of the holdings at that time.  That’s actually after we had redeemed a substantial number of securities in the run-up to the Bear Stearns time frame.  We also sold about $55 billion in coupon securities, which represented about 12 percent of our holdings.  So we had run down a fair amount of the portfolio, and then in that March and May period, we sold another very sizable chunk.  It’s true that we didn’t sell all of them, and it’s also true, as you noted, that some of the securities we needed to hold, in part because those securities were serving as collateral or lend-out securities for programs like the TSLF.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating facts about the securities that were sold during a specific period.


Passage number 13.
 MR. LACKER.  So there were a couple hundred billion we could have sold.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating a numerical fact.


Passage number 14.
 MS. MCLAUGHLIN.  Yes.  I don’t have the exact numbers.  There were some securities.  They were, I believe, principally long-duration securities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the exact numbers and details of the securities are unknown to the speaker.


Passage number 15.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Isn’t the point, though, that we didn’t need to sell them because we hadn’t added sufficient reserves that we had to offset.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The sentence is simply stating a point.


Passage number 16.
 MR. LACKER.  Well, there’s this point at which we did, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It appears to be a simple statement or response without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 17.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No, no.  I know, I know.  But the point is, at the time, we were basically saying, “Well, we can sell securities, and we can expand our liquidity provisions, but we don’t want to be too aggressive in terms of our liquidity provision, because then we might have to sell a whole lot of securities, and then we’re not sure what the market effect is going to be.”  So we basically were very conscious of how the liquidity provisions were going to add reserves to the banking system and our ability to actually offset that by draining.  Now, we did sell securities, because that’s what we had to do to offset the reserves that we added.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is explaining a course of action that was taken, discussing the considerations and potential consequences. There is no indication of any conflicting viewpoints or disagreement among individuals.


Passage number 18.
 MR. LACKER.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only consists of one statement, so there is no opportunity for contention or disagreement.


Passage number 19.
  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  We didn’t do more because that’s the volume of reserves we essentially had issued.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage states a fact about the volume of reserves that were issued. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 20.
 MR. POTTER.  So I think your point, President Lacker, might be that the Desk could have sold all of the outrights and just run a repo book.  That repo book would have been more flexible, and that would have perhaps given you three or four days in September 2008.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Potter, reflecting his understanding of President Lacker's point.


Passage number 21.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  We would have had more capacity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there would have been more capacity.


Passage number 22.
 MR. LACKER.  So let me see if I get this straight.  Before this chart does the hockey-stick thing on page 19, no question, we sold what we did, and we sterilized effectively.  I’m not disputing that.  But the assessment that comes out—and, Madam Chair, you repeated this—that our crisis framework was inadequate for the liquidity provision.  I just want to pinpoint in what way it was.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It seems to be a statement of understanding and a request for clarification.


Passage number 23.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  We could have built up more capacity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply suggests that there was an option to increase capacity.


Passage number 24.
 MR. LACKER.  Is that resting on the notion that we didn’t have enough securities to sell—following what happened after October 2008, in view of the reserve injections that occurred after that, in light of the lending that occurred after that.  We didn’t have enough securities to sell—is that the idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Lacker is asking for clarification and seeking confirmation of a specific idea or notion.


Passage number 25.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Well, there is the gap between September and October when the TARP legislation gives us the authority to pay interest on reserves.  It’s really during that month that we were exposed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a gap or period of time between September and October when the TARP legislation allows the authority to pay interest on reserves, and comments on the exposure during that month.


Passage number 26.
 MR. LACKER.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It only states "Right," which indicates agreement or affirmation rather than disagreement.


Passage number 27.
 MR. POTTER.  Well, there’s clearly that.  There is the issue in the spring and the summer of 2008 when the TAF and swaps were there, but they had a limit on the usage.  We’ve had a long discussion on this.  I don’t think this was the first binding constraint in policymakers’  minds, but from the operational perspective, when Vice Chairman Dudley and his staff were thinking through about how to describe for you what we could do, they were constantly thinking at the back of their minds, “We have to be careful here, because there’s only a limited amount we can do if we have a lot of usage of, say, the TAF, or the swaps, to control the federal funds rate.”  And the federal funds rate was well above zero.  It was about 2¼ percent at that time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining a limitation on the usage of TAF and swaps in controlling the federal funds rate.


Passage number 28.
 MR. LACKER.  Well, then we could have sold more securities outright, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement of a possibility.


Passage number 29.
 MR. POTTER.  Exactly.  The Desk could have come to you and said, “Over the next few months, we are now going to liquidate all of the Treasury portfolio, run a repo book, and that will give you more flexibility to size up these programs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply explains a hypothetical scenario.


Passage number 30.
” MR. LACKER.  But, even short of that, I don’t see what the problem would have been then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not show any sign of contention or disagreement. Mr. Lacker is simply expressing confusion or lack of understanding about a certain issue.


Passage number 31.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Part of the issue is, you don’t have foresight about what’s going to come.  You don’t know that Lehman weekend is coming down the road, right. You could sell a lot of securities to build up your capacity, but then you have the cost of how that could potentially disrupt the Treasury securities market, and do you want to do that or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: This passage is discussing potential consequences and considerations, but there is no clear contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 32.
 MR. LACKER.  Well, we were lowering rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 33.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Right.  Selling bills and short-dated coupon securities is probably not going to have much effect on the Treasury securities market or the Treasury yield curve, but if we had sold a lot of longer-dated Treasur securities, I think there’s a question of what that would do to the market.  It’s a judgment call.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.
There is a potential disagreement in the passage. The author states that selling bills and short-dated coupon securities will probably have no significant impact on the Treasury securities market or yield curve. However, there is a question about the potential effects if a large amount of longer-dated Treasury securities were sold. This presents a difference in opinion or uncertainty regarding the potential outcome.


Passage number 34.
 MR. POTTER.  I think if we look back, there are many things we would have done in a different way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing personal reflection and a hypothetical scenario.


Passage number 35.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Oh, absolutely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Oh, absolutely" is a strong agreement and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 36.
  MR. POTTER.  That’s certainly true, but from the interviews that we’ve done, this was a constraint in people’s minds.  I don’t think it was a primary constraint in policymakers’ minds.  For them, there were a lot of issues—moral hazard and dealing with whether we could have such large programs and what that would look like.  Optically, that ended in the middle of September 2008. CHAIR YELLEN.  Didn’t the Treasury come along and help us manage this problem substantially by running up its own balances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Potter, is discussing his opinion and observations about a constraint in people's minds. The other speaker, Chair Yellen, is not directly responding to or contradicting Mr. Potter's statement.


Passage number 37.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Correct, and it helped drain reserves by holding more. CHAIR YELLEN.  And that was before October.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by CHAIR YELLEN, affirming that the action mentioned was correct and had a positive effect.


Passage number 38.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without the actual passage provided, it is impossible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 39.
 MR. LACKER.  I have a second question.  It’s for Beth Klee.  In your presentation, you talked about linkages, and this shows up in the paper, too.  There’s this graph on slide 28 that shows pre-crisis rates are highly correlated, and then on slide 29 it says that rates may be less connected at high frequencies.  On 28, all the rates are really close to each other and the lines kind of overlap, and then on 29, they wiggle around a lot and they’re far apart.  But then, the scales are different.  To your credit and in all fairness, you cite, I think, some econometric work, something about what fraction of variance is explained by a common factor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage describes a question asked by Mr. Lacker to Beth Klee regarding certain graphs and slides. There is no clear contention or disagreement mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 40.
 MS. KLEE.  Yes.  That’s just doing a simple principal component analysis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement simply states that performing a principal component analysis is a straightforward process, without any mention of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 41.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay.  So when I look the one on 28, the pre-crisis, and I think about a common factor there, I’m thinking, that would be us, right, moving interest rates around.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their own thought or understanding.


Passage number 42.
 MS. KLEE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without further context, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The response "Yes" alone does not provide enough information to make a judgement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 43.
 MR. LACKER.  And then in your second sample, we’re not moving interest rates around much at all.  We do it once at the end.  You’re not going to get the federal funds rate target or  some policy rate as being the common factor.  So, you’d expect the fraction of variance explained by the common factor to go down, right, and that would not to really reflect any difference in meaningful linkages or the extent to which market rates would move if we raised rates as much as we did on slide 28.  Is that intuition correct, Beth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker is expressing his own intuition or hypothesis, suggesting that the expected decrease in the fraction of variance explained by the common factor would not necessarily reflect any meaningful differences or the extent to which market rates would move if rates were increased.


Passage number 44.
 MS. KLEE.  I think it is to some degree.  It’s basically a statistical exercise—it’s pretty agnostic.  I think that you’re going to see the rates travel more together if you have the policy rates moving things, and so, therefore, that will explain more.  To be technical about it:  We take out the mean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is offering their opinion and explaining a statistical exercise without conflicting with any other point of view.


Passage number 45.
  We control for these kinds of things, but— MR. LACKER.  You don’t take out the movement in the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a continuation of a statement without any indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 46.
 MS. KLEE.  No, we don’t take out the movement in the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple statement given by Ms. Klee. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 47.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply acknowledges the information given.


Passage number 48.
 MS. KLEE.  But in terms of the behavior of the constellation of rates when you move, let’s say, either the federal funds rate target or, in this case, the administered rates, in both cases the constellation of money market rates moved up.  And so is 95 percent very different from 85 percent, particularly when you’re at the effective lower bound.  That’s probably a judgment call.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the behavior of money market rates and mentioning that there may be a judgment call involved in evaluating the difference between 95 percent and 85 percent in certain circumstances.


Passage number 49.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speakers are polite and the conversation seems to be progressing smoothly.


Passage number 50.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Somebody said earlier that they weren’t sure they should raise this issue, and I’m not sure I should raise this issue except that it’s important.  The big thing that happened last time was at the time of the failure of Lehman Brothers.  And that made a difference to the entire world.  Now, there’s nothing as far as I can see that prevents us coming to a day on which we don’t have a tool to deal with a similar situation.  So what are we going to do on that day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing concern about the lack of a tool to deal with a situation similar to the failure of Lehman Brothers in the future.


Passage number 51.
  MR. TARULLO.  Are you waiting for an answer, sir.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question and does not indicate any conflict or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 52.
 MR. FISCHER.  Well, the question I’m raising is what are we allowed to do. CHAIR YELLEN.  Do you mean what facilities do we have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fischer is questioning what actions they are permitted to take, while Chair Yellen is seeking clarification on the facilities they have available.


Passage number 53.
 MR. FISCHER.  Yes,  Are we allowed to go to the FDIC and start putting this institution into bankruptcy or at least into the FDIC’s care, with some hope that we’ve done enough work that will enable us to prevent that having massive repercussions. CHAIR YELLEN.  Under Title 2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question and a response discussing the possibility of putting an institution into bankruptcy or under the FDIC's care.


Passage number 54.
 MR. FISCHER.  Under Title 2. CHAIR YELLEN.  And the FDIC has the ability to tap liquidity and lend to that institution.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not describe any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the FDIC's ability to tap liquidity and lend to institutions.


Passage number 55.
 MR. FISCHER.  Yes. CHAIR YELLEN.  We still have 13(3) powers to put in place broad-based programs if it’s not a single institution.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The response of "Yes" by Mr. Fischer seems to be in agreement with Chair Yellen's statement about the Federal Reserve's ability to implement broad-based programs.


Passage number 56.
 MR. FISCHER.  Yes, well, if we had five Lehmans, we would have had a bigger problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is stating a hypothetical situation where having multiple Lehman companies would have resulted in a more significant issue. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 57.
 MR. POTTER.  Five investment banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states that there are five investment banks.


Passage number 58.
 MR. LAUBACH.  But, Governor Fischer, just to be clear, for the purpose of this project, we decided deliberately—and I believe also with your blessing—that we would actually stay away from the explicit evaluation of, for example, 13(3) facilities, because we felt that they were not part of a normal implementation framework.  Now, as you saw from the material, clearly there is a bit of a gray area here, in the sense that you cannot completely exclude the topic of liquidity provision, because it turns out that liquidity provision and the implementation framework are very closely tied.  That said, I think what our work here has primarily focused on  are questions such as, If you had to greatly expand the provision of liquidity, how would you still be able to control short-term interest rates in order to implement the particular chosen stance for monetary policy. I’m afraid that it was by design that this project was not intended to address the question that you just raised.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is clarifying the scope of the project and explaining that they purposely avoided evaluating certain facilities. They also acknowledge that there is some overlap between liquidity provision and the implementation framework.


Passage number 59.
 MR. FISCHER.  That’s clear, and if I agreed with that some time ago, then I plead guilty.  But, at some point, we’re going to have to look at this issue.  We’ve got a plan, which is not entirely “fair weather” sailing, but there are things that it doesn’t quite go into in the same depth that it might.  We’ve got to find a way of doing the best we can to figure out what we would do in similar circumstances because they can quite well arise.  It’s not that we banned them by saying that you got rid of too-big-to-fail.  If somebody eventually says “yes,” then it’s gone, but that hasn’t happened, so we had better come back to it in some way, shape, or form, with the attendant political difficulties being taken into account.  It’s a very tough issue, as I’m sure I don’t have to say. CHAIR YELLEN.  And our powers have been restricted in Dodd-Frank, but we still do have substantial 13(3) powers to create facilities to address strains, and in Dodd-Frank we got the ability, if we deemed it important, to lend to a CCP or a designated financial market utility if it encountered strains, which could be a different kind of problem that afflicts the financial system. We’re not completely without powers, but they’re certainly not as broad as some other countries have and have regularly put into effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speakers are discussing the limitations and powers they have in addressing financial strains, but there is no disagreement or argument between them.


Passage number 60.
 MR. FISCHER.  Okay. CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions for the staff.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there may be other questions for the staff after Mr. Fischer's statement and before President Rosengren's turn.


Passage number 61.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Sorry for the second question.  CHAIR YELLEN.  Please feel free.  We’ve got a lot of time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply apologizing for asking a second question and the chairperson is giving permission to ask another question.


Passage number 62.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  This is an international question again.  I’m looking at slide 8 on the policy rates and the distinction between market and administered rates, and it’s striking how many chose administered rates rather than market rates.  When I think of the IOER, it’s a leaky floor, which is, in some sense, by design.  It’s a leaky floor because we didn’t give nonbanks access to the administered rate.  Are there any other central banks that chose to have a leaky floor by design. In some sense, you could view us as having an administered rate, because it’s really weird that only the GSEs are trading in the federal funds market.  So we’ve created, kind of by design, an artificial market that’s very tied to the administered rate.  The arbitrage works through foreign banks, but because of the FDIC, they’re getting arbitrage profits relative to the GSEs, which are government entities.  It’s kind of a weird set of constraints that we’ve imposed to make this a market.  In some sense, I’d be interested whether anybody else has this kind of characteristic.  Are all of these administered rates truly administered rates, or is what they’ve done to avoid leaky floors to allow other people to participate in the administered rate besides depositories.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 63.
 MR. DOYLE.  If you turn to slide 11, I don’t know if they tried to do this by design or not, but you can see in the case of both the Bank of England, which is depicted in the purple line, and the Bank of Japan, shown in the dark blue line, money market rates are trading far below their floor.  And that includes some nonbank participants who are not part of or don’t have access to accounts that get remunerated trading with banks that do have access.  So it is this sort of arbitrage activity.  I don’t know whether it’s by design or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 64.
  MR. ROSENGREN.  So those are administered rates or market rates when they have those examples.  That’s similar to us, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact and making a comparison.


Passage number 65.
 MR. DOYLE.  In both of these cases, they are administered rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states that "in both of these cases, they are administered rates."


Passage number 66.
 MR. POTTER.  I don’t think they have a government-sponsored enterprise that has an account at the central bank that can run transactions through that account but is not eligible to earn that central bank rate.  That is somewhat different, and it affects the federal funds market.  If you paid out to the GSEs, the federal funds rate would likely then trade above the effective rate where the IOER is.  Remember, that market is relatively small compared with the Eurodollar market in which the nonbanks, which are the money funds, are much bigger transactors.  You’d still have that wedge, and that’s really what you see in the United Kingdom and Japan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and explaining how certain factors would affect the federal funds market.


Passage number 67.
 MR. DOYLE.  This is a conjecture.  I also don’t know if the statement is 100 percent true.  It is the case that you see that the rates trade not as below the floor in the case of the BOJ and BOE.  And that may be due to their having a broader set of counterparties, and it may also be due to their having a much smaller nonbank sector.  But, you know, that’s a conjecture.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that their statement is a conjecture and admits uncertainty about its accuracy. They then provide possible explanations for why the rates trade differently, but acknowledge that it is simply a conjecture.


Passage number 68.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Rosengren simply thanks Chair Yellen, and Chair Yellen invites other questions. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 69.
 MR. FISCHER.  On page 12, there’s a discussion about liquidity provision to a broader range of institutions, and then there’s bullet 4, which is that central banks see advantages to having a more level playing field and to getting information about the institutions to which they are lending, but that we need to be worried about moral hazard.  That’s not written—that was said.  As far as I can see—and I think you said this in the written paper—the Bank of England, for instance, has just tried to get rid of the moral-hazard aspects in the way it has set up these facilities, or something like these facilities.  And the question is, should we be saying, well, in  essence, moral hazard is a barrier that we can’t overcome, or should we try to think of institutional arrangements like the Bank of England has developed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and seeking clarification about the topic of moral hazard and its implications for liquidity provision.


Passage number 70.
 MR. DOYLE.  One thing that a number of foreign banks expressed was that getting at moral hazard might be more of a supervisory and regulatory issue than an issue for liquidity insurance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. The speaker is stating an observation about the opinion of foreign banks regarding the issue of moral hazard.


Passage number 71.
 MR. TARULLO.  But, of course, the Bank of England is the supervisor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of fact.


Passage number 72.
 MR. DOYLE.  Yes.  So they would try to use those powers, although they were not the supervisor, necessarily, in all instances, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Doyle about the actions of a certain group or individual.


Passage number 73.
 MR. TARULLO.  They are the only prudential supervisor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a straightforward and declarative statement about the role of a particular entity.


Passage number 74.
 MR. DOYLE.  Okay.  They are now.  Yes, you’re right, I’m sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges their mistake and agrees with the other person's statement.


Passage number 75.
 MR. POTTER.  That wasn’t the case partly when they designed this, but that’s the situation now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is describing a change in the situation, not expressing disagreement or contention between parties.


Passage number 76.
 MR. DOYLE.  Now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not display any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 77.
 MR. POTTER.  It’s also true that that’s the change at the ECB.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any evidence of contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the change at the ECB.


Passage number 78.
 MR. DOYLE.  Although, in the case of the ECB, they don’t have the broadest set of counterparties. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kaplan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 79.
 MR. KAPLAN.  I’ll get to this in the comments, but I gathered in reading all this—which I thought was very well done and obviously very helpful for me—that while you didn’t address some of the sensitivity about what powers we have and don’t have, you laid it out so that part of the guidance we can offer in our comments should be:  What should we have.  And then we can have a separate discussion about how to get from here to there.  And the BOE is the one that naturally you gravitate toward, because what they have—and we’ll get to this later—seems like a  good thing to have.  The issue here I gather is:  How do we get to where we actually have the ability to do the same thing the Bank of England does.  I take it that’s a little trickier question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their understanding of the guidance provided and is suggesting the need for further discussion on specific powers and how to acquire them.


Passage number 80.
 MR. POTTER.  My view is that the law, especially the Federal Reserve Act, is what we take.  It gives the Federal Reserve tremendous power.  Before the crisis, the Bank of England operated in a way that was much narrower in terms of the collateral that they would take.  The discount window will take a range of collateral, which is very wide compared with most central banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information about the Federal Reserve Act and the broader range of collateral accepted by the discount window compared to other central banks.


Passage number 81.
 MR. KAPLAN.  So we might actually have the power.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply presents a statement or observation from Mr. Kaplan.


Passage number 82.
 MR. POTTER.  There, you limit the type of counterparties.  With open market operations, if you’re prepared to narrow to a particular type of collateral, you can have a wide range of counterparties.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Potter, is simply explaining that by narrowing the type of collateral, a wide range of counterparties can be involved in open market operations.


Passage number 83.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting or opposing ideas. It appears to be a simple response or statement.


Passage number 84.
 MR. POTTER.  Within that construction, subject to some really important issues, whatever decisions that you take, you have to think about the incentives you are putting into money markets and about the financial institutions there.  We can’t just be thinking of the case of how would we lend a lot of money at a certain time.  We have to think of how likely we are to get to that situation, because we have incentives in place for those folks to take risks, because they know that the Federal Reserve is there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any form of disagreement or contention. It simply states a perspective regarding the need to consider incentives and potential risks in money markets and financial institutions.


Passage number 85.
 MR. KAPLAN.  But that’s why we’re doing this exercise, to think through these things in advance, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement that suggests the purpose of the exercise is to think through things in advance.


Passage number 86.
 MR. POTTER.  It’s part of the reason, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Potter simply confirms that it is indeed part of the reason being discussed.


Passage number 87.
 MR. DOYLE.  I guess I’d only add that part of the reason we cite the Bank of England frequently is that it is a central bank that has done a lot of thinking and enacted a lot of change  from where it was pre-2006, even before the crisis.  The BOE changed its system before the crisis, and we saw a lot of evolution during the crisis.  Because they’ve done a lot of thinking, it’s a lot of grist in the mill.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion about the Bank of England and its changes over time.


Passage number 88.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you.  CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Any further questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. No contention or disagreement is present in the passage. Both Mr. Kaplan and Chair Yellen are having a conversation where Mr. Kaplan is thanking Chair Yellen and Chair Yellen is asking if there are any further questions.


Passage number 89.
 MR. LACKER.  Madam Chair— CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both parties are respectfully addressing each other.


Passage number 90.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.  Let me just add a comment to echo what Thomas Laubach said.  We have the luxury now of separating questions of monetary control and interest rate control from credit extension.  When we were founded, the founders made a choice to combine those two, and it was based on the monetary system at the time of the gold standard and the fact that government finance, if it was monetized, tended to be associated with wartime departures from the gold standard and inflation—or, if done in peacetime, associated with inflation.  The founders explicitly chose not to focus on government-debt backing for the money we would issue but instead used the discount window in its mechanism.  Very rapidly after that, we got plenty of government securities, and we’ve figured out over the last century how to run central banks with a portfolio in which the money they issue is backed by government securities and without having that be inflationary.  It was for a time in the ’70s, but it isn’t now. But that gives us the luxury of separating granting credit to the private sector from how much liquidity we provide—and I use that word in the sense of our monetary liabilities that we provide to the system.  Now, liquidity is also used in these papers—a little sloppily—to refer to credit extension, in which you are lending somebody those assets.  To provide them to the system, people can exchange assets to acquire our liabilities.  But that’s not the same as our  lending them to them.  That division we can do, and so I think, on Thomas’s point, either we separate thinking about liquidity provision and liquidity extension from monetary control or we don’t.  And if we are going to go down the road of combining the two, using credit extension as part of monetary control, opens up a big can of worms.  But I would just put in a pitch for keeping those separate in our discussions. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting information and making a suggestion for consideration.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 91.
 MR. BULLARD.  I have a follow-up for President Lacker.  Could you elaborate on what you mean.  Because I took the point of the memos to be that these are not really separable things, and therefore we have to design a system that appropriately balances the ability to provide monetary control and the ability to provide liquidity in a crisis.  And you just said, you could separate these two things.  So, what do you mean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: There is disagreement in this passage between Mr. Bullard and President Lacker. Mr. Bullard argues that monetary control and liquidity in a crisis are not separable, while President Lacker believes they can be separated.


Passage number 92.
 MR. LACKER.  Well, I was going to get to this in my prepared remarks.  At the risk of some perseveration, I’ll just say that what I am proposing is a very simple regime in which we pay interest on reserves and ignore everything else in the world—not ignore it, but don’t adopt an explicit target for the funds rate, just drop that.  Our policy rate is our administered rate, and that’s it.  And we count on arbitrage, as we do now, to align rates with that.  So that’s a crisp, pure polar model, and in that world, you know, our balance sheet can be whatever it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their proposal for a simple regime and explaining how it would work.


Passage number 93.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  So the point would be, it’s an administered rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states a point without any arguments or opposing views.


Passage number 94.
 MR. LACKER.  Right.  In that simple regime there doesn’t seem to be any tension between monetary control and credit extension, right.  We can extend credit, and we keep the IOER where it is, and arbitrage presumably keeps everything where it is.  So we don’t have to sterilize anything.  We just don’t have an issue.  So the tension doesn’t arise in that scenario.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 95.
  MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  So your point would be that a lot hinges on an administered rate versus a market rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It is a statement made by Mr. Bullard, possibly in the form of a question or seeking clarification.


Passage number 96.
 MR. LACKER.  Right.  An administered rate with a floor.  With other systems, like reserve scarcity systems, you have to sterilize things.  You have to deal with this issue.  That was the point—that, if there is going to be a tension, if the staff is going to ask us to consider something in which there is some tradeoff, we haven’t seen a serious ex post review of our credit programs.  They are going to be asking us to make some choice, on the basis of the costs and benefits of preparedness for liquidity provision programs, credit extension programs.  I think we would want something about the economic advantages and disadvantages of various levels of preparedness for credit extension by a central bank.  So I previewed my comments there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, is discussing different systems and their potential trade-offs, but there is no indication of disagreement or contention with anyone else.


Passage number 97.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a response to a statement made by Mr. Bullard, so there is no contention or disagreement indicated.


Passage number 98.
 MR. LACKER.  Certainly. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  A number of people have asked to comment.  If others who are not on this list wish to be added, just let us know.  Let’s begin our comment opportunity with the Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply sets the stage for a comment opportunity and mentions that the Vice Chairman will be the first to comment.


Passage number 99.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without having access to the actual content of the passage. The abbreviation "MR" does not provide enough information to make a judgment.


Passage number 100.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I agree with your opening remarks that this is very useful material.  Even though I’ve been in the Federal Reserve throughout this period, it was nice to have all of the documents together, highlighting the key issues and open questions. In terms of open questions, the thing that struck me in reading through the very thorough memos—and I agree here with the Vice Chairman—was the sense that there are still the same  open questions today that we had the last time we discussed this.  One example is how regulations—especially in money market funds, in banking—will affect the demand for reserves or affect relative activity in money markets and interest rates and things like that.  That’s still an ongoing process, so I think there’s time for us to learn more from that. Another open question—and I do have a solution for this, but maybe I’ll save it for tomorrow—is that we haven’t really progressed very far on policy normalization.  [Laughter]  Some of the big questions we had were on the role of the ON RRP and its size:  what the scale of the ON RRP will be as we raise interest rates and how that will affect market conditions.  We started with this very open-ended, large approach to the program so that we could have very good interest rate control.  That’s been successful, but I still think we have a lot to learn as we do raise rates about how that will actually function and the pros and cons of that. So like the Vice Chairman commented, I think it is premature to come to conclusions either here or November.  In fact, I guess my main point I would like to make is, I’m worried a little bit about the timeline here.  It’s great that we have a discussion today and maybe in November to intellectually think about these issues.  In view of some of the uncertainties and questions that will still be open, I’m just not sure whether we’re going to have the information we need even in 2017, which is when, I think, we’re supposed to have the kind of meeting at which we actually try to come to agreement on some of this.  I guess my one bit of advice is not to try to hold to some fixed timeline in coming to decisions, but to have that be on the basis of what we’ve learned and the events, say, over the next year. Going back to the issue that Governor Fischer and others have brought up in their questions, I do think, in setting up this new framework, we need to consider seriously what we think the risks are and what the distribution of the risks that we’re worried about is.  In normal  times, I think any framework works fine.  [Laughter]  I think that’s the international experience.  It doesn’t matter in normal times how we do monetary policy.  It’s fine.  The issues that you really want to think about the situations that are either very stressful from a financial-sector point of view, the zero lower bound, negative interest rates.  And I think that does force us to actually think about what the likely scenarios are, not specifically about a Lehman Brothers or an AIG kind of scenario, but more generally about what the problem is that we’re trying to solve. Personally, because of my view on the low equilibrium real interest rate or natural rate of interest, I am mostly scared, if you will, about effective lower bounds, and I heard the word “visit.”  I feel this was like my son moving back home.  The effective-lower-bound episodes are not visits, they’re kind of stay-for-many-years situations.  [Laughter]  So, to me, in thinking about the policy framework, a lot of the important issues come up, as you said, Madam Chair, concerning LSAPs, liquidity insurance, and, obviously, stigma, and I’m not discounting those, but I do think that the effective lower bound is the thing that worries me. And I do want to bring up an issue that the Vice Chairman and others brought up, and that’s the issue of the legal restrictions on our ability to conduct monetary policy.  I’m thinking about the types of assets we can buy, whether we can pay negative interest rates, Federal Reserve bills—I was scribbling these down while people were speaking—the various tools that we will have in the future to basically achieve our dual-mandate goals.  And I recognize that these are legal restrictions.  Even interest on reserves is a legal restriction.  But I do think that if we come to the conclusion that we need more powerful monetary policy tools or that we need to be able to use Federal Reserve bills or pay interest to a broader set of institutions, we should, when we come to that view, try our best to convince elected officials that those are the tools that we need.  Now, I know we can’t control that, but I do think that should be part of our discussion.  I don’t  think we should have discussions only about what can we do under the current law, but we should think seriously about, well, if we could have additional tools, what they would be. The last comment is that—and I don’t mean to take up so much time, I apologize for that—I do wonder about stigma.  Stigma in this conversation today sounds a little bit like too-big-to-fail.  We’re all against it, but it’s actually an equilibrium outcome, right.  It’s not about who’s causing the stigma.  It’s us, right.  We’re the central bank, and the policies that we set and the decisions we make are what cause banks not to want to come to the discount window.  So in thinking about stigma, I think we have to go back to what I understand the fundamental issues is:  Do we think there is value in telling financial institutions that you should be getting your funding from the markets instead of coming to the central bank, or do we think that, no, in fact, we want the central bank to be your source of funding on a regular basis.  And I know I’m being very loose in how I talk about that, but I do remember 2007.  When we said, “The discount window is open, and come,” and no one came, I think the issue was really about the fact that banks understood that you weren’t supposed to come to the discount window unless you were in trouble.  And so I think that when we say we want to reduce stigma, we might look maybe a little more inwardly and think harder about why it is that we developed that situation in the first place. CHAIR YELLEN.  Well, I think we had tried to change that through policy changes made before the crisis to reduce the stigma and make it an effective ceiling, but I agree with your point.  We hadn’t been successful before that, and that continued to prevail during the crisis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Williams, is expressing agreement and sharing his observations and concerns.


Passage number 101.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage provided is "MR." Based on this information alone, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 102.
 WILLIAMS.  I agree with what you just said, but I remember in 2007, with then-Chairman Bernanke, it was almost like we had an announcement, along with balloons and free hot dogs and soda pop, saying, “Come to the discount window.  We’re open for business,” right.  And then everyone said, “Not so much.”  And the TAF, I think, was, in a way, successful in  creating a different structure that somehow removed the stigma.  So I’m just bringing out the issue that stigma seems to be something about which you can’t just say, “I want there to be no stigma.”  You have to think about where the stigma came from.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Williams agreeing with a point made previously, but also bringing up an additional point regarding the issue of stigma.


Passage number 103.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’ll start by also complimenting the staff for their considerable effort and having a wide range of researchers engaged in the project.  I found that really useful.  These memos provide a lot of useful material, particularly the money market field research.  I think no matter what we do, the research that’s being done on this is going to be of lasting value for the System. A little side comment on “stigma” before we go on—I agree very much with President Williams’s observations that it’s an outcome.  If you think about wholly private market transactions, they also are subject to exactly the same thing, that if it’s revealed that Party A borrows at Rate X, that’s going to convey some information about the situation of Party A.  We had Citigroup paying exorbitant amounts to raise additional capital in 2008, and that reveals something to the markets about just how dire the situation was at Citi, and I think that’s unavoidable.  It’s part of the market outcome.  And the lesson that yields for me is that we are going to have to accommodate ourselves to some amount of stigma. I approached this general subject of the long-range framework with a leaning toward, as I said before, a simple, straightforward floor system, in which the interest rate on reserves is our sole policy instrument.  And we supply just enough reserves to satiate the banking system with a fair, high degree of profitability and eschew targeting the federal funds rate or intervening in the RP market.  Now, I’m looking forward to the staff’s future work on this, and, as the Vice Chairman implored us, I’m retaining an open mind.  [Laughter]  I’m open to persuasion.  But  what I’ve learned so far tilts me toward that preference.  Beyond my preference about this, I think that that simple regime is a useful benchmark, and I think the way to approach the analysis of this is to take that and then view any other framework as that plus some stuff.  And I’ll get back to this. At a broad level, what I take away from this is that there are a wide range of considerations in money markets that affect market outcomes—the observed trading volumes and prices for various money market instruments.  The memos do a good job of documenting the array of regulatory factors.  I thought that was really useful, sort of a missing element in the overnight RRP discussions we had.  I think we had a sense that they were broad and pervasive and complicated, and I think that’s the picture that emerges. In addition, I was struck by the extent to which relationship considerations seem to affect many money market transactions, and I’m not sure I suspected they’d be as pervasive as they are.  Apparently, there are some money market funding deals that are bundled together with other financial transactions and occur between parties that establish a relationship and continue it for some time.  So there must be some economies of scope across financial transactions or maybe some fixed costs associated with establishing a relationship.  Well, in those cases, the observed transactions don’t represent arm’s-length Walrasian spot trades that are popular in our models, so it’s not obvious to me what it means to target a rate in a market governed by sort of relationship trades like that or whether it’s advisable. I was also struck by the importance of counterparty credit risk.  In some markets, sometimes credit risk premiums are negligible or relatively stable outside of crisis periods, but some premiums arguably have been quite relevant to the federal funds market because there’s always been a noticeable dispersion of observed transaction rates.  To me, this makes it tricky to  think about targeting something like the average interest rate on federal funds when so many of the transactions build in some tiering or differential, what you’d interpret as credit risk premiums.  When counterparty credit risk premiums rise across a broad range of counterparties in that market, which arguably happened in August 2007, then you’d expect the credit risk premiums to rise, right.  And if risk-free rates don’t change, then the funds rate will rise.  If we target the funds rate, if we feel as if we have to hold that constant, then we in essence have to lower what’s essentially the risk-free rate.  Now, we often do find it appropriate to cut our policy rate at times when credit risk premiums go up, but it’s not obvious that should be automatically one-for-one, and that’s sort of what we imposed on the Desk in August 2007.  We were sort of cracking the whip, asking them to keep the average funds rate constant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists primarily of the speaker expressing their thoughts and observations on various topics related to money markets and monetary policy.


Passage number 104.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I remember that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a personal recollection.


Passage number 105.
  [Laughter] MR. LACKER.  Yes, you do.  You were sitting right over there, getting some heat from the Committee about that in September.  And yet the situation was that we had these risk premiums rising, and so you had to drive down what was, in essence, the risk-free rate.  So if we worked with an administered rate, then risk premiums do what they do and we make an explicit decision about how much to offset that with a move in the risk-free rate.  So, for me, as I said, just the welter of factors that affect various spreads and money markets make the simplicity of adopting an administered rate pretty attractive.  They also make me dubious about targeting any particular market rate or aiming our operations at any particular money market beyond this administered rate we have. We have some experience now away from the lower bound.  It seems pretty clear that arbitrage among various parties does make the interest rate on excess reserves an effective anchor for other market rates.  I think the interviews with money market participants confirm  that.  If we just relied on our administered rate, we’d avoid the dependence on the funds market, which could dwindle to nothing pretty rapidly.  We could avoid the cost of overnight RRP operations and sort of footprint concerns we’ve had.  The information in the staff memos suggests those are superfluous to the degree to which IOER is acting as an effective market anchor already.  In addition, with a floor system and a large enough balance sheet to satiate reserves, overnight and intraday lending by us would be fairly minimal.  Daylight credit use would be fairly minimal, another advantage I think we need to count. Now, as I said, I prefer that regime, but I’ll just say that I think if the staff brings back a recommendation for anything else, I think the burden of proof should be on demonstrating that going beyond that simple regime has some benefits.  Another way to put that as a question for the staff would be:  What would be wrong with that regime.  If we had money market rates configured the way they are, with us just running a simple IOER-based administered rate system, what would be wrong with the funds rate trading we’d see.  What would be wrong with the RP rate.  What would be wrong with money market rates that we’d need to correct by going in and targeting some other rate.  And I guess that’s the way to think about it. There’s one wrinkle that detracts from a simple IOER-based administered rate regime that springs to mind.  The Congress gave the power to set the interest rate on excess reserves to the Board of Governors and not to the FOMC—in hindsight, arguably, a blunder.  [Laughter]  It might not be the first by the Congress, but—so I’m okay for now with setting the target rate at the funds rate as an interim arrangement until we can get the Congress to fix the legislation.  But in response to President Williams’s point:  I think we shouldn’t be shy about deciding we’re going to seek some changes.  In the meantime, this is sort of a messy aspect of the current framework because we really don’t care about the funds market per se, which is the point our  Vice Chairman made.  But having an announced target for the funds rate kind of makes it seem like we do, and it’s an awkward aspect to the current regime, as I see it.  So in their analysis of alternative frameworks, I’d urge the staff to be candid about governance questions as they bring back their work to us. Let me talk about “liquidity programs,” as they’re called.  One memo asks whether the framework should be designed to mitigate the tension between interest rate control and liquidity provision objectives.  As I highlighted in response to President Bullard, in a simple floor system relying on just the interest rate on reserves, there is no tension between our monetary policy framework and liquidity programs.  In fact, one of our former Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia colleagues used to oppose floor systems for exactly this reason, because they facilitated credit-market interventions.  In case you were wondering, I can assure you that the ease of undertaking credit-market interventions is not the reason I prefer a simple floor system.  [Laughter] This obviously isn’t the time to debate the merits of the various ways we intervened in credit markets during the crisis, but if the staff believes that there is a tension or a tradeoff between the ability to undertake liquidity programs and a monetary policy framework that they’d recommend, they’re going to have to come to us with some sense of the economic benefits and costs of such credit programs, and they haven’t done this in the materials they provide.  In fact, the memo on lessons from the crisis simply takes as an unquestioned premise that various credit market interventions were necessary.  They’re referred to as things we had to do in this situation.  This is consistent with some popular narratives that emphasize the inherent dysfunctionality in financial markets, but, as David Altig noted at the beginning of his remarks, scholars differ on the interpretation of the events of the crisis.  I’m not aware of any economic analysis comparing  this popular narrative with alternatives, including ones that emphasize the extent to which volatility and distress in financial markets in that period were induced by the moral hazard effects of the perceived Federal Reserve stance toward credit provisions, particularly following the August 2007 actions that President Williams so vividly described.  We haven’t conducted such an evaluation internally, and I’m not aware of any credible external assessment.  And without such a comparative assessment, I think the necessity of the sequence of credit market interventions we undertook in the crisis is far from obvious.  So if the staff believes that the merits of liquidity program capability should be taken into account in monetary framework design, it would seem essential that they take the time to conduct an after-action assessment of our policy choices before, during, and after the crisis, even if that means putting the next phase of the work on the long-run framework on hold.  In my view, this type of assessment is long overdue.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and perspectives on various topics, without directly contradicting or disagreeing with anyone else's ideas.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 106.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Thank you to the team around the System that worked on this project.  Let me just make a couple of comments that struck me after reading through the papers, understanding these are early days. Regulatory reform, I think, has certainly reduced the probability of financial crises and limited their potential severity.  However, it also probably has reduced incentives for arbitrage in money markets and may introduce some frictions that make money markets work less smoothly, therefore possibly increasing the need for liquidity actions by the Federal Reserve.  A combination of on-the-shelf liquidity facilities and the ON RRP may be needed to ensure future money market functionality and interest rate control in a potential future crisis.  So far, the ON RRP facility has helped limit shortfalls and volatility in money markets, and the risk that it might have exacerbated flights to quality really has not materialized.  For example, we didn’t see it in January and February of this year, and we haven’t seen it following the Brexit vote.   Nevertheless, because crises can hit at unexpected times and in unexpected ways—and, by definition, are surprises that you don’t expect—I do feel strongly that we should do more work on having on-the-shelf liquidity facilities that could help limit the severity of market stress episodes and help address one potential downside of an ON RRP facility.  In my view, in that crisis it may well be necessary to assist, in particular, the money market industry, dealers, and nonbank financials. On slide 13 of the briefing materials, the points 2 and 3 that you made are, to me, a couple of the reasons why I would like to have on-the-shelf facilities.  Number one, I think if there’s clarity about the purpose of such operations, it does reduce stigma.  And, in particular, it’s important to emphasize that this is about the provision of liquidity versus emergency lending to individual firms.  I believe that if our communications are well prepared and explain what those facilities are designed for, we won’t eliminate stigma but should help reduce it.  Also, your point about clarity on when liquidity insurance operations would be used—to limit contagion during stress events—is a very key one and is another reason to have on-the-shelf facilities. I would add two other reasons for having on-the-shelf facilities.  One, it allows you to move quickly, and, two, when you are in a crisis is not the time to be thinking through and making up provisions and mechanisms to deal with the situation.  That is, I’d rather we did this in advance in the cold light of day rather than on the run.  And I think we have the opportunity to do that, so I would encourage you to do more work on this.  I understand the risk that it may appear to create or induce an overreliance on the Fed, and there are some political sensitivities associated with that.  But this work is very, very important, and I think history has shown that we ought to have these facilities in place with our communication well established in advance.  So I encourage you to do more work on this.  Thank you.  CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you very much.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes 

Explanation: The passage contains differing opinions on the effectiveness and potential drawbacks of regulatory reform on money markets. Mr. Kaplan acknowledges that regulatory reform has reduced the probability and severity of financial crises but argues that it may also reduce incentives for arbitrage and introduce frictions that make money markets work less smoothly. He suggests that a combination of on-the-shelf liquidity facilities and the ON RRP may be needed to ensure future money market functionality. He also expresses the need for clear communication and preparedness for future crises. President Evans, on the other hand, does not directly respond to Mr. Kaplan's comments and instead proceeds with her own remarks.


Passage number 107.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’d like to thank all of the contributors to the long-run framework working groups who presented here today.  The first installment has been an impressive effort, and I learned a lot from reading the memos and discussing them with my staff.  The presentations clearly point to a number of tradeoffs that will be associated with choosing among alternative implementation structures. Before I forget, I agree with the comments that President Williams and President Rosengren made, that the implications of the probability of hitting the effective lower bound should be considered within the context of our long-run framework discussions.  I think it is certainly the case that the choice of our inflation objective is part of that, in terms of how low interest rates will be during normal times and how much capacity we have to lower rates when we need to do so. I’d like to say at this point that I remain open minded, no matter what I say after this.  [Laughter]  I am not strongly wed to many prior views on the long-run framework, and it’s simply useful for each of us to push, in our own way, harder on all of the framework presentations.  So, in that spirit, I will continue. I’m not sure this isn’t just nostalgia for the old days, but I do confess some sympathies for returning to our pre-crisis framework with a small balance sheet, or at least a smaller balance sheet than we have.  At least during normal times, it served us well and in ways that we probably still don’t fully appreciate, at least I think when it comes to minimizing political risks that we previously never considered. A fundamental question for me is this:  Do the changes in financial markets that we have experienced over the past several years make it clearly undesirable to return to the “old world”.   I’ll describe it that way.  I appreciate that there are numerous details that complicate this return to a more conservative, old-style monetary approach.  For example, we will have to determine if changes in regulation and business practices have had a lasting and unalterable effect on reserve demand and overnight funding markets in general.  And, in turn, there are many interactions and interdependencies involved in analyzing this and other important questions.  I’m looking forward to hearing more about the strengths and weaknesses across alternative frameworks, both during normal times and during periods of stress.  Our ability to achieve our set of macroeconomic outcomes is the most important piece of this decision tree, it seems to me.  Maybe it’s the easiest.  The social benefits of reducing deadweight losses in some markets might be more uncertain and controversial with respect to possible unexpected outcomes that I just can’t lay out today, because I don’t know that we know them. Again, here is that caveat.  I remain open minded, but I am wondering about the following risk.  It’s not just the economics that are difficult.  The decisions that we make about the implementation framework will be scrutinized from a political economy perspective as well, and I think President Mester touched on a number of these issues.  Inevitably, we will need to consider the possibility that not all of our tools will be available in the future. Madam Chair, you mentioned that there are already “optics” concerns related to the IOER rate being above a market rate.  The Congress has wondered whether that is something of a subsidy to certain financial institutions.  For example, large IOER payments to banks may not always be seen as “living the Friedman rule” and reducing regulatory reserve burdens.  I worry about the possibility that, when rates increase and get closer to neutral, when we finally do normalize, if we still have a large balance sheet, the size of IOER payments going out to banks may become a political lightning rod.  Should we select a best framework or most robust  framework, subject to achieving a number of objectives that we specify.  I look forward to hearing more about this.  Our previous small-balance-sheet approach may seem 20th century, “old school,” and opaque.  But I wonder if those tools and authorities might be more robust to changes in political winds.  I’m just wondering. I appreciate the long-run framework project’s commitment to a broad, open, and robust process that considers the issues from many vantage points.  It will help us understand important tradeoffs and move us toward adopting an implementation framework that will serve the institution well in years to come.  I expect to learn more, and I remain open minded about selecting the best appropriate framework for the years ahead.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing appreciation for the contributions made by others and stating that they remain open-minded about the topic being discussed. They also express curiosity and raise questions about certain aspects, but there is no disagreement with anyone in the passage.


Passage number 108.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I, too, would like to add my thanks to the workgroups’ very thorough work products for today’s discussion. While I think the framework in place today seems to be working well for monetary control purposes, I do support this effort devoting time and resources to thinking ahead, exploring options, and, importantly, anticipating various states of the world in which the Committee might be making policy.  I do think we have time to do this exercise in a very deliberate way.  I don’t have a lean yet.  I’m processing the information in the memos at a somewhat more basic point of consideration.  I found the three memos helpful in teasing out what seemed to me to be the first-order pertinent questions.  Some of my questions may suggest further work and attention, so here’s what’s on my mind, informed by the memos. Realistically, can we get back to a corridor system and preserve the federal funds rate as a centerpiece of policy setting.  Will reserves be scarce or plentiful down the road.  If we take as a  given the fact that depository institutions will want to hold a higher level of reserves, will their target level reserves vary with changing conditions.  And, if so, how. Will the expanded number of counterparties that we now have be a permanent aspect of the operating framework.  And if we were to go further, what classes of institutions would we want to include.  What are the benefits and negatives of expanding the range of collateral instruments. If we want to preserve a market rate as the policy rate, how viable is the federal funds rate as a policy instrument.  Are the overnight interbank funding rate, which is an unsecured instrument, and/or the GC repo rate, a secured instrument, workable alternatives as a market rate.  And do these rates require expanding the number of counterparties.  More generally, what distinguishes one money market rate from another as a potential policy rate. Regarding arbitrage behavior, what can be assumed to be reliable on an ongoing basis.  I’d like to understand better what incentives and disincentives are associated with regulation as they affect arbitrage opportunities. And, finally, a broader question is suggested by commentary that comes on pages 9 and 10 of the memo “Lessons from the Crisis”: What conclusions can we draw regarding the features of the U.S. environment that will shape implementation practices.  I think we might gain from an attempt to work back from the environment or the context of policy to the operating framework options and choices.  We tend to think of environment features in terms of the structure of money markets and the regulatory picture.  As others have raised, including President Evans just before me, I’ll suggest that we might also think about the political support for operating in different ways.  As I see it, there is likely to be political pressure on the IOER rate as an instrument.  I’d like also to suggest that, as we move this exercise forward, thought be given at some point to the  requirements of transition from the current regime to another and to the communications challenges involved. Finally, while these were prepared in advance, I will freelance for just one moment, perhaps responding to Governor Fischer and something that President Williams said, about our regime that will probably work in normal times, with many different versions of it.  But I think the times also call for perhaps thinking well outside the box.  So to borrow from a different discipline—maybe a little bit of a “Herman Kahn” approach to thinking about the unthinkable—we’re in an era in which it’s not unthinkable that a terrorist act or cyberwarfare could severely affect the operating environment of the Federal Reserve.  So I would encourage some work on thinking about scenarios that are really extreme and how we would respond to those scenarios.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their support for the effort being made to think ahead and explore options for the Committee's policy-making. They also raise several questions and considerations for further discussion, but there is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 109.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’m going to begin with a procedural point, which picks up on some of the things John said earlier.  I think we have to find a way to explore a variety of ideas here, some of which may be pretty innovative and some of which may be pretty far reaching, without committing anybody ex ante to any particular direction.  I think it is hard to do that in this room because discussions here have a tendency to either acquire a certain direction or acquire a certain oppositional quality whereby it seems as though something is being debated.  And, like President Williams, I see neither the need nor the desirability of rushing to some sort of answer.  I think that we’re going to need to figure out a way to have an exploration of both a lot of the substantive issues people have raised as well as a blue-skying of ideas that takes place outside this room but in a way that is accessible to people in the room who are currently in the room and who may be able to participate.  This can happen through the Jackson  Hole symposium and other conferences.  It might be able to happen informally.  But I do think that’s important, because we don’t want to force the staff to either come back only with incremental ideas because they feel it’s not their place to change things fundamentally or to force them to come back with something that’s quite far-reaching, and then for us to say, “Who are you guys to be coming to us with something far reaching like this.”  So some sort of iterative process in between, I think, is actually important. Let me now just identify, as a number of other people have, some of the issues that I think are particularly useful, interesting, or important, or all three, to pursue during this process.  At the very top of that list I will echo Presidents Evans, Rosengren, and Williams in saying that how to think about accommodation in a low-for-long environment is, I think, essential to this exercise, and if it doesn’t address that question, it probably hasn’t succeeded.  Other things I’m going to mention now I think are important, but without that first element, it’s a little hard to see why we would have gone through the whole thing to being with. Next, I would say, how to adjust monetary policy to the better regulation of financial institutions and activities that have been put in place since the crisis is actually very important.  And in this respect, I would recommend—I know the staff knows about it, because they’ve read it—to the Committee generally a paper on monetary policy and regulation put out, I think, Vice Chairman Dudley, was it a year ago May, by the Committee on the Global Financial System.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is mainly discussing the need for exploring different ideas and approaches without committing to a specific direction. There are no opposing opinions or conflicting arguments presented.


Passage number 110.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without knowing the specific passage that is being referred to, it is not possible to determine with certainty whether there is contention or disagreement. However, based on the provided information, it can be inferred that there is some sort of disagreement or conflict present in the passage.


Passage number 111.
 MR. TARULLO.  I think it was put out in May 2015.  Is that when it was.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating the date when something was put out.


Passage number 112.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes, last year—“Regulatory Change and Monetary Policy,” paper number 54.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply states a statement made by Mr. Potter without any evidence of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 113.
  MR. TARULLO.  Yes.  It was, I thought, a very nuanced assessment of how the necessary changes in regulation will need to be accommodated by monetary policies throughout the world, and it was done principally by people from the monetary policy side of shops.  It wasn’t done by regulators, which I think is one of the things that made it useful.  Now, we were lucky that our participant was someone from the Division of Monetary Affairs, but someone who knew a lot about regulation, and I think other central banks were able to do the same, which is why it has a nuanced feel to it.  In that regard, I would note that the maximum lubrication of the policy transmission system that monetary policy people sometimes talk about as desirable is actually, if not quite the same thing, very close to the same thing as the massive amounts of short-term wholesale funding that support unexamined credit positions and runs at the first real signs of trouble. That’s why the regulation and monetary policy decisions need to be thought of at the same time.  You can’t just think, “Well, we want maximum transmission so that we can get monetary policy through in these very liquid markets” without realizing that it’s those very liquid markets that freeze up when things start to go awry, which leads me to the concept of “liquidity insurance.”  I know that is not a term coined by the staff, but it is a pregnant term, which immediately elicited in me the question, “And who exactly is paying the premiums for that liquidity insurance.”  And the answer, of course, is not really anybody in some of the countries that the staff was referring to, except insofar as you accept the proposition that being part of a regulatory system is in and of itself a premium, a case pretty hard to make on the basis of the existing state of the financial system.  I would note in this regard that the United Kingdom and  Switzerland, the two countries correctly cited as having some of the more fulsome liquidity facilities, are also two of the jurisdictions that have what we might term “unusually large”  financial systems, given their GDPs.  And I think it’s difficult to avoid the conclusion that it is necessary for the central bank to be a very generous lender of last resort in order to sustain what some might characterize as outsized financial systems.  This leads to some of the questions that Vice Chairman Dudley was suggesting a moment ago as well about our own financial system, which, although it’s not as outsized relative to our GDP as is the case in either the United Kingdom or certainly the old Switzerland, is still pretty outsized in comparison with the rest of the world.  And that does get us thinking, as Vice Chairman Dudley said, about the layers of intermediation that take place, but also the kind of things that we want to be backing up, as it were. Now, I actually was a bit bemused by President Lacker’s suggestion that it was moral hazard that created the problems during the crisis.  I would very much agree with the proposition that moral hazard in the years preceding the crisis led to the conditions that created all of these runs.  Personally, I subscribe to the view that when you’re in the middle of a crisis is not the time to create bulwarks against moral hazard.  That’s what you do when things have calmed down.  But that is something that we need to be thinking about.  And it’s the reason why I have been more skeptical than a lot of you—although, judging by today, I have more allies than I might have feared, and I’m glad to hear that—about always wanting more powers in the central banks to be able to create liquidity, because there is a time-consistency problem that is created when you have those powers, and that’s why it’s a difficult set of issues. That pushes me to the existence, size, and use of the balance sheet, which I think is in the first instance an analytic question.  That is, there’s a positive analysis to be done before the normative analysis comes through.  I was in Cambridge, Massachusetts, a week ago Friday and had this very interesting experience in which I had breakfast at Harvard University and lunch at  MIT.  And so at Harvard University, led by Jeremy Stein, as many of you would have guessed, I very much got the demand for safe assets:  “You know, they’re being privately created right now, so the Federal Reserve should think about creating public safe assets” and all the rest—the full dose of that.  And then a mere two stops down the Red Line, in Kendall Square, I got the exact opposite view, which is, “It is a very dangerous thing for the central bank to be creating safe assets.  Moreover, a lot of the so-called demand for safe assets will actually dissipate.”  If they could meet in Central Square and have the debate, that would be fun to watch.  But, analytically, I do think we need to pay attention to that issue because whatever our normative predispositions, if there is, indeed, a substantial exogenous demand for money like our safe assets that is going to be privately created, we have to take that into account not just for regulatory purposes, but also when thinking about the transmission of monetary policy.  And if we come to that analytic conclusion, we may or may not decide that we want to do something with the balance sheet, as Jeremy Stein would have us do to create safe assets, but we at least need to take that into account.  And then as President Rosengren said—so I won’t repeat it at any length—it’s conceivable that you’d also use the balance sheet for monetary policy purposes, with a sort of twist–reverse twist kind of mechanism.  I think that’s worth exploring as well. And finally, an issue that I don’t think anyone has mentioned to this point is that I do think it’s worth paying some attention to the unique role of the dollar in the global economy and thinking about how we fashion our monetary policy framework.  It occurred to me in the first instance as I was reading the memo on foreign central bank frameworks.  And I said, “Wait a second.  This is very interesting, but, man, oh, man, this would not work for us, because you’ve got people holding dollar assets as currency reserves all around the world.”  So I do think it would be worth specifically addressing the question of the degree to which the role of the dollar  as the principal global reserve currency both affects us in the effectiveness of monetary policy decisions that we would make—this is back to global savings kinds of issues—and, in turn, affects other people, which has a kind of feedback effect on the performance of the macroeconomy.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kashkari.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is mainly a series of statements and opinions expressed by the speaker.


Passage number 114.
 MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’ll just make four quick points.  First, let me add my voice to all those who came before in encouraging the staff to do work looking at the effective lower bound.  I think that’s paramount, as others have said.  I know you were planning to do it anyway, but I think it’s important. Second, I’m interested in the staff’s view on some of these on-the-shelf or off-the-shelf tools.  How often would you expect that we would use them.  To me this goes right to the core of both stigma and moral hazard.  I view stigma and moral hazard as closely linked.  If we have tools that are used frequently, they’re going to have low stigma and potentially increase moral hazard.  Tools that are used infrequently, the opposite.  Would you envision us using these tools in the ordinary course of events every year, every 10 years, every 100 years.  I’m just interested in getting your perspective on that. And this is linked to something that Vice Chairman Dudley said, which was, “Would the crisis have been less severe if we had more of these tools ready to go.”  I’m not sure.  When I think back to my experience during the crisis, when people asked me to reflect on our performance, let’s say, the government entirely—the Federal Reserve, the Treasury, et cetera—the criticism that I offer is that we were always late because, in connection with Loretta’s point, we didn’t know how bad the crisis was, and we were reluctant interveners.  I’ll give you one example.  Just take the TARP, as the most extreme example.  When the Congress passed the  TARP, it was about two weeks to when we announced the capital injections, and about a month later we actually had money going into banks.  But it had been sitting on the shelf as a concept for eight months until Bernanke and Paulson said, “Now we finally have to go to the Congress.”  So the delay was not the implementation.  The biggest delay was us having the will to say “We need to do this.”  So it affects, for me, how I think about tools on the shelf.  Is it the time to implement the tool or the time to make the decision to use the tool that ultimately is the delay. And then the last point I’ll make, because I think we should be humble about our ability to forecast the future, is that if we had gone back 20 or 30 years ago and asked the Federal Reserve System to design tools that would have been useful in 2008, there’s no chance they would have come up with the right set of tools that ended up being implemented in 2008 because the markets evolved.  That tells me that we should err toward simplicity but flexibility to give future participants the tools they need to design tools in the moment, because we’re probably not going to be able to design them right now.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is offering their perspective and making points for consideration, but there is no argument or conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 115.
  MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I appreciate the very high-quality and voluminous material [laughter] that the staff is developing to help inform these policy deliberations, and I’m guessing that all of the comments that we’re making today will lead to even more voluminous material. I think it’s always tempting as policymakers to hark back to an era of greater simplicity with fewer tools.  But I think it would be a mistake if we succumbed prematurely to that temptation without carefully assessing the complex nature of the challenges we are facing today and are likely to face in the future in order to fulfill our statutory responsibilities.  I think the financial markets in particular have evolved considerably and are likely to continue doing so.  The staff’s analysis highlights the role of regulation.  And I think this needs to be further explored.  But I also want to make sure that we’re taking into account the role of technology, which is already affecting the wholesale financial markets and changing market structure and is likely to do more of that.  We certainly saw that in the Treasury securities markets in October 2014, and we’re likely to see more disintermediation and changes in market structure associated with technology. I also would highlight, as others have done, that it’s important to take into account the likelihood that we find ourselves in a lower neutral rate environment for a protracted period of time.  This is an environment in which the same frequency and size of shocks that we have seen historically would lead us back down to the effective lower bound with greater frequency, which surely needs to be taken into account in our policy framework, and one in which we might see greater international transmission than we have previously. The analysis, to me at least, suggests that the complicated nature of the challenges we’re likely to face may, in fact, require greater complexity in our implementation framework to  achieve in the most effective and compelling way the clear objectives the Congress set out for us.  In my own view, it’s very important to think about provision of liquidity in the wholesale financial markets at times of stress as part of our critical responsibility for financial stability in parallel to our monetary policy objectives.  And I do believe that I would like to see some explicit consideration of the demand for safe assets and what our role is likely to be or should be in the future.  It seems particularly important for us as the central bank that has the deepest, most liquid, largest wholesale financial markets in the world and a currency that is viewed globally as the most important reserve currency.  This is not something we chose, it may not be something we wished for, but it is something that I think matters in terms of our role in the system and the ways that financial stresses spill over into our markets.  So I agree that it should be taken explicitly into account. That said, I’m certainly keeping a very open mind, and others around the table, I hear, are doing the same.  I think it’s quite premature to draw any firm conclusions until we’re better able to assess possible tradeoffs.  I do believe that at some juncture we would benefit from a broader public discussion of these issues—not just with expert communities, but also with nonexpert communities who may not fully understand the kinds of tradeoffs that we faced during the crisis and may well face.  And it’s better to have those discussions ex ante than to try to defend actions ex post. So, against the background of those considerations, I do think this is a very important set of analyses.  And I hope we’ll have a lot of time before we need to actually draw conclusions about tools and the framework.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 116.
  MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’m not sure whether I missed something that Governor Tarullo said, but I heard him talking about the interaction between the need to plan the system to take account of both the regulatory system that you’re changing and the financial system.  And I think we ought to remind ourselves that we missed that in a big way in 2006, ’07, and ’08, when the supervisory system did not carry out the functions as well as it should have, and that those two elements of our job as the central bank, which are supervision and regulation of the financial system and the provision of a lender-of-last-resort facility, are very intimately connected.  They are connected in the sense that any intelligent human being faced with the choice between creating a recession of the depth that we had in 2008 to prevent moral hazard on some future occasion—which it wouldn’t do anyway, because the people who created that crisis won’t be around for the next one—will, in the end, succumb to what we call “moral hazard”—and what I call “common sense”—namely, that you don’t destroy an economy for the next five years in order to teach somebody a lesson. So we will not get to that point, and that means we have to make sure that through all the tools that we have at our command, we minimize the probability of being put in such a situation.  But we should never believe that we understand the world and the random events that happen well enough that our successors will not be put in that situation again.  We’re not going to end too-big-to-fail, and we need to take that into account.  We just have to make absolutely sure that we have done everything that we can to minimize the probability that we are put in that situation at some future date.  And I think that has to be part of the discussions.  I think several people have already said they would like those issues discussed in the next round of this very, very critical discussion.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Anybody else.  [No response]  Okay.  Well, let me end by again thanking the staff for their fantastic work.  I think the input that you’ve heard will be useful as we prepare for further discussion in November. Why don’t we take a break at this point to have lunch and resume at, say, 1:15. [Lunch recess] CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay, folks.  Will this group come to order.  We’re ready to begin with the Desk briefing, and let me turn things over to Lorie Logan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contentious or disagreement. It consists mainly of statements and reflections made by the speakers.


Passage number 117.
 MR. FISCHER.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  And without objection.  Okay.  Let’s move along then to the economic and financial situation, and Steve Kamin is going to start us off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The participants are simply discussing how to proceed and move on to the next topic.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 118.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I have a question on “The International Outlook”—exhibit 2, box 9, “Real Dollar Indexes.”  You’ve got the dollar appreciating over the forecast horizon.  One question you might ask is:  Wouldn’t markets already have integrated all of the information that’s available, and, therefore, it wouldn’t really be very predictable where the trade-weighted value of the dollar was going to go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention/disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Bullard, questions the predictability of the trade-weighted value of the dollar based on the information already integrated into the markets. This implies a disagreement or doubt about the accuracy of the forecast outlined in the exhibit.


Passage number 119.
 MR. KAMIN.  That insight is exactly right, and that is an important part of the way we forecast the dollar, which is to assume that everything the markets know or anticipate now is already incorporated into the current level of the dollar.  The only reason why we would predict changes in the dollar—particularly the exchange rate against the advanced economies, whose exchange rates are determined by the market—is if we thought the market was going to learn  something later that it does not know now.  In general, of course, we don’t think we have any greater insight into future events than the market does.  However, there is one area in which we think we might have some insight, and that’s the assumption in our forecast that the federal funds rate will rise at a steeper gradient over the course of the forecast period than the market expects.  So the market expects a relatively small amount of tightening over the next few years.  We have built into our forecast a greater amount of tightening, so we assumed that as the market learns about that and is surprised by the upward shift in the federal funds rate, it will accordingly bid the dollar up, and that’s the rationale for the upward tilt in our exchange rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply explaining their approach to forecasting the dollar and the rationale for their exchange rate forecast.


Passage number 120.
 MR. BULLARD.  I see.  But, actually, my own forecasts don’t have that policy upswing.  So I guess if you’re applying this to what I have, then you’d say that maybe the dollar would even depreciate, or at least you would make no forecast about the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their own perspective and stating that their own forecasts do not align with the mentioned policy upswing. They also mention that based on their forecasts, they would not make any specific forecast about the dollar.


Passage number 121.
 MR. KAMIN.  That could well be.  Our forecast regarding the dollar is part of the overall staff forecast of the U.S. economy and depends on the assumptions about U.S. monetary policy that are incorporated into our staff forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No
Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a statement explaining that the forecast regarding the dollar is part of the overall staff forecast of the U.S. economy and relies on assumptions about U.S. monetary policy.


Passage number 122.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement from Mr. Bullard is a simple expression of gratitude, and Chair Yellen's response indicates that she is open to further questions.


Passage number 123.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 124.
 WILLIAMS.  I have a question, diving deep into the Tealbook forecast, and that’s specifically about housing.  You highlight in the Tealbook that the incoming data on residential construction suggest lower growth over the near term, but I’m a little bit puzzled by that.  And, I’m thinking ahead to the wording in the draft statement that residential investment is “soft.”  Real residential investment increased at a rate of more than 15 percent in the first quarter.  Outside commentators would describe housing—and this is how my own staff described it when we discussed it—as a sector in which housing starts, permits, and existing home sales have been  strong and have been in fact above expectations, and that any slowing that we’ve seen in the data may be just some weather effects, which have affected the timing of activity between Q1 and Q2.  So I guess I’m asking for your help in thinking this through:  If you have a really strong Q1, partly boosted by weather, and then a little bit of a takeaway in Q2, how do you view that.  And why would that make your forecast more negative about Q3 and Q4.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. 

The speaker, Williams, is questioning the forecast that suggests lower growth in residential construction over the near term. He argues that the data on housing starts, permits, and existing home sales have been strong, and any slowdown may be due to weather effects. Williams is expressing disagreement with the forecast and seeking clarification on why it is more negative about Q3 and Q4.


Passage number 125.
 MR. WILCOX.  By our lights, starts and permits data have been disappointing over the past couple of months.  And, basically, the permits numbers, which give a much higher signal-to-noise ratio reading on the underlying pace of activity, have been about flat since December of last year.  So we marked down our near-term forecast of single-family permits from the June Tealbook to now. Now, part of the reason why the residential investment figure in the national income and product accounts is so strong in the first quarter was that there looks to have been a very large spike in single-family starts in February; the series for single-family starts is pretty noisy.  We think that most of that is just statistical noise around a much steadier trend that’s formed by the adjusted single-family permits.  The starts number does feed mechanically through in a distributed moving lag into the residential investment, but what we think basically is going on there is that the BEA is feeding through a distributed moving lag of noise into the national income and product accounts, and the permits numbers—which are not based on a sample but are essentially a census of permits issued across the country—just give a much smoother picture.  And those numbers continue to disappoint.  We’ve been steadily marking down our assessment.  We still think that the pace of construction is significantly below the demographically indicated pace of units to be added to the capital stock.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any obvious contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing data and their analysis of it, without contradicting or arguing with any other viewpoints.


Passage number 126.
  MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual passage being provided. Please provide the passage in question for a specific analysis.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 127.
 WILLIAMS.  I agree with the latter point.  I guess I’m going back to this characterization of residential construction as being soft when it’s been growing, whether there is statistical noise or not.  If it’s been growing very rapidly and it just doesn’t keep growing or it declines a little bit, that just seems a funny way to characterize residential construction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Williams, disagrees with the characterization of residential construction as "soft" even though it has been growing. They believe that even if residential construction stops growing or declines slightly, it is not accurate to describe it as "soft."


Passage number 128.
 MR. WILCOX.  Permits have been basically moving sideways since the beginning of the year, and we think that’s just a much better gauge on the pace of activity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is stating a fact about the movement of permits without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 129.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  John, is your concern that it’s an untrue statement, or is your concern that because it’s included in the statement, it suggests that the Committee is putting too much weight on it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification from John on the specific nature of his concern.


Passage number 130.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not provide any information or context to indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 131.
 WILLIAMS.  Of course it’s the latter, right.  Otherwise, I wouldn’t be talking about this.  So if you look at business investment, that has been slow, negative for quarter after quarter—there’s no question that’s been a negative.  But right after, we get a torrid—a term we used back in the ’90s—rate of growth in a category, 15.6 percent, and then it falls by—I think we’re writing down minus 3 percent for Q2, something like that—it just seems a little funny to describe that as a “soft” sector, as opposed to business investment, which has clearly has shown ongoing weakness rather than a big movement up and a little movement down.  Even though you’re saying permits are roughly flat, starts have moved up and then they’ve moved down, and it just seems it’s harder to describe to the public why something that has been growing very rapidly is “soft.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining their perspective and questioning the use of the term "soft" to describe a sector that has been growing rapidly.


Passage number 132.
” VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Of course, paragraph 1 is almost always characterized as something like “data received since the previous meeting,” so we’re not stretching back over to the beginning of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It is providing a clarification about the typical characterization of paragraph 1.


Passage number 133.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not provided, so it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 134.
 WILLIAMS.  Right, but it’s the level—“soft” is a level in a way, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 135.
  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Look, I have some sympathy for your point, in the sense that I’m not putting a lot of weight on that softness,  But I agree with the staff that it is soft over that interval.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The speaker expresses some sympathy for the other person's point but ultimately agrees with the staff's assessment of the softness. There is no clear contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 136.
 MR. TARULLO.  So is “soft” a relative or absolute term.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Tarullo is simply asking a clarifying question.


Passage number 137.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The abbreviation "MR" does not provide any context or information to determine if there is contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 138.
 WILLIAMS.  Well, I would like to go back to what David said.  The first-quarter growth rate was 15.6.  So you said some of that is “noise.”  Even if we take that at face value, then you’re really just saying that you’re taking that noise out of Q2, right.  You’re saying that the level over the two quarters is going to be up by—I’m going to have to do this math in my head—15.6 minus 3.2 divided by 2.  [Laughter]  So the level is up quite a bit.  Say there’s a little bit of noise that pushed up that Q1 number, and you’re taking that away in Q2.  That’s still not soft, in my view.  It’s really about quarterly growth rates having some ups and downs—a theme I’m going to come back to tomorrow—overemphasis on quarterly ups and downs in some of these data series.  And we know that residential investment has a lot of quarterly volatility in it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply restating and clarifying what David said and expressing their own perspective on the issue of quarterly growth rates.


Passage number 139.
 MR. WILCOX.  I really don’t want to go to the mat over this issue that’s worth a few basis points in terms of its contribution to GDP.  If we’re going to get out the number two pencil and put a really fine point on it, we were disappointed by the most recent data on starts and permits.  We’ve marked down our near-term trajectory for single-family permits—it’s a little lower, it’s a little flatter than what it has been before.  The trajectory of single-family permits is essentially flat since the beginning of the year.  To use Governor Tarullo’s typology, I guess my answer would be “yes,” it’s soft in relative terms and in absolute terms.  We’re significantly below where we think the demographically indicated or neutral level of construction is.  We’re not going to get there for years, and the most recent tranche of data was a little disappointing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Wilcox, is simply stating his own opinion and observations about the data on starts and permits.


Passage number 140.
  MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 141.
 WILLIAMS.  So, again, I’m going to drop it too—but in a moment.  [Laughter]  And I will have an open mind.  Our June statement said, “Since the beginning of the year, the housing sector has continued to improve.”  So you would say, “That’s no longer as true as it used to be,” and you could just kill that sentence.  But what we’ve done instead is to say, “Let’s kill the ‘has continued to improve’ and say ‘is soft.’ ”  That’s two notches down.  That’s all.  I’m done.  [Laughter]  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Other questions.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Williams, agrees with the suggestion to revise the statement and make it more accurate, describing the housing sector as "soft" instead of continuing to improve.


Passage number 142.
 MR. FISCHER.  I think this probably goes to Steve.  On the broad real exchange rate, we talk about the massive appreciation of the dollar.  I’m looking at the Wilcox presentation, page 1, chart 3.  That shows that from the middle of 2014 to now, we went up from 93 or thereabouts to 110, and that the increase took place, in essence, over two years.  Then we’ve basically got it just staying flat here.  I’m kind of puzzled, because whenever I listen to what we’re told about what the exchange rate has done, the story varies—“recent changes in the exchange rate reduced GDP growth 1½ percentage points, or ½ percentage point, or something.”  And then I listen the next time, and that number has been changed because something else happened.  So do we have a reliable set of data on what has happened to imports or exports because of the exchange rate, particularly imports.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing confusion about the varying information they have heard regarding the exchange rate and its impact on GDP growth. They are seeking clarification on the data related to imports and exports.


Passage number 143.
 MR. KAMIN.  I don’t have that off the top of my head, but I could certainly calculate that for you.  I will say that a couple of things are worth pointing out.  Broadly speaking, our exports over the past year or so have been flat.  And that would compare in some kind of steady state—normal conditions—with export growth of 3 to 5 percent.  So, very clearly, the rise in the dollar has depressed the growth of exports.  Now, the rise in the dollar should have also led, given normal GDP growth in the United States, to strong increases in imports.  And as a result of  that, we should have seen pretty substantial subtractions from GDP growth from net exports.  We actually have not seen that in the past few quarters.  In the first quarter, net exports actually contributed 0.1 percentage point to U.S. GDP growth.  In the second, we estimate that it subtracted about one-tenth, and there were similarly smaller numbers in the last quarters of 2015. With the dollar depressing exports pretty much as we would expect, the mystery in some sense is why imports have been so weak.  And one possibility, of course, is that somehow exchange rates no longer are a relative price that would affect the choice between domestic and imported goods.  We have no reason to believe that is the case, although we are certainly exploring that.  Our best hypothesis as to what’s going on is that some components of U.S. domestic spending that are particularly intensive in imports, particularly consumer durables and equipment investment, have been quite weak, and that has been exerting a downward effect on imports.  That hypothesis is substantiated, or at least given support by, the fact that models that we’ve estimated in which imports rely not on aggregate GDP growth but rather on the growth of those particular expenditure components I just mentioned do a better job of explaining the weakness of imports recently.  By that metric, the reason that net exports are not taking away as much from GDP growth as we might imagine is not because the exchange rate appreciation has had no effect, but rather because other shocks to domestic spending have offset.  So, by and large, we think the exchange rate mechanism still works.  Appreciation of the dollar has, indeed, cooled exports, but other developments in domestic spending have offset the exchange rate effect and depressed imports and have thus led to a smaller net exports drag than we might have anticipated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 144.
 MR. WILCOX.  And that the dollar appreciation probably plays some role in explaining why investment has been as weak as it has been.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is presenting a probable explanation without expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 145.
  MR. KAMIN.  Oh, absolutely. Right.  That’s a good point because that would be a knock-on effect that would not be captured just by the net exports components.  In other words, if manufacturers and exporters more generally were very chagrined about their future profitability prospects, and they reduced investment, that would not show up in net exports, exactly, but it would still be a drag on U.S. GDP growth attributable to the appreciation of the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is agreeing with the point made by the previous speaker and elaborating on it. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 146.
 MR. FISCHER.  Okay.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 147.
 MR. WILCOX.  So just to put our dirty laundry out a little further, it’s not unusual for us to be unable to trace dollar effects in the neat way to net exports so that the arithmetic lines up.  Nonetheless, when we take more of a top-line view of real GDP overall, the model estimates are loose and imprecise, but they are rules of thumb, which were the basis for the figures that I cited.  They continue to point to magnitudes of overall GDP effects that are in line with what we’ve got built in.  It’s an uncomfortable fact that tracing it through only to exports and imports doesn’t work very well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any direct contention or disagreement. It may imply some frustration or dissatisfaction with the inability to trace dollar effects in a neat way, but there is no explicit disagreement or arguing happening.


Passage number 148.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thanks. CHAIR YELLEN.  Further questions.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The mentioned passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It just includes a series of statements made by Mr. Fischer and Chair Yellen.


Passage number 149.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.  I was wondering what you know about why you now expect such a large drop in defense in the second quarter—the revision happened over just one meeting.  Also, is there payback.  And do you spread out the payback.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. The speaker is simply asking for information and clarification.


Passage number 150.
 MR. WILCOX.  We’ve been surprised by how weak defense spending has been.  Glenn Follette is here and can provide more details.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement made by Mr. Wilcox is merely stating a fact about defense spending without any opposing or conflicting viewpoints. Additionally, the presence of Glenn Follette to provide more details suggests a collaborative approach rather than disagreement.


Passage number 151.
 MR. FOLLETTE.  Yes, we’ve been surprised at how weak defense spending has been.  [Laughter]  That’s the reason for the large downswing in our Q2 forecast.  We expect that  spending should come back, but it’s not guaranteed to come back next quarter and could be spread out over time.  And so in the forecast we have defense spending coming back over the next couple of years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their surprise at the weak defense spending and suggesting that it may come back over the next couple of years.


Passage number 152.
 MR. WILCOX.  One way to put it, in sort of Washington-area lingo, is that—Glenn, help me out here—there’s been no surprise in defense appropriations, but for reasons not particularly apparent to us the spend-out from the appropriations has just been slower than expected.  However, it’s going to be in the pipeline.  We haven’t, as Glenn mentioned, built an immediate snapback in the level, but they will get those authorizations spent eventually.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining that defense appropriations have not been surprising, but the spending from those appropriations has been slower than expected. There is no indication of disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 153.
 MR. FOLLETTE.  So the appropriations that they approved last December are for a fiscal year, but those typically get spent out over a period of four or five years—about 60 percent in the first year and the rest after that.  But it’s not always 60 percent—55, 65, whatever—so there’s some noise in the series.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement or contention in the passage. The speaker mentions that the appropriations approved last December are typically spent over a period of four or five years, with around 60% spent in the first year. However, they also note that the percentage can vary and there is "some noise in the series." This suggests a lack of agreement or certainty about the exact percentages and timing of the spending.


Passage number 154.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you.  For what it’s worth, a contact of ours, a director in a large defense contracting firm, when asked about this, cited some large contracts whose awards were delayed.  Our contact also suggested that at this time of the year—in an election year, with a change of administration—typically, a lot of the workforce who do the contract awards leave, so there are sometimes some delays from that as well, but it could come back in a couple of quarters after that.  So I’ll have to wait and see.  Thanks. CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions.  [No response]  Okay.  There’s an opportunity now to comment on financial stability issues, and I’ve got two people on the list.  Anybody else who wishes to comment is welcome to do so as well.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of statements and observations made by Mr. Lacker and Chair Yellen.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 155.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The QS report highlights the fact that CRE overvaluation remains a concern.  It concludes that the effects of a sizable decline in CRE  prices on financial stability are likely to be small.  I remain concerned that the financial-stability risks associated with CRE are elevated. Out of the $3.6 trillion total commercial mortgages and multifamily residential mortgages, $1.8 trillion are held by the banking system.  Among asset classes held by leveraged institutions, it is large, although not concentrated in particularly large institutions.  It is also true that a significant decline in the CRE market is unlikely to occur in isolation.  However, if the economy does weaken, I expect that a large decline in CRE collateral value risks significantly reducing access to credit to all but the most creditworthy borrowers.  Such conditions conform well to the classic determinants of financial-stability problems—collateral values fall, and payment streams are interrupted.  Commercial and residential price declines account for most of the significant international financial problems in the postwar period in advanced countries.  Once prices fall, it is obviously too late to act preemptively.  Thus, now is a great time to test the effectiveness of our preventive actions—a time when persistently low interest rates are encouraging “reach-for-yield” behavior that may eventually be disruptive. One simple anecdote illustrates my concern.  In the third quarter of 2014, my staff produced a table of banks with the highest ratios of total CRE to risk-based capital.  Among those 50 institutions, 11 have already failed.  My concern is particularly heightened because these banks have been unable to survive despite an improving economy, low interest rates, and generally rising commercial real estate prices.  These 11 banks with high CRE concentration levels represent the preponderance of the total 15 bank failures that have occurred recently.  While failing in the current environment is likely illustrative of problems well beyond just commercial real estate exposure, there would seem to be an exposure level that is sufficiently  high that it reflects poorly on management decisions and results in an unsafe and unsound practice that should be limited.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Rosengren, is concerned about the financial-stability risks associated with commercial real estate (CRE) and believes that a significant decline in the CRE market could reduce access to credit and lead to financial-stability problems. On the other hand, the QS report concludes that the effects of a sizable decline in CRE prices on financial stability are likely to be small.


Passage number 156.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Over the past several weeks, we have heard a good deal of talk about investors reaching for yield.  In using the word “reach,” this terminology presupposes elements of exuberance.  But when you dig into some details, the recent commentary seems different than the kind of reach-for-yield behavior that often flashes red with respect to financial instability concerns.  That kind of behavior represents short-term, speculative hot money—chasing nickels in front of steamrollers—with an eye toward a quick and seemingly costless exit through rapidly closing doors when all rates begin to rise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is presenting their opinion and analysis of the recent commentary on investors reaching for yield. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument present.


Passage number 157.
 MR. TARULLO.  Yikes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The word "yikes" is an exclamation expressing surprise or alarm, but it does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 158.
  [Laughter] MR. FISCHER.  We’ll keep an open mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement indicates that the speaker is willing to consider different perspectives or ideas.


Passage number 159.
  [Laughter] MR. EVANS.  It’s the kind of stuff that gave us the 2013 taper tantrum.  At the moment, I don’t see this kind of activity as being behind recent market moves.  Rather, to me, the recent behavior looks more like a capitulation to permanently low yields. For example, our bank’s insurance financial monitoring team recently hosted a meeting for President Lockhart and me with seven life insurance executives.  We heard about some substantial reassessments by real money managers with long investment horizons, and, of course, insurance companies are one big piece of this group.  Many of these long-duration asset managers seem to be coming around to the view that persistently slow potential output growth here and abroad will keep real interest rates low for a long time—longer than they likely acknowledged one, two, or even three years ago.  These investors now seem resigned to locking in the yields they currently can get on safe longer-term fixed-income instruments.  This  investment behavior also seems consistent with what we’re hearing from issuers of highly rated corporate debt.  For instance, a contact at Ford referred to an astonishing fixed-income market in which high-quality debt is routinely oversubscribed. I think the capitulation hypothesis has implications for our thinking about financial vulnerability surrounding potential future monetary policy moves.  Real money investors resigned to lower rates in the long run seem less likely to think that an unexpected tightening will lead to substantially higher longer-term rates.  Rather, such tightening would simply flatten the yield curve.  This implies a reduced risk of outsized and persistent increases in longer-term interest rates if we have to raise policy rates somewhat more quickly than what is currently envisioned in the SEPs.  Put another way, perhaps it is more the case that the decline in longer-term interest rates we’ve seen in the past year or so reflects lower expected policy rates over the longer term as opposed to the large declines in term premium, such as those estimated by our stationary mean-reverting affine finance models.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Is there anybody else who would like to comment on financial stability issues.  You’re welcome to weigh in.  [No response]  Okay.  Seeing no takers, I suggest we begin our go-round on the economy, starting with President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is presenting their own perspective and observations.


Passage number 160.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Since our previous FOMC meeting, stock prices are up, the 10-year Treasury yield has declined, credit spreads have narrowed, the VIX is below average, and the trade-weighted exchange rate is little changed.  While the Brexit vote is likely to have negative economic ramifications for the United Kingdom and possibly for Europe, to date the effect on U.S. financial data has been quite benign.  In addition, while we do not have much real data that reflect the post-Brexit period, the data just before Brexit were  positive.  For example, employment rebounded strongly in June, allaying many of the concerns raised by the weak May employment report. Not surprisingly, in light of the generally positive news, my forecast has changed little.  It remains slightly more positive than the Tealbook forecast for the end of 2016, with real GDP slightly higher, core PCE inflation slightly higher, and the unemployment rate slightly lower.  In essence, it looks quite similar to the July Blue Chip forecasts of these variables.  Specifically, my forecast for the end of the year has an unemployment rate of 4.7 percent and core PCE only somewhat below 2 percent.  Thus, I expect us to be quite close to achieving our dual mandate by the end of the year.  Hence, it is not surprising that my forecast includes two increases in the funds rate this year, in September and December. It is notable that the Tealbook expects the unemployment rate to fall to 4.3 percent by 2018.  It is also notable that all of the scenarios modeled in the Tealbook result in an unemployment rate of 4.3 percent or lower, with the exception of the “Severe Financial Stress in Europe” scenario.  While I am comfortable probing to determine how low the natural rate of unemployment may be, I view 4.3 percent as more of a plunge than a probe.  It is not that tight labor markets have no benefits.  I would like somewhat tighter labor markets than what we have now to offset some of the labor scarring that occurred in the Great Recession.  However, history shows that when the unemployment rate gets as low as 4.3 percent, monetary policy tightens in an attempt to raise the unemployment rate back to full employment.  But, almost always, our attempt to achieve a smooth landing ends poorly, as the unemployment rate responds much more than intended, resulting in a recession.  What is striking when looking at unemployment over time is how rarely we are able to keep unemployment rates near anyone’s estimate of full  employment for an extended period.  Put differently, part of achieving maximum employment is avoiding significant overshooting of full employment and the recession that typically follows. One possibility for caution in continuing the normalization of the funds rate might be heightened uncertainty.  The buoyant stock market suggests that this uncertainty is not weighing heavily on market participants.  The widely used VIX measure of uncertainty is currently well below its norm.  A new, broader measure of uncertainty is the news-based Economic Policy Uncertainty Index, which is available daily.  After being low for most of the year, it spiked for a day or two on the Brexit news and is once again at relatively low levels.  One might think that greater uncertainty would lead some forecasters to predict more dire economic outcomes.  Instead, the Blue Chip’s July survey of forecasters reported the average of the 10 highest forecasts of unemployment at the end of 2016 and 2017 at 4.9 percent and 4.8 percent, respectively.  Perhaps the greatest tail risk right now is the one modeled in the Tealbook as “Severe Financial Stress in Europe.”  In that scenario, the unemployment rate peaks at 5.1 percent in 2017.  Even so, we continue to raise the federal funds rate but at a slower rate than in the baseline and still noticeably faster than markets currently expect. In summary, I expect that we are likely to be close to both elements of our dual mandate by the end of the year, and I do not see the risks to the economy as being particularly elevated.  I will discuss tomorrow what that implies for policy.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 161.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Both of the Fifth District surveys, just released this morning, improved in July and are now in positive territory.  On the manufacturing side, the composite index swung from minus 10 to plus 10, and the new orders component swung  from minus 17 to plus 15.  On the services side, the overall revenue index rose from plus 2 to plus 8.  The wage indexes are strongly positive across all sectors. At the national level, in my mind, the overall outlook has not changed appreciably since the June meeting.  Consumer spending gains are likely to account for most of the growth in real GDP this year, and the June retail sales report increased my confidence in the outlook for consumption.  Other sectors are likely to contribute less to overall economic growth.  Recent data suggest that homebuilding may have flattened out.  We continue to hear frequent reports of residential construction being limited by shortages of buildable lots and skilled workers, so supply-side factors rather than softer demand may be what’s limiting residential investment.  This view is consistent with the home price inflation that we see in the CoreLogic repeat sales index and would point toward “soft” not quite the right adjective for the housing market. Although business investment remains weak overall, there’s been at least some positive news.  In the latest estimate of first-quarter GDP, the growth rate for real intellectual property investment was revised from basically zero to more than 4 percent.  And with the price of petroleum now above $40 per barrel, the rig count has ticked up, suggesting that spending on new oil and gas wells has bottomed out.  Along with the Tealbook, I expect investment in nonresidential structures to begin to grow again in the third quarter.  There are even some signs of near-term firming in equipment.  For example, one of our roundtable members from the trade association representing what we used to call “machine tools”—they call themselves the Association for Manufacturing Technology now—reported a substantial increase in requests for price quotations in recent months.  At the end of each quarter, he surveys, a couple of dozen contacts within the industry.  He expects the price quotations to lead to increased orders later this year and bases that on the rate at which these are converted.  They’re expecting a good finish to  2016 and things to pick up in 2017 by10 to 20 percent.  This seems consistent with the Tealbook outlook for investment in equipment.  My overall outlook, then, is for strong growth in consumer spending and improving growth in business investment to offset a slowdown in housing and yield 2 percent real GDP growth for the next few quarters. In the labor market, I think we should see falling employment growth this year and very little further decline in the unemployment rate.  With the benefit of the June employment report, it now seems clear that the May payroll number was a fluke.  That said, employment growth has averaged 147,000 jobs per month in the second quarter compared with 229,000 jobs per month last year.  So it’s pretty clear that we’ve seen some step-down in employment growth.  But even at the current pace, the employment-to-population ratio would continue to rise, and that seems unlikely to go on for much longer.  As I’ve been arguing since the beginning of the year, I think we should be prepared to see monthly job growth continue to fall, consistent with convergence to a more sustainable steady-state trajectory, notwithstanding President Rosengren’s caution about actually being able to achieve that. On inflation, I would note that in December, the Tealbook was forecasting 1.4 percent core PCE inflation for both Q1 and Q2 of this year.  Now the forecast is for 1.9 percent for the first half, but the forecast for the second half is basically unchanged.  Some of that first-half miss can plausibly be attributed to one-time factors and residual seasonality.  But I doubt that all of the pickup in core inflation in the first half is going to prove short lived, so I’m expecting core inflation in the second half to come in close to 2 percent as well.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is providing an overview of various economic indicators and their potential impact on the overall outlook.


Passage number 162.
  [Laughter] MR. TARULLO.  They were worried about having a crisis without you there, Stan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that there was worry about a crisis occurring in the absence of someone named Stan.


Passage number 163.
 MR. FISCHER.  That’s right.  So I feel a little bit guilty about all of these things that have happened to us.  But after the things that have happened to us over the past year or so, including the Chinese letting their exchange rate go—which they seem to be continuing to do in a very controlled manner at the moment as well—and then Brexit and a succession of things that worried us, the economy looks quite similar to what it looked like before except that we’re on a lower path.  Economic growth has been down a little bit, but we’re expecting a catch-up.  And somewhere in this economy and in the labor market, in ways we, or at least I, don’t understand  there’s something very robust that’s been happening for a lot of years as employment growth continues, except for that terrible month that worried us. If you look at the components of aggregate demand, PCE growth has contributed in a major way to GDP growth.  Investment continues to be weak.  I don’t know if we can call investment performance “weak.”  Investment has been weak for a long time, and I think we may just be at a new normal on investment, although there are some stories now about U.S. oil production beginning to come back, and that would presumably bring with it some of the associated investment whose disappearance helped reduce aggregate investment for the U.S. economy. If you look at the rest of the world, Europe is very unknowable.  The Chinese are somewhere around 6 percent, which is fairly good.  But the nature of Chinese economic growth has changed, and it’s less investment intensive, so they’re importing less from the rest of the world than they used to.  It seems that what they were importing was based more on an acceleration model than on a straightforward multiplier model, and so that’s a slowdown.  And then Latin America is just changing disaster places.  Now we’ve got Venezuela instead of Argentina and so forth, but there are some positive signs there.  Africa doesn’t look very good.  India does look very good.  So the rest of the world is not terrible, but it’s not great. If we look at other things that might happen here, the money market mutual fund reforms that are coming seem to me to be bothersome, but they’re all anticipated, so maybe they’re not going to be a bother.  I think we can take some comfort in the fiscal policies we’re going to get whoever wins the elections, because, as far as I can see, both candidates are going to raise spending.  One’s going to cut taxes—that’s expansionary.  The other’s going to raise spending.   So a year from now we could have a fiscally driven expansion, if all works out, and that will be good for us.  But, unfortunately, I don’t know if we’re going to have that. I won’t make any policy recommendations until tomorrow, but we’re in a situation that is way better than we feared it might be at our previous meeting, and we’re just probably going to wait a little while to see if the situation continues to strengthen.  Thank you very much, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It is mainly a description of various economic factors and observations. The speaker does express uncertainty about certain aspects, but there is no explicit disagreement with any other person or viewpoint.


Passage number 164.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I read the incoming data as largely consistent with the view of the economy summarized as follows:  continuing moderate economic growth, near full employment but with some absorbable slack remaining, and signs of gradually rising price pressures with associated movement toward the Committee’s target. My Bank’s tracking estimate for the second quarter now rests at a 2.4 percent annualized rate, a little stronger than the number in the Tealbook.  In terms of the composition of GDP growth in the second quarter, distinctions between our assessment of the second quarter and the Tealbook are minor.  Business investment remains soft, and that softness is broad based.  The current strength of the economy is largely based on the strength of consumer activity.  Reports from our retail contacts in my District this cycle confirm the strength in consumer spending.  Most retailers reported healthy sales levels and a relatively optimistic outlook for the remainder of 2016.  Tourism remains solid, and we heard of a shift in the composition of demand away from international visitors and toward domestic travelers.  In recent meetings, I’ve passed along reports of our director who heads the nation’s largest auto retailer.  He continues to report very high sales volumes but cautions that high fleet sales are in the mix, and consumer sales are being maintained by substantial discounts and incentives.  Whereas, after the May employment report,  there seemed to me to be some disconnect between data and anecdote, recent reports from our business contacts in the Sixth District are mostly consistent with my read of the incoming data. My outlook for the economy remains unchanged from the June meeting and from my last SEP submission.  My outlook resembles this meeting’s Tealbook, with the only exception being that my forecast anticipates a slightly faster closing to the inflation target.  Recent retail price reports are broadly in line with my assumption of firming inflation readings.  These reports have been encouraging but not definitive.  My staff cautions that recent component price movements underlying the inflation reports exhibit unusual disparity. A key assumption in my outlook is an improvement in the pace of business investment.  This assumption carries some risk.  In the most recent contact cycle, my team took every opportunity to probe thinking on capital spending.  While most of our conversations suggested some longer-term optimism about prospects for expansionary, capacity-building cap-ex, we heard little that would suggest a near-term resurgence in spending.  Current capital investment is depicted mostly as replacement, oriented toward productivity improvement, or focused on cost takeout.  Some contacts mentioned their excess capacity; we also heard comments on new foreign-sourced product competition responding to global capacity and the stronger dollar. A number of companies repeated that M&A is their preferred growth strategy.  Acquisitions bring their own incremental revenues and demand.  Firms continue to be cautious about assumptions of organic growth.  Businesses continue to report little in the way of direct pricing power.  I would note, however, that some retailers indicated that price promotions had eased.  Other firms indicated that they have been able to capture and retain commodity cost reductions in their margins.  Finally, a number of public companies noted greater pressure  coming from investors to justify capital investments and, implicitly, higher return hurdles and shorter payback horizons. So business fixed investment is a sphere of activity in which anecdotal feedback is not currently lining up well with my forecast assumption.  At this time, I’m prepared to treat business fixed investment as a risk—the risk being a failure to realize an assumed upside.  If improved business investment does not materialize, the outlook on which I’m premising further policy rate increases cannot easily rely on personal consumption in isolation.  Investment, enhanced productivity growth, wage growth, and rising business and consumer confidence must be part of the picture. Others have commented on the uncertainty factors associated with Brexit.  The outcome of the July 23 Brexit referendum seems to have affected business confidence in the immediate aftermath, but recent soundings suggest that concern among business leaders in my District is modest.  In the week following the referendum, we got 244 responses to a survey of CEOs and CFOs, and roughly one-third indicated Brexit had introduced some uncertainty into their individual business outlooks.  In a second survey a week later of nearly 400 CEOs and CFOs, the portion of firms reporting Brexit affecting their sales had dropped sharply to only about 15 percent.  So I’m satisfied that we’ve gotten beyond the immediate uncertainty that drove the Committee’s caution at the June meeting, and I see the appropriate focus in coming weeks being mostly on domestic economic performance.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit statements of disagreement or contention. It is a report on economic data and the speaker's interpretation of that data.


Passage number 165.
  MR. HARKER.   Thank you, Madam Chair.  Overall economic activity in the Third District is little changed from June.  But looking ahead, things appear to be on the upswing.  Employment growth has slowed a bit, and the unemployment rate ticked up to 5.3 percent in May.  Comparing labor force developments in my region with those of the nation, the Third District continues to grow a bit more slowly than the nation, but that’s not unusual.  We typically do. The manufacturing sector continues to struggle a bit, but expectations in the business community remain fairly upbeat:  Of the firms surveyed in our latest Business Outlook Survey, 46 percent expect an increase in activity over the next six months, while only 12 percent anticipate a decline.  Also, a large majority of firms reported stable employment in July.  Now, a contact with broad exposure in manufacturing indicated that a number of lines of business are beginning to see profits turn positive, with July being the best month of his year.  Growth is strong in transportation, health care, and areas associated with construction.  And he reports there have been no negative effects from “the Kamin,” we’ll call it, as he walks out of the room [laughter], formerly known as “the Brexit.”  Even in his businesses that deal heavily with Europe, he’s not seeing any real effect.  Another contact indicated that the British arm of a major flooring company is reporting stronger growth as a result of the Brexit vote.  However, one of our bankers indicated that a major multinational firm in our District is starting to lay people off, and the excuse it gave was that, because of the Brexit result, it started to see some slowdown in its business.  Who knows whether that is true, but that’s what it is reporting. Bankers in our region are experiencing strong loan growth and high profitability as well as a continued decline in delinquencies.  Residential investment is strong in the Philadelphia area, and the Jersey Shore is absolutely booming.  Although these numbers will not excite  President Williams, beachfront property on Long Beach Island, New Jersey, is going for upward of $4 million to $5 million.  I know, that’s a condo in San Francisco.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is giving a summary of various economic indicators and observations in the Third District, with some contrasting opinions from different sources. However, there is no explicit disagreement between the statements.


Passage number 166.
   MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 167.
 WILLIAMS.  A lean-to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 168.
  [Laughter] MR. HARKER.  A supplier of homebuilding materials has seen a 60 percent increase in business during the second quarter.  And, as others have reported, for difficult-to-find workers such as truck drivers, this one contact says his firm has raised wages three times this year alone to try to find truck drivers.  That said, a number of contacts did mention that the uncertainty arising from this year’s presidential election was damping their capital spending for the second half of this year and possibly into 2017. Nonmanufacturing activity in the District continues to grow modestly at a somewhat slower-than-historical rate.  Readings are a bit mixed, as we are seeing declining activities at malls but very strong growth in tourism and hospitality.  The DNC helped that, by the way, this week.  Like our manufacturers, area service providers remain relatively optimistic with respect to future activity.  Further, commercial construction has begun to pick up in the region, which makes us an outlier nationally.  Also, the value of residential contracts continues on a steady upward trend, although permits continue to fall, mostly as a result of weakness in the multifamily sector of the market.  House prices are appreciating at a modest pace, growing at less than half the U.S. average.  So, overall, the Third District should see steady, if unspectacular, economic growth, and contacts are generally upbeat about the future. Turning to the nation as a whole, the latest employment report greatly allayed my concerns over the underlying strength in the labor market.  Averaging through the past few months indicates that job growth has decelerated from earlier in the year, but that the economy is still creating jobs at a healthy clip.  In light of the tightness in the labor market, I also believe that  a gradual slowdown in job creation is, as many have said, to be expected.  My other concern over the potential destabilizing influence of Brexit, as others have noted, has not materialized.  If anything, financial markets have shown amazing resiliency, and it is still not clear if and when actual Brexit will occur. Overall, I view the data we have received since we last met as reassuring.  Consumer spending and residential real estate are contributing to economic growth, the job market has retained its dynamism, and core inflation numbers appear to be heading toward our target.  I anticipate that headline inflation will follow and that the economy will grow at or slightly above trend.  In that regard, I’m a bit more optimistic than the staff in the Tealbook.  Now, some of my optimism is informed by my greater reliance on GDPplus rather than expenditure GDP, or simply GDP, as a measure of underlying economic activity.  This latent variable is calculated by the staff at the Philadelphia Fed and combines GDP and GDI using a Kalman filter.  Interestingly, the staff finds that GDPplus does not suffer from the residual seasonality problem and is a better predictor of GDP than GDP itself.  Further, real-time forecasts of GDPplus are more informative about future GDP than our current real-time estimates of GDP itself.  This suggests that current GDPplus contains valuable information about underlying economic activity as well as about future revised BEA estimates of GDP.  The current estimate we have for first-quarter GDPplus growth is 2.7 percent, and this measure indicates that there was no fourth-quarter economic slowdown.  Also, using GDPplus as a gauge of first-quarter economic activity substantially attenuates the puzzling weakness in labor productivity.  My somewhat optimistic outlook will inform my view on policy tomorrow.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Let me suggest at this point, for good behavior, we take a short break—maybe 20 minutes.  I think coffee and refreshments are available outside.  [Coffee break] CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay, let’s get started.  Our next speaker is Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of a summary of various economic observations and assessments.


Passage number 169.
 MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The Ninth District economy continues to perform well.  Employment has been growing modestly overall, hampered by anecdotes of ongoing poor labor availability.  We often hear that worker scarcity is a problem, that employers can’t find workers with the skills that they need.  And then usually I turn around and ask them, “Okay.  Are you raising wages.”  “No.  We’re not in a position to do that.”  So I take these anecdotes with a grain of salt.  Until we see them raising wages, I don’t take much information from them. The national economy continues to grow at a modest pace.  The labor market is in good health overall, but I don’t see any signs of overheating.  Rather, on balance, when I look at all of the data over the past year, it seems to be moving more or less sideways—not huge wage growth, not employment cost growth, et cetera.  I think we’re going to be lucky if we see overall 2 percent GDP growth for 2016 as a whole.  On the inflation front, inflation continues to run below target.  I don’t see clear evidence of a sustained move upward toward our 2 percent target.  And, as others have noted, some measures of inflation expectations are worryingly low. Internationally, I have more concerns.  If I just think objectively, developments since our previous meeting have not been positive.  Our base case was “No Brexit.”  We had the Brexit, so that’s a negative even if it wasn’t as bad as we’d feared.  We’ve seen fresh strains in global banks, especially in Italian banks.  We saw a potential coup in Turkey.  We’ve seen repeated terrorist attacks.  Some of these are not economic events, but they nonetheless affect confidence, and they’re all tilted to the negative.  Now, I hope that the U.S. economy will mostly escape  these headwinds coming from abroad, but, like the Tealbook, I do continue to see the risks to the outlook for the real economy and for inflation as tilted to the downside.  I don’t see these risks as having materially diminished since we last met in June. One other comment I’ll make is that this discussion today makes me think about the optimal control exercise in Tealbook B.  And I struggle with this notion.  No one is suggesting this today, but I struggle with the notion that there may come a time when inflation is low but we need to get the unemployment rate up.  I just struggle with that as not being credible, that we need to get the unemployment rate up when there’s no inflation immediately on the horizon.  I think that that runs afoul of, really, the mandate that we have been given.  So, for me, the optimal control exercise with the asymmetric weight on the unemployment rate gap is the one that I found compelling.  We say that 2 percent is a target, not a ceiling.  If we really mean that, then we should be as concerned about inflation under target as we are over target.  So that’s what’s governing my thinking as I think through these various options.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 170.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 171.
 MR. KASHKARI.  Maybe I’m spending too much time on Twitter.  [Laughter.] CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 172.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes, I have a question for Thomas.   CHAIR YELLEN.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they have a question for Thomas, and then the other person, Chair Yellen, responds.


Passage number 173.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Couldn’t you interpret the ratio of overnight to trading-hour volatility differently as just an indication of where the information arises in the world that affects people’s outlook of global economic growth and the  market for U.S. Treasury securities.  For example, couldn’t you get this spike because the Brexit moves occurred over there.  Normally, the volatility is below 1 because most of the news relevant to Treasury securities happens here in U.S. time.  So it might not be anything having to do with global portfolio rebalancing.  It might just be due to where the distribution of the important news falls.  If our news is boring and their news is really interesting, then I would expect that the volatility during overnight sessions would go up relative to the volatility in U.S. sessions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage is offering an alternative interpretation and suggesting that the volatility in overnight sessions may be influenced by where important news occurs. There is no indication of contention or disagreement, as the passage does not argue against the initial interpretation of volatility being related to global portfolio rebalancing.


Passage number 174.
  MR. LAUBACH.  That’s right.  One concern here could well be that because the big event was Brexit and it clearly showed up during overnight hours, that’s what’s driving the result.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a concern or possibility.


Passage number 175.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes, because it is a one-month rolling volatility, the Brexit event is a tremendous pull.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply explaining that the Brexit event has had a significant impact on the one-month rolling volatility.


Passage number 176.
 MR. LAUBACH.  Yes, that’s right.  Now, that said, the lower-left panel actually excludes the Brexit date itself.  Those data start only on June 26, so you do see that even after the Brexit event had passed you still have this development.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining the data and referring to specific panels without expressing any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 177.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I find the lower-left one more compelling.  So I guess we agree.  [Laughter] CHAIR YELLEN.  Are there other questions for Thomas.  [No response]  Okay.  Seeing none, why don’t we adjourn for now.  We have a reception and dinner, as usual, across the street, and we will reconvene at 9:00 a.m. tomorrow. [Meeting recessed]July 27 Session  CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Good morning, everybody.  Let’s get started.  We have a data release this morning.  Let me ask David Wilcox if he’d like to comment on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 178.
 MR. WILCOX.  I don’t have a detailed readout.  I did just speak with our sector specialists, and they’re still processing the data.  It’s clear that the release is weaker than we had anticipated.  This is the advance report on orders and shipments of durable goods, which feeds into the BEA’s estimate of equipment and intangibles investment.  This release, probably more than any other, is very opaque to read.  Translating the orders and shipments data into estimates of equipment investment is not straightforward.  It’s clear, though, that this will take our estimate down into negative territory.  We’d had real equipment and intangible investment about flat in the second quarter.  This will take it down by about 1 percentage point.  That’s probably worth about one-tenth on the growth of GDP in the second quarter—we were at 1.8 in the Tealbook, and we’re probably down at about 1.7 now—and another one-tenth out of the third quarter, give or take.  So that would put us at about 1.8 in the third quarter. CHAIR YELLEN.  Are there any questions for David.  [No response]  Okay.  I guess we’re ready to begin our policy round.  We already do have one suggestion on the table for an edit to the statement pertaining to residential investment.  So let me tee that up, and I will ask you as we go around if you would like to comment on your views about this change.  President Williams—and I did hear some support from others—suggests that in alternative B, we simply delete any reference to residential investment rather than saying that it, along with business fixed investment, has been soft.  So the sentence would read “Household spending has been growing strongly but business fixed investment has been soft,” and that would be an alternative to the wording that’s currently in alternative B.  As we go around, I would appreciate it if you would  comment briefly on that change.  Okay.  We’re going to begin our go-round with Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a discussion about data and potential changes to a statement.


Passage number 179.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B, even though I find some of the language of alternative A to be more compatible with my views. The additional sentence in paragraph 2 of alternative B on the diminution of near-term risks is in itself correct, though by not mentioning the admittedly hard-to-quantify medium-term risks to the global economy associated with the Brexit vote result and its aftermath, the sentence perhaps leaves a marginally more upbeat message than might be strictly accurate, at least with respect to international risks.  But I’m willing to accept the sentence as it is. The inclusion of this sentence obviously reflects at least some shift in the Committee’s risk assessment and thus some reorientation of its monetary policy stance, but the statement wisely omits any language suggesting some lean of the Committee toward raising rates at an upcoming meeting.  Of course, conditional on my current assessment of economic conditions, I would oppose any such language on substantive grounds, but I think that, no matter what one’s policy view, institutional considerations—namely, the Committee’s credibility—argue against inclusion of any such language.  We don’t want another instance in which language that raises the prospect of a rate increase in an upcoming meeting is interpreted by markets as perhaps less conditional than it was actually intended by the Committee or its participants. Market expectations of the path of the federal funds rate and of the likelihood of an increase at specific upcoming meetings have indeed adjusted in response to the ups and downs of recent economic data and developments.  Because a good bit can happen between now and the remainder of this year’s meetings, and on account of the propensity of markets to overread any suggestion by the Committee of an increase at a particular meeting or in a particular time frame,  we should let the economic data do more of the talking for us.  Should market expectations vary too substantially in either direction, the Chair, at her discretion and depending on her assessment of where the Committee stands, could use her public speaking opportunities, including but not limited to her Jackson Hole speech, to affect these expectations.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any significant contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses support for alternative B and acknowledges that language in alternative A aligns more closely with their personal views. However, they ultimately accept the sentence in alternative B and provide reasons for why it is reasonable to omit any language suggesting a lean towards raising rates at an upcoming meeting.


Passage number 180.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is one word, which does not contain any information or context to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 181.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative C.  The uncertainties that argued for a delay at our June meeting have largely been resolved, with a favorable baseline economic outlook intact.  A broad range of labor market indicators continue to point to conditions consistent with full employment, while inflation remains on a gradual upward trend toward 2 percent.  Continued delay in raising the funds rate risks putting us “behind the curve” and creates the risk of greater fallout if we have to hike rates quickly to get back on track.  Now, I know it’s popular to describe the glacial pace of policy adjustment as cautious, but, to my eye, this approach is becoming increasingly risky in terms of raising future potential risks to financial stability and the economy.  This echoes remarks that Presidents Rosengren and Mester made yesterday. In principle, I would support a rate increase today, but that would be highly confusing and disruptive against the background of our prior communications.  So I strongly prefer alternative C with paragraph 3′, which indicates that the case for an increase in the funds rate has strengthened over the intermeeting period.  Short of alternative C, we should at least explicitly acknowledge in alternative B that the case for raising rates has increased and certainly hasn’t diminished.  This optionality allows for data-dependent adjustments as we go forward, but with the modal federal funds rate path of the June SEP still on the table.  In contrast, alternative B as written will likely be understood as indicating that a September increase is unlikely, thus precluding the possibility of two rate hikes this year.  This would be viewed as a downward revision to the near-term funds rate path relative to our median and modal June SEP numbers.  As conditions since June have stayed on track or even improved relative to expectations in some respects, such a shift to lower rates and greater monetary accommodation seems out of tune with our strategy and with our communications up to this point. I have a couple of comments on the statement language, which I found problematic in a number of respects.  First, in all three alternatives, paragraph 1 refers to the swing in job gains in May and June.  This specificity about the monthly data releases may strengthen market perceptions that our actions are—in the apt phrasing of Governor Brainard—data point dependent.  Our communications should not foster a fixation on the monthly ups and downs of the data.  So I would simply delete the sentence in alternatives B and C that says “job gains were strong in June following weak growth in May.”  Second, as I’ve already talked about and as the Chair mentioned, I would strike the phrase “and residential investment” in paragraph 1.  I just want to remind us that real residential investment jumped at an annual pace of 15 percent in the first quarter.  Although recent indicators suggest some slowing of residential investment, this is only a partial payback for the torrid pace of growth early in the year.  And I think it would misrepresent the situation to characterize homebuilding as soft and would be especially misleading to lump residential investment together with business investment, as the latter has been on a notable downtrend for quite some time.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is the opinion of Williams, who supports alternative C, and he gives his reasons and preferences for that alternative.


Passage number 182.
  MR. EVANS.  I’d just ask a question—perhaps of Thomas—because we hadn’t had any discussion about omitting the phrase about residential investment.  Last time, it was referred to.  If you take it out, is there any mention of residential investment.  How do market watchers generally respond to some complete omission.  Is it going to get more prominence or less prominence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply includes someone asking a question and seeking clarification about the potential omission of a phrase regarding residential investment. There is no apparent contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 183.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You’re also taking out the reference to trade. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes, the reference to net exports is going, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the reference to trade and net exports is being removed.


Passage number 184.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay.  Could I just ask the staff their opinion on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking the staff for their opinion on a certain matter.


Passage number 185.
 MR. LAUBACH.  Yes.  To be upfront, I have a very hard time making good guesses about how market watchers might respond to changes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker has difficulty predicting how market watchers will react to changes.


Passage number 186.
   MR. EVANS.  I understand that.  That’s okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Evans is expressing understanding and acceptance of an unknown situation, indicating no contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 187.
 MR. LAUBACH.  But, that said, one interpretation is that there’s no news.  That is certainly what we intended with the striking of the reference to net exports, because there was really nothing new to report. Now, I have to confess that I don’t know exactly when the reference to residential investment was added to the statement.  I would have to look that up.  It’s certainly been in there for a number of rounds, but it hasn’t always been there.  I would think that it will be noticed as a downgrade, because if you no longer say that it’s improving, it seems to imply it’s doing less, and that would be consistent with the recent data flow.  So my guess would be that it would be interpreted as a soft downgrading.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker mentions that they don't know when the reference to residential investment was added to the statement, suggesting a lack of agreement or clarity on the matter. The speaker also speculates on how the removal of the reference to net exports and the inclusion of residential investment may be interpreted differently, indicating potential disagreement or differing opinions on the matter.


Passage number 188.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both individuals are expressing gratitude and addressing each other respectfully.


Passage number 189.
  MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  In my mind, the most useful benchmarks for evaluating the stance of monetary policy are the policy rules that seem to capture the way we’ve behaved in past periods during which we were relatively successful.  One can argue about the details of particular rules, but just about every one that makes it to our desk has the policy rate deviating from normal in response to an inflation gap and some measure of a real-activity gap.  Because these gaps are small now, we should be returning our policy rate to more normal settings, with an adjustment for the possibility, of course, of a lower natural real rate. Tealbook B puts the prescribed policy rate for either Taylor rule at about 2.4 percent, and that’s 200 basis points away from our current policy setting.  A departure from our benchmark of that magnitude is fairly large.  One might argue that the natural real rate is lower than the 1 percent value assumed by the Tealbook staff.  For example, the current estimate using the Laubach-Williams procedure is around zero, and the Lubik-Matthes estimates are very similar.  Even in this case, though, the prescribed policy rate would be 1½ percent, more than 100 basis points higher than the current rate, and I think that’s still a large gap by historical standards.  We’ve occasionally been 100 basis points away from the Taylor rule in the past, but never for a sustained stretch.  On top of that, it’s worth pointing out something about the Laubach-Williams procedure.  Their procedure produces a joint estimate of the natural real rate and the output gap, the two latent variables in their set-up.  Their current estimate of the output gap is large and positive, about 140 basis points.  The natural, internally consistent way is to apply both their natural real rate and their output gap estimates at the same time, and the net effect of doing that results in a Taylor rule policy prescription of 2¼ or 3 percent, depending on whether you use Taylor (1993) or Taylor (1999).  This again implies that the funds rate is now very far below where it should be by those prescriptions.  Some would say that the real-activity gap might still be negative, as opposed to the staff’s calculation of an essentially zero output gap.  This would imply a lower Taylor rule prescription.  For example, a natural unemployment rate of 4 percent or lower would justify the current policy rate.  Now, 4 percent is well below all of our estimates of the natural rate, but those estimates, of course, are notoriously imprecise.  So I can understand the motivation for delaying an increase in rates.  We’d all like to see more employment opportunities for as many Americans as possible.  But theory and experience tell us that there are risks on both sides.  Waiting too long to raise rates can leave us with a higher unemployment rate later on as we fight against an increase in inflation. There’s an argument that we’re perfectly capable of responding effectively if inflation should surge, but our ability to do so depends on inflation expectations remaining anchored or, if they start to drift, on our ability to manage and contain them.  At present, our understanding of the formation and evolution of expectations is fairly limited.  They may seem anchored now, but they’ve been quite variable at times in the past, and I don’t think we have much of an analytical basis for predicting how or when they might become unanchored.  But I think we do know that unstable expectations in the past have been associated with departures from good benchmark policy rules.  If expectations become unanchored, then it would surely reflect beliefs that we are departing from those past patterns of behavior.  And, surely, if expectations are anchored, it reflects a sense that we’re going to continue in a way that’s relatively consistent with those past patterns of behavior.  I think it should be evident that the further we deviate from those benchmarks, the greater the risk that inflation and inflation expectations break away.  So I think that there are serious risks associated with probing, as the phrase is, to see if the natural rate of unemployment might be below where we are right now.  We’ve delayed raising rates this year in part because of events that have caused uncertainty arise.  When uncertainty subsides, as it clearly has now, we should seize the moment and get on with it rather than continue to fall further behind our benchmarks.  I think now is one of those times, a time for opportunistic normalization.  So I support alternative C and paragraph 3. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 190.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B for this meeting, although I could have also been supportive of some of the stronger language in alternative C.  My preference for this meeting is for a statement tilting more strongly toward indicating an increase in the federal funds rate at the next meeting.  I view the statement as leaving open the possibility of an increase in September, but I think it is unlikely to raise the market probability of a September increase as much as I view is warranted.  I am not arguing for calendar-dependent promises in the statement.  The volatility in payroll employment over the past two months, as well as the surprise Brexit vote, highlights risks in such a strategy.  But the relatively modest changes in the statement outside of the first paragraph are likely to leave many outside of this room expecting no change in September.  If incoming data are consistent with my forecast, which I see as requiring a rate increase in September, we may need to use speeches and other opportunities to communicate to the public the increased probability of a September move. Stepping aside from the near-term tactical decisions, I think it’s important to reframe how we have been thinking about policy normalization.  Because we have been extremely and justifiably patient to date in ensuring the economy gets very near our dual-mandate goals before raising the funds rate, we should not view our decisions as balancing on a knife’s edge between action and inaction.  At this point, I believe that we should change from a default of no action  unless everything is perfect in the next six-week period to a default of a plan to take action unless circumstances significantly alter our outlook.  That is, my preference would be that unless incoming data and events suggest a material change to the forecast, we should tighten in September. My estimate of the natural rate is 4.7 percent.  As a result, I believe that a baseline forecast that results in a 4.3 percent unemployment rate implies that we will need to tighten more rapidly.  If we receive evidence that suggests that the natural rate is in the low 4s, we can slow down the rate of increase in the funds rate increase later on in the normalization process.  Further, there remain some upside risks relative to our baseline outlook, and were those risks to materialize, we would, of course, need to tighten even more quickly.  But such rapid rate adjustments run an even greater risk of jeopardizing the attainment of full employment.  Finally, uncertainty regarding the estimate of the equilibrium interest rate further bolsters the argument for gradual tightening, as a gradual increase affords us the time to gauge whether we have gone too far or not far enough.  For all of these reasons, I am concerned that we may be waiting too long to remove accommodation, with a consequence of having to raise rates more rapidly later in the normalization process, placing the attainment of full employment and price stability at greater risk than is warranted. And I would remove the reference to residential investment. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 191.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I do not think the normalization process is going well.  We ended QE in the fall of 2014.  We said we would begin normalizing rates in 2015.  We made only one move that year, at the last meeting of the year.  We have made no further moves during 2016.  This is against a backdrop of an economy that has not behaved very differently from forecasts of a few years ago, especially on inflation and unemployment.  Unemployment has tended to surprise to the downside for us, and inflation has actually been very consistent with the forecast that it would remain below 2 percent.  This is in contrast to our narrative for normalization embodied in the Tealbook and in the Summary of Economic Projections.  As I discussed yesterday, the Tealbook narrative suggests that we are on the precipice of a 200-plus basis point increase in the policy rate over the forecast horizon.  This is a little less than once per quarter.  This comes from using the updated Taylor (1999) rule, which also informs many others and has historically informed many judgments among the Committee about the pace of rate increases.  According to the Tealbook, these increases are going to take place against a backdrop of relatively weak economic growth in the near term, an unemployment rate that is just three-tenths lower at the end of 2017 than it is today, and an inflation rate that remains below target.  I do not think that this is a realistic narrative.  I think it forces us to draw on increasingly tenuous excuses as to why we are not following through on our announced plans.  This is hurting our credibility.  Markets discounted this narrative long ago, and our actions this year are ratifying their expectations. The St. Louis Fed’s new narrative improves on this situation.  It suggests a relatively flat policy rate path with some upside risk, depending on how the data evolve.  It does not leave a 200-plus basis point policy move lingering over the market.  It suggests that r† is minus 140 basis points, which is the ex post real return on one-year Treasury securities over the past three years.  Real returns on short-term government debt are unlikely to switch to higher values any time soon, nor is mean reversion a good prediction.  The best guess is that this situation will simply persist, at least over a period of two to two-and-a-half years.  The St. Louis Federal Reserve narrative realistically suggests that the current slow-growth environment is likely to continue.  It suggests that the labor market is essentially at full employment and perhaps will not improve further, in a situation of relatively slow growth.  It also suggests that inflation does not look set to increase very far above our 2 percent target.  The conclusion is that a relatively low policy rate is consistent with achieving our inflation target and full employment over the next two and a half years.  Adoption of the St. Louis approach would, in my view, improve the alignment of market expectations with the likely future path of policy.  For today, I support alternative B.  The Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis approach does call for one more rate increase, and I would be happy to make this move at the September meeting, provided the data cooperate.  I do prefer to move on good news about the economy.  I would also support President Williams’s suggestion on residential investment.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Harker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker disagrees with the current normalization process and advocates for the adoption of the St. Louis Fed's approach. They argue that the current narrative is unrealistic and hurting the Fed's credibility. They support alternative B and suggest making a rate increase at the September meeting.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 192.
 MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  in light of my fairly upbeat outlook for the economy and the slow but persistent march of inflation to target, the language in alternative B seems a bit too equivocal even after the most recent changes. The two matters we talked about yesterday, the two most pressing concerns at our June meeting, have dissolved.  In June, 287,000 net new jobs were added, and financial markets were generally unfazed by the Brexit vote after the initial shock wore off.  I welcome the recent change to paragraph 2 stating that the “near-term risks to the economic outlook have diminished.”  That said, the message in alternative B is only modestly changed from June, and I fear that the reaction will be similar, taking the next meeting off the table.  It could also very well indicate that our policy is insufficiently sensitive to events on the upside.  That insensitivity may, in turn, serve to confuse markets on exactly what types of data will be sufficient for normalization to proceed.  If we are delaying normalization because we need much greater evidence that inflation is indeed trending upward, then perhaps we should make that point more explicitly.  Or if uncertainty over the level of the natural real rate leads to the belief that policy is  not overly accommodative, that point should be articulated.  But whatever is driving the unresponsiveness of policy needs to be stated clearly.  Communicating a very similar message either in the statement or in public comments under what I perceive to be clearly improved economic circumstances does not seem to represent a strategy that will allow a September rate increase to be a realistic option. So what can we do.  While I can live with alternative B as is today, one possible improvement is to add language, like that in alternative C, stating that the near-term risks to the economy are nearly balanced or have become more balanced, instead of saying that they have diminished.  This more positive tone in the language would send a clearer signal that September is a possibility without overpromising that a move would indeed occur.  And on residential investment, I also support President Williams’s view.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kaplan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Harker expresses his disagreement with the language in alternative B and argues for a more positive tone in the language to indicate that a September rate increase is a possibility. He also suggests that the policy needs to be stated clearly and that delaying normalization without a clear explanation could confuse the markets.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 193.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B with both proposed amendments by President Williams.  That includes the one on job gains in June versus May for the reasons he articulated.  So I support both of those edits. I do think the case for removing some amount of accommodation has strengthened since June.  First, on the pro side, I believe we are making progress in achieving our dual-mandate objectives.  In particular, the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas trimmed mean as well as other, similar measures of core inflation are gradually moving in a direction that suggests we will reach our inflation target in the medium term.  I think labor market slack is declining and we are moving toward full employment, and I hope that upcoming data will give us an opportunity to confirm this.  Second, I believe excesses are building, although not to the point at which I’m alarmed.  As has been discussed, I am concerned about commercial real estate.  I’m also—I must say, maybe colored by my background—concerned about what I see in stock market valuation.  By my measure—and I’m using a per-share number of $115— market P/E is getting close to 19 times earnings in a period when corporate earnings are actually declining.  I’m concerned about where the markets are going to go from here.  My experience is, when stock market valuations become excessive, there may be imbalances building up outside the banking system, particularly in the nonbank financial markets, some of which we, at the Federal Reserve, are not able to see.  I’m slightly concerned about the buildup in nonbank financial debt—that is, on the corporate side—although I think that’s still manageable.  And I do worry about distortions in asset allocation—disincentives for savers as the population ages and people tend to live off their incomes—and I’m worried overall about a rise in risk-taking, particularly as we move from here. In terms of the cons, I do believe the market is certainly unprepared today for us to raise rates, as we know, and they seem to be not quite prepared for September, either.  I do think the uncertainties of Brexit as well as China—which, to me, is a significant risk—are unlikely to be resolved any time soon.  Between now and September, though, we’ll get a little bit better clarity on the Italian bank situation, which I do think is worth watching.  And, obviously, we’ll get two additional job reports, which will help in confirming the trend on the labor markets.  We’ll also get a chance to more clearly see if the recent strength in new home sales translates into a pickup in permits for single-family homes. I’m also persuaded by our work and the comments made here regarding the neutral rate that it is lower than widely recognized.  I agree with President Harker that we have not clearly communicated this.  I do think that we are not as accommodative as is widely believed, and, on  the margin, that reduces the urgency for us to move or, to say it another way, allows us to be patient. But in light of all of this, as I said, I favor alternative B as amended, although I am forward leaning in us gradually and patiently moving toward removal of accommodation.  As we approach our September meeting, I would hope that if incoming data warrant, FOMC communication, potentially from the Chair at Jackson Hole or some other venues, will, as has been suggested, begin to signal to the market that we believe removal of some accommodation is warranted in the near future.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kaplan supports alternative B with proposed amendments, while also expressing concerns about excesses and risk-taking in the market. He also acknowledges the cons of raising rates, such as market unpreparedness and uncertainties in Brexit and China.


Passage number 194.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I have no objection to the change in language with regard to housing.  I would think it would be better to come up with a characterization of what it is rather than just deleting it entirely.  I think what happens in this case is that people probably think, “Oh, they mentioned housing last time.  Let me go see what the latest data were.  I can’t remember.”  And if they see that the data were kind of soft, they’re going to have to come up with their own interpretation.  But I don’t have any objection to omitting it. On the basis of my outlook and my expectations for continued data confirmations, I support alternative B as written.  As I mentioned yesterday, my economic growth outlook has not changed materially since June, though I do think the downside risks have diminished some.  I’ve also made no changes to my inflation outlook or my readings of the downside risks to it.  I think alternative B captures these sentiments for me. Clearly, more of the focus today is on what we’re going to be doing in September and beyond.  If there were no material changes to my baseline forecast or risk assessments, then I could see the case for a rate increase in September.  It’s not my preferred course, and it would be  a close call.  However, I would not support a September move if our communications led markets to think that a second increase in December was highly likely in the absence of very strong data.  I think it’s important that we allow adequate time to assess the economic reactions to our next policy move before taking the next step after that.  Maybe conditions would improve enough to justify another move in December, but my base case is, they will not.  Either way, in my opinion, there’s just too much uncertainty to precondition markets to expect an end-of-year funds rate target in the range of 75 to 100 basis points. As I mentioned last round, I continue to be attracted to the forward-guidance language in alternative A.  It says “The Committee judges that an increase in the target range will not be warranted until the risks to the outlook are more closely balanced and inflation moves closer to 2 percent on a sustained basis.”  Frankly, I would wait until core PCE is 2 percent and projected to be at least 2 percent over the forecast horizon.  This is a strong commitment to our symmetric 2 percent inflation target, one that would likely provide much needed support to private inflation expectations.  Our inflation projections would benefit more from an increase in inflation expectations than from a lower unemployment rate.  I disagree with President Lacker on this issue, because I think the evidence favors viewing inflation expectations as moving lower than our inflation objective and not the case that he was worried about in terms of them being unstable on the upside. Regarding Governor Fischer’s question as to whether Committee members would fight inflation of 2.2 percent if it was above 2 percent, I actually have no evidence on that.  After seven years, I have no data points to answer that, because we haven’t had inflation above 2 percent.  In the spirit of something a bit more like alternative A, I would feel much more comfortable increasing rates in September if by then core inflation appeared clearly positioned to  come in higher than my 2016 forecast, which, like the Tealbook’s, is 1.6 percent.  President Williams suggested yesterday that recent core inflation has been 2 percent, and others have made sympathetic comments about that as well.  I hope that continues in the coming months and years even if the most recent monthly averages are like that. Finally, policy asymmetries continue to argue for our communication that a very shallow expected path for normalization is appropriate, as our SEP submissions display.  We’re still only a modest negative shock away from returning to the effective lower bound, while, on the other side, if an inflation shock occurs, the inflation process is inertial enough that we most likely can avoid any meaningful overshooting of 2 percent with modest increases in rates and the low r* we expect into the indefinite future, at least according to the most recent Laubach-Williams update that I saw.  Also, as I discussed yesterday following the QS report, I see the apparent changes in long-duration investor attitudes as diminishing potential financial instability concerns that might be associated with a modestly steeper tightening than our recent SEP displays.  If real-money investors have come to believe that low equilibrium interest rates are a fixture of this economy, then we face a lower chance of experiencing a taper tantrum–like fillip in financial conditions if we have to pull policy normalization forward in time. In sum, I remain on the fence about a move in September, but whatever we do then, I think we should continue to communicate our basic policy strategy for slow, gradual rate increases dependent on the Committee’s confidence in achieving its dual-mandate goals in as timely a fashion as possible.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kashkari.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply provides their opinion and rationale for their stance on various issues.


Passage number 195.
 MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  As a Committee, we continue to debate whether we are approaching a point when further rate increases are appropriate.  Because we  can’t perfectly foresee the future path of the economy, as many others have said, I’m in favor of taking a risk-management approach and avoiding policy choices that could lead to especially poor outcomes.  In my view, the costs associated with a monetary policy stance that, after the fact, turns out to be too tight are likely much larger than the costs of a stance that, after the fact, turns out to have been too loose.  Many others have made these comments as well. Regarding the alternatives presented, I support alternative B, but I don’t have a strong view on President Williams’s changes.  I’m okay with those changes either way, but I personally am not in favor of the language that was added to paragraph 2.  I understand the distinction between near-term risks and medium-term risks, but I think it’s a little bit too subtle.  It isn’t clear to me that the risks to the economic outlook have diminished.  And, maybe more important, I don’t think the phrase is actually necessary to preserving optionality for September.  I think the statement as written preserves that optionality.  We always say that every meeting is a live meeting.  So why do we therefore have to signal that we really mean the next meeting is “live,” if we always say that every meeting is a “live” meeting. In filling out the June SEP, I indicated one increase in the federal funds rate for 2016 because I expected that, and I hope now that tightening labor markets will continue to push inflation toward our 2 percent target.  I haven’t seen the evidence of that yet.  I know that in recent months, there’s been a little bit of an uptick, but on a year-over-year basis, there’s not any real evidence of it.  So, for me, I need to see real evidence that we’re moving toward 2 percent before I can support a rate increase.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Kashkari, is expressing his own views and preferences but does not directly oppose or argue against anyone else's opinions.


Passage number 196.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B.  I came to the meeting comfortable with the statement as written, but I have no objection to removing the  reference to residential investment.  I don’t think it will generate excessive attention even if it is, as Thomas said, a soft downgrade. For this meeting, I believe it’s prudent to exercise patience and let the post-Brexit economic picture, as well as the array of risks and uncertainties regarding the outlook, congeal.  I don’t think the Committee risks getting “behind the curve” by exercising patience at this meeting.  I think it’s appropriate to keep all options open for the September meeting.  I can foresee conditions that would be a reasonable basis for a discussion of a rate move at that meeting. In broad strokes, here is a configuration of the incoming data that would make me pretty comfortable that the economy is on a track justifying serious consideration of a rate move.  First, second-quarter growth above 2 percent confirmed in official releases.  We’ll get the first estimate Friday and the second estimate on August 26.  We’ll also have most of the data releases having direct implications for revision in the third GDP estimate before the September meeting.  Second, apparent third-quarter growth consistent with that of the second quarter.  We’ll have almost all third-quarter GDP source data for July before the September meeting, but not much source data for August.  But we will have auto sales for August and, most important, retail sales for August.  Third, two more positive employment reports centered on payroll jobs gains comfortably above the breakeven number needed to cover labor force growth.  As a marker, I’m thinking of 150,000 per month as being comfortably above that breakeven point.  Finally, continuing indications that inflation is firming and moving in the right direction.  If a scenario consistent with these conditions plays out through mid-September, as I said, I think the Committee should give a rate increase serious consideration.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lockhart expresses his support for alternative B and discusses his reasoning for exercising patience at the current meeting and considering a rate increase at the September meeting. There are no conflicting opinions or arguments presented.


Passage number 197.
  MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I think Governor Tarullo’s comments yesterday about challenging our views and assumptions and being open to changing one’s mind is an important aspect of the job we do here.  And, because I have found my own views outside the consensus of the Committee from time to time, that kind of self-examination may come more naturally for me.  But I agree with him that it is an essential aspect of arriving at sound policy prescriptions.  In fact, I think it’s an obligation to the effective decisionmaking function of this Committee, to the economic well-being of the public we serve, and with the assurance that history will judge best whether our calibrations indeed achieve their aim.  So, with that in mind, I take a good dose of humility before these meetings, and, in that spirit, I’ll turn to my view on today’s policy choices. I support alternative C.  Since our June meeting, job growth has been solid, GDP growth looks to be back near trend, markets have calmed after a surprise Brexit vote, and inflation outcomes are aligning with our statutory objectives.  As a result, I see a 25 basis point increase today as an appropriate adjustment to realized economic conditions, not necessarily a commitment to a preset path to normal rates.  Waiting longer to make adjustments is not a benign choice, in my view.  It challenges the clarity and the discipline of our monetary policy strategy, and it leans in the direction of accepting risk.  As deviations from policy rules become larger, explaining the rationale for not adjusting rates becomes both more difficult and more important.  Continuing to appeal to headwinds—including events abroad, a subdued pace of household formation, and low productivity growth—argues for further clarification.  Household formation and productivity growth are more supply-side factors, or at least structural factors, that monetary policy is ill equipped to influence.  Instead, insofar as these factors at least partially explain  declines in estimates for the longer-run terminal rate, it is the case that adjustments to the rate need to occur sooner. I am mindful of the fact that financial stability is an essential condition for achieving our objectives for the economy.  And I’m concerned that this extended period of negative real rates can create incentives to “reach for yield” and can facilitate the misallocation of capital and the mispricing of risk.  But I do not believe raising rates should be a response to those realities.  It is too blunt a response, and the ability to both accurately identify these imbalances and time a proper response has historically, both here and abroad, proved challenging. I do worry about expectations of low rates for even longer becoming ingrained.  I recently heard anecdotes from bankers in our District that they have been anticipating higher rates going back to 2011, when the Committee issued its first communication regarding normalization principles, and have managed their balance sheets accordingly.  Now they are beginning to adjust those expectations, offering more longer-term fixed-rate loans with assumptions that the unusually low rate environment will persist even longer.  This seems likely to be happening in other sectors even if our measures of financial stability aren’t yet registering concern. Finally, I do not view gradual adjustments to our policy stance as a function of judging whether we are “behind the curve.”  I’d prefer not to wait for that kind of evidence.  Continuing to wait to see more data could send a message that our attempts to achieve some degree of normalization are failing or have become unnecessary.  At our June meeting, there were questions about whether we need to talk about normalization, and some expressed concern that the goal seemed to be that normalizing the federal funds rate as a default view was risky.  I think the Committee should, in fact, take stock of our communications and its strategy in this regard.   Because the Committee outlined on several occasions since 2011 its intended path to policy normalization and then raised the federal funds rate last December, the Committee’s credibility will hinge on our ability to clarify that strategy.  Although we’ve not talked about revisiting those principles, I continue to think the reinvestment policy could offer an alternative or a complement to how we think about future rate increases, especially in a world that continues to demand safe assets. And, finally, Madam Chair, on the language change, I can support dropping the reference to residential investment.  I think that, either way, some in the markets will note whether it’s there or not there. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's views and opinions.


Passage number 198.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  With my baseline assumptions, I see the appropriate path forward as one of gradual increases in the federal funds rate.  For me, the necessary conditions for further increases are, unsurprisingly, continued GDP growth at or above potential, continued progress in the labor market, and inflation moving back to 2 percent over time.  I would like to see unemployment decline well below 5 percent, the current Tealbook estimate of the natural rate, and I’d like to see, in that context, what happens to wages and to labor force participation. My baseline expectation is that those conditions will be fulfilled in the course of 2016.  If they are, I will support further rate increases, and I can see one or two this year—again, if those conditions are fulfilled.  But if one or more of the conditions are not fulfilled or if obvious global risks emerge, in my view, it may be appropriate to pause.  I don’t see the Committee as needing to be in a hurry to raise rates.  We have below-target inflation and an apparent weakening in both demand and job creation.  I do not feel a pressing need to take steps to slow the economy further.   It is plausible to me that those conditions will be fulfilled at the time of the September meeting.  Two strong payroll reports, combined with decent demand, could well suffice.  The market is currently pricing in a modest probability of an increase by the September meeting, and, in fact, the market has been moving that probability up materially in response to incoming data.  If the two payroll reports are strong, then the market will likely move substantially in the direction of an increase, and the rest of that gap could be closed through communication. The question for today is whether to send a strong signal through the statement that an increase is likely in September.  I would not do that, because I actually don’t know whether a rate increase in September is likely to be a good idea.  We gave a strong signal earlier in the year but were whipsawed by incoming data, and I’m reluctant to send a strong signal, as is contained in alternative C, paragraph 3′.  If the data do support a September increase, it will be straightforward to bring markets into better alignment with that event.  And if we send a strong signal now but the data don’t cooperate, then I think we are in a position of climbing down again, at real risk to the Committee’s credibility. So I think we should continue to say clearly that the path of tightening is likely to be gradual and dependent on the momentum of the economy, and we should let the data do the talking.  I support alternative B as written and am happy to accept the amendment on residential investment.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Mr. Powell expresses his own views on the appropriate path forward for the federal funds rate and discusses the conditions that need to be fulfilled for further rate increases. He also expresses caution and a preference for a gradual approach. There is no apparent disagreement or contention in this passage.


Passage number 199.
 MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  In view of my outlook and the risks, I believe a gradual upward path of interest rates remains appropriate.  We’ve made progress on both of our monetary policy goals, and various forecasts and optimal control exercises indicate that, to continue to make progress on our goals, it’s appropriate that we gradually increase the funds rate.  In my view, from the standpoint of what monetary policy can do, we have met our maximum-employment goal.  Employment growth is projected to be sufficient to lead to further reductions in the unemployment rate and other measures of underutilization of labor.  Both anecdotal reports and data suggest wages are beginning to accelerate, although the pace of acceleration is likely to be relatively slow as long as productivity growth remains low.  I don’t want to underestimate the problems many people continue to have in the labor market.  Technological advances and globalization are changing the nature of available jobs and the skill sets needed to perform those jobs.  I do believe that government policies and programs and private–public partnerships should be brought to bear to help workers develop skills to reenter and stay in the workforce.  I just don’t see how monetary policy is a means to do that, and it seems like a disservice to the very people it’s intended to help to suggest otherwise. Although inflation remains below our 2 percent goal, we’ve made progress.  I expect inflation to move back gradually to our goal, consistent with my outlook that economic growth will continue to be at or slightly above trend, that the unemployment rate will fall below estimates of its longer-run trend, and that inflation expectations have been and will continue to be reasonably stable.  Of course, there will be some ups and downs along that path, depending on the trajectory of oil prices and the dollar.  But I think continued gradual progress is a reasonable forecast. I believe risks associated with the outlook have decreased since our June meeting in terms of both those attending the labor market and the reaction to the U.K. referendum, which have subsided.  If financial stresses in the European banking system build up significantly in the future, then we can address the implications for the U.S. economy at that time.  I don’t think holding policy rates low in the United States can mitigate that sort of risk or reduce the  probability that this type of event will occur.  Indeed, by keeping rates lower for longer than appropriate, we could be exacerbating problems in the banking system by encouraging even greater search-for-yield behavior in light of lower net interest income.  Putting all of this together, I believe there’s a strong case for raising the funds rate.  We are not “behind the curve” yet, but if we continue to wait for every piece of data to line up before we act, we will surely be “behind the curve.”  And if we refrain from acting even though we are making progress toward both of our policy goals, we’re going to confuse the public and reduce our own credibility.  At this point, I think we have the luxury of taking the next step and then taking time to assess conditions before moving again.  This is consistent with our anticipated gradual path.  It’s also consistent with our being data dependent in the right way.  By that, I mean it allows us to accumulate enough data so that we can better assess whether the medium-run outlook has changed, rather than being “jerked around” by every monthly data release.  Assuming there’s no material change in the medium-run outlook between now and September, whether we raise rates today or do it in September is immaterial from an economic standpoint.  In September we will have a new set of SEP numbers, the first estimate of second-quarter GDP, two more job reports, and opportunities for further communication so that an action isn’t as much of a surprise as one would be today. Regarding today’s statement, in paragraph 1, I think the characterization of inflation should acknowledge that inflation has risen this year, and that we’ve made progress on our inflation goal.  I prefer the inflation language in alternative C to that in alternative B.  I prefer the alternative language regarding residential investment that President Williams put on the table today.  I don’t think there’s been a material change in our housing outlook since June.  If you wanted to leave in a reference to residential investment, I suggest using language closer to what  we used in June and just simply say “Since the beginning of the year, the housing sector has improved.”  In paragraph 2, I believe it is very important that we indicate that near-term risks have diminished, as now proposed in alternative B.  I read the rest of the statement as not giving any indication of what we will do in September.  Regardless of market expectations, which may remain low because of our own communications, if the outlook for the economy is largely unchanged from what we see today, with employment growth continuing to be at or above the estimates needed to put further downward pressure on the unemployment rate and the forecast that inflation returns to our goal over time still intact, I will expect us to increase the funds rate in September.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Mester, is expressing her own views and preferences on various aspects of monetary policy, but there is no direct disagreement with any other person or viewpoint mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 200.
 MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I would want to get additional readings on the underlying momentum of the economy before making a call on whether it’s appropriate to adjust policy.  In considering whether it will be appropriate to adjust policy in coming meetings, it will be important to assess the distance to our policy goals, the speed at which we’re approaching them, the balance of risks, and our ability to adjust course if the economy evolves differently than we anticipate. The recent pace of progress toward full employment appears to have downshifted materially, and there are few, if any, signs of strong wage pressures.  As payroll gains have moderated, the unemployment rate has essentially moved sideways.  Although there are some indications that the economy is approaching full employment, estimates of full employment are highly imprecise, and this has been exacerbated by the deep damage wrought by the Great Recession.  Moreover, some indicators, such as the prime-age employment-to-population ratio and the number working part time for economic reasons, suggest there is still room to go.   Importantly, both headline and core inflation remain notably below 2 percent, and core inflation has been below our target for 88 out of the past 92 months.  To the extent that inflation expectations show signs of becoming less well anchored, survey- and market-based measures suggest we should be concerned about unanchoring not to the upside but to the downside. If we were to suggest through our policy actions that we are content that the current level of resource utilization is consistent with attainment of our dual mandate, our commitment to a symmetric inflation target around 2 percent could be called into doubt, and inflation expectations could suffer.  While it seems likely that further improvement in economic momentum and resource utilization will likely be necessary in order to reach our policy goals, more data will help us assess just how much.  In light of the recent slowing in economic momentum, with the economy likely still somewhat short of reaching our goals, the downward tilt of risks to real activity and inflation from abroad counsels a prudent approach. We should carefully weigh the risks of moving to tighten policy prematurely against the risks of moving too slowly.  If we take a patient approach and policy does not adjust as rapidly as it should and inflationary pressures build more quickly than we anticipate, we still have well-understood conventional tools and plenty of space to address this contingency.  Moreover, upwardly anchored expectations and weakness in external demand, along with what I believe is a persistently lower neutral rate, will likely limit the steepness of that required policy response.  On the other hand, if we adjust policy in the hope that favorable data will subsequently materialize and they do not, the economy will become more vulnerable to adverse shocks, even fairly moderate ones.  The space we have to address such a contingency using conventional tools is extremely limited, and the policy options using nonconventional tools are not without complications.  As a result, we could risk a prolonged period in which  inflation and, potentially,  employment fall short of our goals.  In short, I would need to see some combination of greater momentum in economic activity and progress on inflation before feeling confident that the economy would both warrant a tightening in policy and remain resilient to possible negative shocks from abroad that we discussed yesterday. For those reasons, it’s important that the statement does not provide a soft commitment to a policy adjustment in the near term, both to avoid muddying the waters on data dependence and to avoid any risk to our credibility if we seem to change course subsequently.  We’ll be receiving important data before our next meeting:  two employment reports, two reports on PCE inflation, the first report on Q2 GDP, revisions to price, compensation, and spending data in previous quarters, and important data on recent changes in labor compensation.  We’ll also get a better sense of the resilience of euro-area banks and insights about the shape of any possible response by Italy.  These will provide valuable insights about how much momentum has slowed, whether it’s slowed, how quickly resource constraints are tightening, and how key risks are evolving. The intermeeting data may indeed be consistent with a need for another step-up in the federal funds rate in coming months, or, of course, they may not.  In view of the uncertainty, there’s a reasonable probability that the incoming data would not be consistent with a policy adjustment in September.  A soft lean in today’s statement would then be quite problematic insofar as it might constrain our decisions in September.  It would be better to leave decisionmaking in September unconstrained.  As Governor Powell suggested, if we see the data coming in stronger, the market itself is likely to begin to adjust its expectations, and there’ll be ample opportunity to communicate how the Committee is likely to react to those developments through the minutes and the Chair’s communications.  Finally, I do have a suggestion in response to President Williams’s suggestion.  If we do decide to follow his recommendation to delete the reference to residential investment being soft, it allows us to downgrade, I think, our description of business investment, which I would prefer to see described as weak, reflecting that it has indeed been one of the troubling spots in the economy for past quarters.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. BRAINARD is simply discussing her thoughts on the current state of the economy and suggesting a cautious approach to adjusting policy.


Passage number 201.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think there was a pretty strong consensus on that side. CHAIR YELLEN.  To just delete it completely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses their opinion that there was a strong consensus on a certain topic. The response from Chair Yellen does not contradict or challenge this opinion, but rather suggests the possibility of deleting something related to the topic.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 202.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Among the people who spoke, yes. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  So I suggest we delete it.  The sentence would read “Household spending has been growing strongly, but business fixed investment has been soft.” The second suggestion of President Williams concerned the sentence “Job gains were strong in June following weak growth in May.”  I did hear a little bit of support for President Williams’s proposal to delete that as well as some counterarguments.  I’ll say that, for my own part, normally I don’t like to focus on a lot of up-and-down in the data and prefer instead to focus  on longer-term trends, which are highlighted in the sentence that follows that.  But I agree with the Vice Chairman that, on this particular occasion, we strongly emphasized our concern about the May reading.  And to say that weak reading was completely reversed, essentially, in June is giving a clear sense that we’re now discounting that and taking a stronger view.  On this occasion, I think it’s important, but if I hear a groundswell of sentiment for getting rid of it, I’m open to it.  President Kaplan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage mentions that there are some counterarguments to President Williams's proposal to delete a sentence, indicating a disagreement or contention among the speakers.


Passage number 203.
 MR. KAPLAN.  The reason I agreed is, my fear is that we know that each of these monthly data series is subject to revision, and sometimes it’s a large revision.  As we go forward, as we have volatility in monthly numbers, I don’t want the public to think our reaction function is to overreact or underreact to any month.  And I do think the sentence that follows does the trick by focusing more on smoothing.  I’m more worried about the public understanding our reaction function, and, to me, citing individual months gives them a somewhat misleading picture of our reaction function.  That’s the reason I was in favor of deleting it. CHAIR YELLEN.  I guess, in general, I agree with that, and typically we do not cite “This thing went up last month, and it fell.”  When such things happen—and I guess residential investment is arguably a case in point—we don’t talk about it, or we talk about longer-term trends.  So I think this is an unusual situation, but, to my mind, it’s one in which we focused so much attention on our concern about the May employment report that it is a slightly different situation.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. Mr. Kaplan and Chair Yellen both express their agreement on the concern of providing a misleading picture of the Federal Reserve's reaction function by citing individual months. They both emphasize the importance of focusing on longer-term trends and smoothing out volatility in the data.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 204.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I think President Kaplan brings up a good point about revisions.  This could be changed in the future.  And I also think it’s unnecessary.  The next sentence says “On balance, payrolls . . . ,” and everyone will know exactly what we’re talking about without having to have the “upsey downsey” sentence in there.  So I don’t think it  helps us, I don’t think it does anything for us, and the “On balance” sentence takes care of it.  So I would agree with President Williams on this. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. Mr. Bullard disagrees with the sentence that President Kaplan brought up. He believes it is unnecessary and does not add any value to the discussion.


Passage number 205.
 MS. MESTER.  You know I’ve argued that we should take a longer-term view.  My fear is that if we don’t put this in, we’re not taking a stand that 287,000 jobs per month is strong job growth.  And I worry that if we take that out, people are going to think that an increase of 287,000 in jobs is kind of what we’re expecting each time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Mester expresses her concern about not including a specific statement in order to clarify the expectation of job growth. There is no opposing viewpoint or argument presented in the passage.


Passage number 206.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think it would make the statement softer— PRESIDENT ROSENGREN.  To take it out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply expressing a personal opinion or suggestion without any opposing views.


Passage number 207.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  —to take it out, frankly.  Because by highlighting the job gains, what you’re doing is saying that you’re taking quite a bit of signal from it, which I think we are. PRESIDENT ROSENGREN.  I agree with that. CHAIR YELLEN.  Absolutely.  I agree.  President Harker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Each speaker expresses agreement with the previous statement.


Passage number 208.
 MR. HARKER.  One possibility, without naming months, is just to delete that sentence, get rid of “On balance,” and say “Job gains, payrolls, and other labor market indicators,” et cetera.  So it’s recognizing the job gains without actually explicitly naming the month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. The suggestion made by Mr. Harker is to modify a sentence in a neutral manner without any opposing viewpoint or disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 209.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  We’re already saying that by the word “payrolls,” though, aren’t we, President Harker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply confirming the use of the term "payrolls" with President Harker.


Passage number 210.
 MR. HARKER.  I worry about naming the months, especially when you consider revisions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Harker, simply expresses his concern or worry about naming the months, particularly in relation to revisions.


Passage number 211.
 MR. FISCHER.  I don’t think we should worry about naming this month.  We had a deviation of about three standard deviations from what was expected, and everybody noticed it,  and we used it as a reason why we weren’t raising rates—I don’t know quite how we phrased it—so I think we should at least mention it. CHAIR YELLEN.  It was an important factor in our changing view, and this is communicating that we’re now discounting what we said about our concerns at the June meeting.  Okay.  I realize there are people on both sides of this.  My suggestion is that we leave that as is, and let me turn to the larger issue of September.  I certainly heard many of you around the table express the view that there is a strong case, in view of how the economy has behaved, for moving rates gradually up over time; that September certainly should be on the table as an option; and that you would want to see nothing in the statement or in our communications over the next couple of months that would in any way tie our hands in September if we interpret that the data are appropriate to move.  Even among those of you who are more reluctant and skeptical that a move in September will be appropriate and that the data will support it, I’ve also heard an openness on your part to looking at the incoming data and evaluating whether a move in September is appropriate, and I completely share that view. I can easily imagine a data flow—President Lockhart set out some examples—that would leave me feeling that we should move in September.  I absolutely agree that it should be an open option.  We should do nothing to take September off the table.  And as time passes and the data flow comes in, if our sense is that September is appropriate, then our communication should help markets to understand our evolving views. Now, frankly, my interpretation of what’s in alternative B—I think both the changes in paragraph 1 and the new red sentence in paragraph 2 do indicate that September is on the table, and that it will be interpreted that way.  I’m not perfect, either, at predicting market reaction to our statements, but it is my sense that, for example, no changes at all are really expected in  paragraph 2 by most observers.  And for us to say that near-term risks have diminished, I think, will be noticed and taken as a signal not of any commitment to move, but as a sense that we’re more comfortable with the data flow. Many of you mentioned my speech at the Jackson Hole symposium.  I have a good opportunity there to comment on the incoming data flow.  If we’re feeling that September looks like the time we should move, first of all, I think the data flow will move markets.  We’ve seen that in the past.  A number of you have commented on it.  I would expect that.  And I promise that at Jackson Hole, if that looks appropriate, I will say something that will confirm that sentiment or move it along. I am very worried—a number of you have commented on this—that we have in the past signaled we’re just on the verge of moving, and then something happens and we don’t move.  I do not regret our decisions in various meetings not to move.  I think there were good reasons not to move.  But constantly suggesting we’re on the verge of moving and then not doing so is harming our credibility.  I would prefer to be more in a wait-and-see posture, in which every meeting, particularly September, is “live,” and we will make our decision on the basis of the data flow and not go too far. And the language that’s in alternative C, I think, is true.  You know, the case in favor of raising the funds rate I believe has increased.  I wouldn’t take any issue with the truthfulness of that statement, but it would be taken as an extremely strong signal, and, to my mind, it’s not appropriate at this point.  I’ve heard a lot of sentiment in the direction of alternative C, but I also have heard a large number of people who feel pretty strongly that alternative B is far enough for today, so I would propose that we stick with the language in alternative B.  Let me say just one other thing before we call for a vote, and that is that both today and at our June meeting I heard a number of you say that our statement and communications aren’t as effective as they ought to be.  In particular, over the past year, the pace of tightening has been noticeably slower than we anticipated in December when we first raised rates.  That’s led to the cynical conclusion in some quarters that we’re always looking for an excuse, and we’ll always find an excuse, not to raise rates.  I’m wondering, in light of that, whether it’s helpful to keep emphasizing in our statement that the funds rate is likely to rise gradually over the next two or three years.  And I think we do need to think hard about our forward guidance and whether we could change the language so that it provides a somewhat better sense of what our actual reaction function is and what it means when we say that our actions are data dependent.  I think that in coming meetings, this is something that we need to consider and discuss, and I will try to structure some conversation on that.  But for today, I would like to propose that we vote on alternative B as written, with the one change pertaining to residential investment that we discussed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Multiple viewpoints and suggestions are being discussed, but there is no clear disagreement or opposing arguments.


Passage number 212.
 MR. MADIGAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  This vote will be on the statement associated with alternative B, as on pages 6 and 7 of Thomas’s handout, with the change to the fourth sentence that the Chair indicated.  This vote will also cover the directive to the Desk as included in the implementation note on page 10 of Thomas’s package.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information about a vote that will take place, including the page references for the relevant documents.


