Passage number 1.
TRANSCRIPT FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE MEETING October 6, 1979 Prefatorv Note This transcript has been produced from the original raw transcript in the FOMC Secretariat's files. The Secretariat has lightly edited the original to facilitate the reader's understanding Where one or more words were missed or garbled in the transcription, the notation "unintelligible" has been inserted. In some instances, words have been added in brackets to complete a speaker's thought or to correct an obvious transcription error or misstatement. Errors undoubtedly remain. The raw transcript was not fully edited for accuracy at the time it was produced because it was intended only as an aid to the Secretariat in preparing the record of the Committee's policy actions. The edited transcript has not been reviewed by present or past members of the Committee. Aside from the editing to facilitate the reader's understanding, the only deletions involve a very small amount of confidential information regarding foreign central banks, businesses, and persons that are identified or identifiable. Deleted passages are indicated by gaps in the text. All information deleted in this manner is exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of Information Act. Xeeting of Federal Open Market Committee October 6 ,  1979 A meeting of t h e  Federal Open Market Committee w a s  held i.3 t h e  o f f i c e s  of t h e  Board of Governors of t h e  Federal Reserve System i n  Washington, D. C . ,  on Saturday, October 6 ,  1979, beginning at 10:lO a.n. .RESEXT: M r .  Volcker, Chairman M r .  Balles Mr. Black Mr. Coldwell Mr. K i m b r e l  N r .  Mayo Mr. Partee N r .  Rice Mr. Schultz Mrs. Teeters Mr. Wallich 3essrs. Guffey, Ksrris, Soos, T i ~ l e z ,  and Winn, Alternate Members of t h e  Federal Opeil Market Cornlittee Msjsrs. Saughinan 2.3d Eastburn, Presidenrs of t h e  Federal Reserve Banks of D a l l r t s  anci Philadelphia, r e s p e c t i v e l y  Mr . A l t m a c r . ,  Secretary Xr. Bernard. A s s i s t a n t  Sec~retary Xr. Petersen, General Counsel I&. Axilrod, Economist M r .  H o l m e s ,  Adviser for Market Operations Messrs. E t t i n ,  Xichline,and Truman, Associate Economists M r .  S t e r n l i g h t ,  Manager for Domestic Operations, System Open Market Account Nr. Pardee, Manager f o r  Foreign Operations, System Open Market Account M r .  Allison, Secretary of t h e  Board of Governors - 2 -  Mr. Coyne, Assistant t o  t h e  Board of Governors M r .  Beck, Senior Economist, Banking Section, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors M s .  Farar, Economist, Open Market Secre- tariat, Board of Governors Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a preface note explaining the transcription process of a meeting.


Passage number 2.
 Corrigan, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of October 6, 1979 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, gentlemen, I think we might as well start. I hate to start without Emmett but he seems to have been incommunicado for 40 minutes now, so let’s begin. Maybe we should take a minute to hear Mr. Kichline go over the latest business news. I realize you did that yesterday, Jim, but not everybody had the benefit of your comments yesterday. So, why don’t you do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting that they start the meeting without someone who is running late and suggests that they take a minute to hear the latest business news.


Passage number 3.
 MR. KICHLINE. All right. I’ll try to be brief. Economic activity in the third quarter appears to have expanded a little faster than we had anticipated earlier. We now believe that real GNP probably grew at an annual rate of around 1-1/2 percent, maybe a shade higher. Employment, production, and sales all seem to have been somewhat higher. The most recent news, of course, was on the employment situation in September. Total employment grew substantially and the unemployment rate dropped 0.2 percentage point to 5.8 percent. Industrial production now appears to have grown about 1/2 percent in September on the basis of the most recent labor market report and some physical product data on auto sales and steel production. As you know, housing starts were unchanged in August at 1.8 million. We have some additional information that suggests capital goods shipments in August were rather stronger than we had anticipated as well. On the inventory side, inventory still seemed to have been accumulated at a substantial pace in August, at least at the manufacturing level. And this is an area of growing concern given what we perceive to be substantial imbalances developing unless we get sustained growth in final sales or further downward adjustments in production. While the recent data clearly suggest more strength than the staff had anticipated at the last meeting of the Committee, the fundamentals still seem to be running against sustained growth in coming quarters. Namely, I would point to declining real income, which we have now had since December of last year. At the present time we think that real growth in the fourth quarter is likely to decline at about a 3-1/2 percent annual rate, which is a bit bigger decline than we had estimated earlier. But over the whole projection period through 1980 we don’t anticipate any significant change in the forecast we presented to the Committee in September. On the price side, the most recent information relates to production. The producer price index, as you h o w ,  increased at a 1.4 percent annual rate. It was particularly discouraging. There were widespread increases, with food and energy prices continuing to rise very rapidly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 4.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We might take just a minute to see if any of the Presidents in particular have comments they would like to make on the business scene from [a regional] perspective that would add to the statistical information that we‘ve had on prices, production, or other fronts. Let’s hear quickly. M R .  MORRIS. Well, I think we’re seeing an amazing replay of 1974-75. We have declining final demand, with the economy cushioned by very large inventory accumulation that produces big demand for bank credit, resulting in growth in the aggregates. And we‘ve been leaning against that growth by pushing up the federal funds rate. I gave a 10/6/79 -2- talk to my directors on Tuesday in which I overlaid the 1974-75 period on the current period. I assumed March '79 was the peak in this period and compared that to the November '73 peak. The behavior, including the tracking of the federal funds rate, is amazingly similar. It seems to me that we have a very big inventory accumulation; and when the inventory accumulation does stop, I think the recession is likely to be bigger than we are projecting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is providing their perspective on the business scene and drawing a comparison to a previous period.


Passage number 5.
 MR. BAUGHMAN. Did you see evidence of a credit crunch in that earlier period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 6.
 MR. MORRIS. Well, I don't have a measure of credit crunch but I do have measures of the funds rate and the rate of growth in the money supply, and the behavior of those is quite similar. M R .  BAUGHMAN. My recollection is that we had a very different situation with respect to credit availability but I was told just recently that a bank from Chicago was working diligently in an eastern area to round up business loans. We wouldn't have had that, I think, in 1975.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris suggests that the behavior of the funds rate and the rate of growth in the money supply is similar to a credit crunch, while Mr. Baughman disagrees and mentions a bank from Chicago actively seeking business loans in an eastern area. Their opposing statements indicate a lack of agreement on the state of credit availability.


Passage number 7.
 MR. MORRIS. Well, I think the money center banks are still very aggressively looking for loans. But if you go outside the money centers, the banks are very tight. At least they are in New England.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply presents two different situations: money center banks being aggressively looking for loans and banks outside the money centers being tight. The speaker is presenting their observation without expressing any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 8.
 MR. PARTEE. Of course, the real estate situation is entirely different, with 1.8 million housing starts. That compares with what we had, say, in the summer of '74 when starts were down to a 1.1 million annual rate or thereabouts and there just wasn't any mortgage money.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating facts about different housing starts at different times, without any apparent contention or disagreement.


Passage number 9.
 MR. MORRIS. But the state and local sector is much weaker than it was in 1974-75.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward statement about the current state of the state and local sector being weaker compared to 1974-75.


Passage number 10.
 MR. PARTEE. That's true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee simply agrees with the statement made.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 11.
 MR. WALLICH. That is hardly speculative although it's a little speculative. In '74 it was virulent. M R .  COLDWELL. In '74 we had a constraint in terms of capacity that we haven't faced to a big degree. M R .  BALLES. To follow up on what Ernie said, I've had conversations in some depth with various directors over the last week and whether they're businessmen or bankers they report essentially the same story--that the present level of interest rates, in contrast to the situation generally in '74, is just not deterring borrowing in any way that they can see. country; small businesses and farmers are in a big cash flow bind. But medium- and larger-size companies, according to the companies themselves as well as their bankers, just don't blink at this level of interest rates. They just go ahead and borrow anyway. I don't think we're approaching the credit crunch type of situation that we had in '74. I think that's one of the big differences.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is some disagreement in the passage. Mr. Coldwell suggests that in 1974 there was a constraint in terms of capacity that is not currently being faced to the same degree. However, Mr. Balles contradicts this and states that the present level of interest rates is not deterring borrowing, at least for medium- and large-size companies, according to conversations he has had with businessmen and bankers. So, while Mr. Coldwell believes there is a constraint on borrowing capacity, Mr. Balles believes that interest rates are not deterring borrowing.


Passage number 12.
 I'm sure that's not true for everybody in the MR. MAYO. We have plenty of tightness at 90 percent of our banks but they probably don't account for more than half of the business. And the other 10 percent can get money whenever they want.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It provides information about the speaker's perspective on the availability of money in the MR and the distribution among different banks.


Passage number 13.
 10/6/19 -3- MR. MORRIS. But bank credit was expanding pretty rapidly in the first half of ‘74.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a fact about bank credit expanding rapidly in the first half of '74. There is no disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 14.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other quick comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Any other quick comments" is simply asking for additional thoughts or opinions without indicating any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 15.
 MR. EASTBURN. Yes, Paul. A quick and informal [survey] of some people in our area confirms a bit what I think Frank [Morris] was saying. There’s increasing concern about the inventory situation and the likelihood that the recession is going to be more severe than they had thought. This is on the part of retailers and of bankers who have some feeling that the strength in business loans is inventory-based and that it is going to collapse.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 16.
 MR. TIMLEN. We had a businessmen’s meeting in our Bank about a week ago and we had three or four industrialists as part of the group. Of the three or four, all were predicting a rather good year in 1980 with the exception of one that is a supplier to the automotive industry. It’s generally the same kind of [story] we’ve been hearing for a long time. The industrialists were all vigorously defending their accomplishments in the area of productivity. They were saying that their own companies were doing very well in that regard and they thought the national statistics really related to the services field and government regulations. One of the people there was a mutual savings banker who was not very happy about the prospect for deposits in New York for the next quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply mentions the opinions and viewpoints of different individuals in a businessmen's meeting.


Passage number 17.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there are no other comments--. Bones did you want to comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if someone named Bones wants to make a comment if there are no other comments.


Passage number 18.
 MR. KIMEREL. I’d simply echo [Tom Timlenl. In the last week we had a series of business leaders in from Jacksonville, Atlanta, and New Orleans. They [exhibited] an enthusiastic lack of confidence in so many areas. But for their own individual businesses the only expression of any concern was from a convenience store operator with about 1500 outlets who suggested that one [sign] of a possible recession was the fact that they were having many more thefts--more stealing [of merchandise] as well as robberies. That was the only [indication] of recession they could see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is summarizing the viewpoints of different business leaders and noting that the only mention of a possible recession came from a convenience store operator. There is no conflicting information or differing opinions presented.


Passage number 19.
 MR. MAYO. Sales at Sears Roebuck were ahead of last year for the first time in twelve months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. It simply states a fact that sales at Sears Roebuck were ahead of last year for the first time in twelve months.


Passage number 20.
 MR. PARTEE. Was a year ago bad, do you recall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The question is straightforward and does not indicate any conflicting opinions or disagreement between the individuals involved.


Passage number 21.
 MR. MAYO. Well, Sears has gone through particular problems. M R .  PARTEE. It seems to me that they were in bad shape about a year ago. M R .  MAYO. It shouldn‘t be used as an example for the whole country.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no specific contention or disagreement mentioned in the passage. The individuals are discussing the state of Sears and whether it should be used as an example for the whole country, but there is no disagreement or argument presented.


Passage number 22.
 MR. PARTEE. Wards had a very small change over a year ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that there was a small change in Wards over a year ago.


Passage number 23.
 MR. MAYO. Yes, but Penneys and Kmart are still doing fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply acknowledges that Penneys and Kmart are still doing fine.


Passage number 24.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me say where I think we are even though Emmett is still absent. I appreciate your all standing by so 10/6/79 -4- patiently over the past few days, but we’ve had a few complications putting this together, with some people out of town and so forth. Just in terms of the schedule for today, I think we have to assume that the Board of Governors is going to have to meet after we get finished. And depending upon what we decide, the presidents may want to meet. too, to discuss any reserve requirement changes and what kinds of problems that will create in the short run. [Unintelligible] and we may need to talk about straightening out mechanical problems that may arise [when we implement] any decisions we make. So we can play that by ear as we go along. I don’t know how long we’re going to have to be here today. We will be here until we arrive at a consensus and proceed [from there]. I’m not sure when we would announce any decision that we make--whether we’d do it late today or Monday morning. Those seem to be the two practical alternatives with the Pope here rather blanketing the area [news] tomorrow and creating a little difficulty [for us1 in terms of an orderly announcement. Let me say that I think there are several dimensions to the current situation. We wouldn‘t be here today if we didn’t have a problem with the state of the markets, whether international or domestic. They were pretty feverish last week--or beginning in the previous week, really. Beginning about 2 weeks ago and carrying over into the early part of what is still this week, the foreign exchange market was in a situation that was clearly not amenable for very long to such techniques as intervention. The markets have turned around some in the past few days, as you know. I think that is almost entirely explicable by the fact that at about the time I returned from Belgrade Treasury officials and others were making some statements that left hanging the possibility of some kind of a package, so the foreign exchange dealers have retreated to the sidelines.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 25.
 MR. WALLICH. The reporters left the room when [Secretary] Miller said that Paul had gone home. They just rushed to the phones.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 26.
 MR. MAYO. Paul, in your review you made no mention of controls. I hear more rumors about those than you can shake a stick at these days.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states that the speaker, Mr. Mayo, is pointing out that Paul did not mention controls in his review. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention between them.


Passage number 27.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Bank credit controls or any kind of controls. M R .  MAYO. Various types.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 28.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me just say a word on that. In this situation we get more talk about that, and there are certainly market rumors. I don't know that I hear such strong rumors that controls are a great possibility right now but there is a very large segment of market opinion that says if not now we are going to be driven to [impose them] later because the situation is out of control. My reaction--which on the basis of some earlier discussions I think is shared by some other Board members and by people in the Administration who at the very least would have to trigger the control mechanism when we're talking about domestic credit controls--is that of all the options one could think of theoretically, that is probably the most dangerous in terms of the business situation. That's because a control program that really bites at all might lead to [undesirable] reactions. For instance, grave questions might be raised about whether financing was available for some of the inventory that one would like to see financed. And all the anticipatory effects, with people trying to protect themselves, would [put the economy on] a very dangerous course at this particular juncture in the business cycle. The feeling is that there is some danger, on which people will put different [probabilities], of the economy having a most severe inventory reaction and indeed [that controls might1 even inhibit planning for capital spending that we wouldn't want to inhibit. Controls in the international dimension have not been discussed at all. I personally cannot conceive of controls in the international area. Forgetting about philosophy or long-term effects or anything else, I can't imagine--1 speak for myself--how one would design them so they'd be effective. They would have so many leaks around them because the major types of flows that involve foreign held l0/6/79 -12- dollars [have] leads and lags or what could be disguised as leads or lags. Such controls just don’t have any prospect of effectiveness that would make them within the range of possibilities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker provides their own opinion and acknowledges that others may have different views, but there is no direct disagreement or argument present.


Passage number 29.
 MR. COLDWELL. Paul, it seems to me that the situation we are faced with is pretty much as you outlined here. Maybe I could streamline this for my own thinking. I see our objectives as perhaps four-fold--centered around dampening [inflation] expectations, achieving some credit restraint that might flow from that, hopefully strengthening the dollar exchange rate, and--depending upon how one views this--a somewhat self-serving target of meeting our longer-range objectives and bringing growth in the monetary aggregates down. If those are our objectives and I lay heavy stress on the dampening of expectations, then it seems to me that the program has to be strong enough to impress the market. I have my doubts that the foreign market is going to be impressed for three reasons: (A) I don’t think they are going to believe it: (B) I don’t think they’ll understand it in terms of our change [of technique]: and (C) I think they are so skeptical that they‘d just say it’s too little and, without some effort on the part of the Treasury or somebody else, there would be no direct impact on the gold price. So it seems to me that we are designing something here to a considerable extent [for] our [domestic] situation, hoping there is a fallout internationally. The risks are large, of course, and [primarily] on the side that whatever recessionary tendencies are already there might be compounded, creating a [greater] decline. I suspect that risk involves 1980, not 1979. I think the risks are equally strong on the other side in that if we don’t put out something fully credible, we face a potential blow-up [vial a speculative move in the metals commodities that spreads out from there--in effect a flight from dollars. So I’m prepared to move ahead on this because I think the latter risks are too high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and concerns about the situation, but there is no explicit disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 30.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I’m glad you mentioned the commodities issue. I don‘t know whether all the Presidents have caught up with this, though I presume they have. Beginning a little more than a week ago, late in the previous week when the gold market was gyrating, there was some very clear evidence that this psychology was getting into the metals markets in particular in a very forceful way and maybe in the grains market very temporarily. There were very sharp price increases in some metals markets which continued into Monday or Tuesday. They have relapsed along with the gold market and the exchange market fervor for the same reason and I’m sure they were related psychologically. But it’s worth mentioning that we have this evidence of extreme sensitivity. And the price increase was what--20 percent in the copper market in 2 days or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their viewpoint on the commodities issue and providing evidence to support their perspective.


Passage number 31.
 MR. PARTEE. Lead went up 20 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply states a fact that the price of lead increased by 20 percent.


Passage number 32.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Lead went up 20 percent, too. It was frankly a bit of scary psychology to say the least. That has also in some sense relapsed for the moment in this [general] atmosphere of nervous anticipation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that lead went up 20 percent and acknowledges that it was a bit scary, but then mentions that the situation has somewhat improved in the current atmosphere of nervous anticipation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 33.
 MR. PARTEE. I might make a general comment, Paul. I approach the situation a little differently than Phil does. And I don‘t pay as much attention to foreign and international aspects as 10/6/79 -13 you do. The thought I would like to emphasize or underline is uncertainty. I think the staff forecast--which I believe is not that much different from the forecast of the Council [of Economic Advisers] or from those one sees in standard private market services--is quite plausible. We certainly do have a lack of final demand right now. We certainly do have a decline in real income and we are going to continue to have a decline in real income. And today, at least in Washington, the winter heating season is beginning. The drain on purchasing power from that is going to be much greater on a seasonally unadjusted basis over the coming six months or so. There will be less money available for everything. So it's fairly reasonable to think that there is going to be a recession trend rather promptly, one that develops and continues over the winter and into the spring. If that's so, why of course we are going to want to try to keep the monetary aggregates growing. And we will have a sudden shift in our problem, which will be overly slow growth rather than overly rapid growth in the aggregates. That's one scenario. On the other hand, I was extremely bothered by the market developments of the last two weeks. I think the spreading of the gold [market psychology] into the more remote metals is very bothersome. Silver we understand and platinum we understand, but the spreading to copper, zinc, and lead is very bothersome. And not only grains but a number of other futures prices were moving [up], with no real justification for those moves. It leaves one with the thought that because of a run from currency--a desire to get into goods and out of money--we might have now a new development in our economic experience that would lead to a "last gasp" round of demand for goods, probably most intensively for inventory. That might last 2 or 3 months or it might last 4 or 5 months. It's very limited but it could last for a while. And then when the recession occurs, it will be much deeper because in addition to having to adjust to the lower level of final demand, people will have to liquidate inventory. They will move from inventory accumulation to decumulation and we will have a recession that is more like 1975 or perhaps worse than that. If that's the case, for the next few months or during the period in which there's this anxiety and concern about possibly moving from money into goods, it is very important to restrain the growth in the aggregates, and we could be talking about significantly higher interest rates. With that uncertainty, it seems to me that our traditional method, which is to estimate the short-term market rates that will adjust the demand functions for various kinds of money on a lag structure, has [inherent in] it the danger that we are going to miss. [Either] we will miss an intensification in the demand for money and be behind the gun, as we have tended to be here over the last six months, or we will miss a decline in the demand for money and overstay and be behind the gun, as we traditionally have done [going] into recessions. It's an extremely dangerous, risky proposition to change our operating mode. We have tried it a couple of times. We had RPDs back in the early '70s and we had that experiment a few years ago. For one reason or another--and we know the reasons--they didn't work. But even though it is extremely risky, I think it's the less risky course than to stay with our traditional system. So my emphasis is on uncertainty and the need to be aware of the fact that we no longer can specify interest rates given this uncertainty, rather than our need to tighten up or anything like that at this time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee disagrees with Phil's approach to the situation and emphasizes uncertainty. He also suggests a possible scenario of a recession trend, while also expressing concern about the market developments of the last two weeks. Overall, his viewpoint seems to differ from the traditional operating mode.


Passage number 34.
 10/6/79 -14 MR. MORRIS. I agree with Chuck. His analysis fit my views very closely. Despite my view that the recession is going to be sharp, I think we are in a situation where we have to be willing to do something dramatic today. It’s not clear to me that a change in operating procedures is going to gain us much yardage on the foreign exchange market because many will not understand what we are doing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker explicitly states that they agree with Chuck's analysis and that they have similar views. They also express their uncertainty about the effectiveness of a change in operating procedures on the foreign exchange market.


Passage number 35.
 MR. PARTEE. Unless they think it’s more of a commitment. M R .  MORRIS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. The two speakers are discussing perceptions or opinions about a certain topic, but there is no indication of disagreement between them.


Passage number 36.
 That means that we also have to have some traditional measures to go along with it that they will understand CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not present any conflict or disagreement. It simply states the need for traditional measures to be included alongside other measures.


Passage number 37.
 MR. MORRIS. I think the Committee has to understand that we are talking about something that will give the Manager discretion; [I’d] give him at least 2 percentage points on the up side in the next few weeks. We have never done that--that’s a dramatic change in our behavior--but that’s what we are talking about. And I think our credibility will really suffer if we announce a change in procedure and then fail to have the guts to go through with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and concern about potential consequences of a proposed change in procedure.


Passage number 38.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I may just interject, Frank, I agree with what you are saying and I think [the issue] has to be approached in that light. But presumably the guts will have a number on it--the degree of our guts on the up side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. The statement simply expresses agreement with Frank's point of view without any opposing perspective being presented.


Passage number 39.
 MR. MORRIS. Well, that’s right. But it’s got to be a pretty big number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement in agreement.


Passage number 40.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I understand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "I understand" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests that the speaker comprehends or comprehends a given subject.


Passage number 41.
 MR. MORRIS. The other thing is that we are going to need to educate the market very soon on this. So, if we go ahead with this change to a new procedure, I think you ought to have a press conference today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Morris is suggesting the need for education and a press conference, but there is no contradiction or disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 42.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if we have a new procedure, I will have a press conference. Whether I have it today or Monday is an open quest ion. M R .  MORRIS. [If you have it today], the markets will have the weekend to absorb this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the timing of a press conference and is considering the options of having it today or on Monday. The statement made by Mr. Morris is simply suggesting that if the press conference were to take place today, the markets would have the weekend to process the information.


Passage number 43.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don’t know. We have a holiday on Monday and we may do the press conference Monday morning. You can assume that I will have a press conference if we go through [with this change].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is informational and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 44.
 MR. MORRIS. Are the bond markets closed. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is simply asking a question about the status of the bond markets.


Passage number 45.
 MR. PARTEE. The stock market is open, but that’s it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple statement about the stock market being open, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 46.
 MR. EASTBURN. Could I add one other point. I follow along with Frank on this. However, I think there is one [aspect of making a change] that is a disadvantage. I don’t think this can be a short-run change in technique because it is going to require a certain amount of time for it to work out. I understand the point that you made about 10/6/79 -15- meeting the special situation we have, but this is a basic change in technique. And we’ve learned before that it really does take time to know whether la new technique] works or not. There’s a credibility problem if we launch this and stop and go with it. So I really think we are committed to this if we go [forward].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing agreement with Frank and bringing up a potential disadvantage to consider when making a change. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 47.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don’t want to accept that. I don’t think we can make that decision now. If we [change our operating technique], I do accept the fact that to some degree we have prejudiced the discussion we will have at the end of the year. We will have to have a reason then to move back to the traditional method. But I don’t think we can really make that decision now, nor should we. Nor do I think this commits us that fully, though it prejudices to some degree what we would do next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and reservations about making a decision at the current moment and the potential implications for future discussions and actions. There is no explicit disagreement with any other party mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 48.
 MR. PARTEE. We’d run it for several months in any event. CWlIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh yes. I think we are committed for several months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both individuals agree that the plan will run for several months.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 49.
 MR. EASTBURN. I‘m thinking partly in terms of the public impact that this will have. If the impression is conveyed that this is something we are just trying, I really don’t think it will have the impact on credibility that we need to have. CIiAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe we lose some, but in this particular situation I don’t think we lose the whole [impact] or anywhere near that. We may lose 10 to 20 percent of it. Let me comment on a point that has come up a couple of times. I don’t think we are talking about a program here just to support the dollar. I know [different] people place different emphases on that. The dollar is part of the total situation, but I think this is really all one ball of wax at this point. The psychology in the foreign markets is the same as the psychology at home; it is reflected in the metals markets. It is the inflationary psychology or whatever. So I don’t think of this as a program specifically directed to the foreign side. If anything, it’s specifically directed toward the domestic side, but it will have foreign repercussions. One oE the interesting questions--it’s very hard to express and I don’t know the answer--is whether the new approach will carry a message of its own even in the international markets. I would be a little more optimistic [on that score] than some of the comments I just heard. There has been a great deal of discussion about the money supply and the feeling that so much of this psychology is related to the fact that the money supply is out of control. That’s the comment we hear all the time. The virtue of a new approach, if it has one, is that we are accepting--with all its risks and dangers--more of a focus on the money supply. I think that is understandable at that kind of gross level. I have a list here [of people who have indicated a desire to comment], so maybe I will [proceed] in an orderly way. John.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. Mr. Eastburn is concerned about the public impact of the decision and believes that portraying it as an experiment will harm the credibility. Chairman Volcker disagrees, stating that while there may be some loss of impact, it will not be significant.


Passage number 50.
 MR. BALLES. I think there would be considerable agreement that the kinds of steps that were taken last November were viewed as bridging actions. They were effective but, of course, they can only be effective as long as some fundamental changes are being made that get around to solving the problem. One aspect of that, from the 10/6/79 -16- standpoint of the Federal Reserve, is to do what is necessary to slow the growth of the aggregates and to begin to bring inflation under control. Other elements, as I look back on it--and I‘m sorry that we [as a nation1 haven’t made more progress--would have been to do something more effective on the energy front and so on. I think there is a wide perception from the standpoint of the Fed’s responsibilities and functions that there has simply been such excessive monetary growth in the last six months that we aren‘t making any progress on the inflation front. Fred’s comment about Scylla and Charybdis coming together is a very apt analogy, I’m afraid. We’ve all been struggling with this problem in that if we know a recession is probably in prospect, we normally would want to ease [policy] somewhat. Some of us felt so strongly about that last spring that we dissented; the record will show that we thought [policy] ought to be easing. Since that time inflationary developments and inflation expectations have become even more dangerous. One definite advantage that I see in moving to this new operating target of reserves is that it’s likely to result in greater credibility in the marketplace [on the part of] a great many observers here and abroad that we will do something more effective than we‘ve done, say, in the past 6 months in slowing down the rate of monetary growth. That [growth] in a way has been good in that it [may be] counter-cyclical but I think it has seriously damaged our ability to control inflation. One thing that hasn’t been said yet--perhaps it‘s so widely understood that it doesn‘t need to be said--is that the possibility of using the kinds of reserve targets that are set forth in this memo has been studied at great depth over a considerable number of years. We are not moving into this as if it were untested and unstudied; there‘s an enormous body of research, including staff papers and very good analytical delineations of the problems and so forth. So I don‘t think we are taking on something that’s new and experimental in the sense that it hasn’t been very thoroughly examined. When this subject came up four years ago under a predecessor subcommittee of the current subcommittee on the directive--and I served on that predecessor subcommittee--I was in favor of moving to a nonborrrowed reserves target then. And that was not in a crisis atmosphere such as we have today. If anything, I think the argument for adding a reserves target, with a considerably wider range of possible movements in the federal funds rate to make it effective, is stronger now than it was then, particularly in view of the explosive inflationary psychology that we have today. So, on balance, I would feel very comfortable in moving to the sort of approach that was set forth in the Axilrod-Sternlight paper. I fully agree with you that we shouldn’t go by a strict mechanical formula. I agree completely that we’re going to need to give you and the Desk a lot of discretion if we get into this. I, for one, think we would make a real impact on market expectations by announcing this new technique. Obviously, we’d have to follow through with some results, but I would strongly support the proposal for moving toward the sort of approach outlined in the paper by Steve and Peter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses agreement and support for the proposed approach outlined in the paper by Steve and Peter. They also acknowledge the need for discretion and the potential impact on market expectations.


Passage number 51.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Bob Mayo. I’ll get back on course.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that Bob Mayo will get back on course, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 52.
 10/6/79 -11- MR. MAYO. Mr. Chairman, I would like to enthusiastically support the change in emphasis in our operations. I have felt for a long time that we were doing the best that we could, but I've changed my position on that under these circumstances of the most sensitive monetary situation that I can remember at any time in our history. It seems to me that we are dealing with an essentially psychological situation, both abroad and here at home. I'm not going to suggest that we do something dramatic just to do something dramatic. I share John Balles's feelings that this isn't something that is so unknown to us that we should register fear and trepidation and do it blindly. I think the RPD experiment, looking back over the history of it, failed because we were too timid on the federal funds ranges that we associated with it, and it killed itself. So, I think now is the time for us to take the plunge, so to speak. I would do it for international reasons, too. I don't think it is just a question of fallout from what is good for domestic reasons. I have talked over recent years with a number of people throughout the world in their home offices about the role of money targets and so forth. And I've come to realize that for better or for worse these [targets] are there; there is an acceptance of the idea of a more monetarist approach than we have taken. It seems to me that this is the time to do something a little more [dramatic]. If I may be so crude, the patient has been constipated for a long time and Ex-lax will no longer work. I'm suggesting an enema or, if you want the full prescription, an enema plus some change in diet. Dr. Mayo is speaking, though I'm not one of the Mayo brothers, thank you. Anyway, at this point I think we can capitalize psychologically on monetarist support throughout Europe in particular, as well as in the Congress of the United States and much of the journalistic fraternity today. That doesn't mean that I, Bob Mayo, agree with all the arguments of the monetarists, but I recognize that they are there and they are important. They can give us support in what is essentially a psychological situation. I would not worry about whether, in going with the new emphasis, we are taking a risk that we cannot reverse [our decision] if we have to go to something else later. This is not black and white. We could decide--to use an extreme example--that we don't want to say anything about a federal funds range in the directive today, but keep to ourselves the idea that the Desk should have plenty of leeway. If the market dictates-- in the way it responds to what we're doing--that the federal funds rate should go temporarily to 15 percent, we'd let it go. I wouldn't worry about that. If sometime after 90 days--or it may take even longer--we find that this [new operating technique] has served its purpose, we can go back to including a federal funds range that is broad but nevertheless there, if we wish to. I think we have these options as we move along. A decision today to go to the technique described in Steve's and Peter's memo is not a decision for all time, either on the technique or obviously on the policy. We may wish to reverse it before we get locked in [at] too high [a rate], as Paul has said. If we believe in targets at all and believe that we have a responsibility to meet our targets, I think our best bet--not our riskiest--at this point is to take the bull by the horns and change our emphasis of operations. I'm probably getting ahead of myself or ahead of the group, but I would combine this with some increase in reserve requirements, 10/6/79 -18- particularly aimed at the larger banks where the tightness is not apparent. Our agricultural banks are tight as a drum. It's not needed there bur: it is needed for the bigger banks. And I would think that any discussion of the discount rate today would probably be premature; that would follow along with whatever the market is showing. But we should keep on the alert on a day-by-day basis to the way the market is responding to our shift in emphasis. And I would give considerable publicity to the change in emphasis. In my view this can be very important psychologically at home as well as abroad. CHAIR" VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is overall agreement in the passage. The speaker expresses support for the change in emphasis in operations and acknowledges the importance of psychological factors and the acceptance of a more monetarist approach. They also mention the option to reverse the decision if necessary. There is no argument or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 53.
 Roger Guffey MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I believe almost everybody who has spoken up until now has said that they would endorse the change in operating procedures. I'd just like to raise a voice, not necessarily in opposition to it but at least to question it. First of all, let me say that I agree that there's a need for something to be done today and that it has to be rather dramatic. Hopefully, it would include the Treasury, but if that's not in the works then we have to move ahead. But if I understand what is being proposed--the change in operating technique--it seems to me a very high risk venture, particularly in view of the fact that it has never been tried. To be sure, it has been studied to death. Moreover, I happen to be somewhat sympathetic to this kind of operating technique. But we are in a time of crisis. For us to move to a new technique that has never been tried will be viewed by the markets, it seems to me, as our grasping at the last straw, so to speak. And if indeed it doesn't work to get the aggregates in better position by the end of this year I think we would have shot our last round and missed. I think that's putting the Federal Reserve as a system in a very, very precarious position. Lastly, if I understand what is being proposed, I would say that the very same thing can be accomplished by using our present operating procedures simply by broadening the federal funds range and narrowing the aggregates ranges. We would have as much chance--or perhaps more chance because we have experience with it--of hitting the targets we're shooting at instead of starting to swim in new and untried waters. If we can get the public reaction that we're trying to get by operating with our present procedures, I would prefer to go that route rather than go into something that we know very little about. I happen to believe that we may be on the verge of moving into a recession but it isn't clear. And I think we do need some dramatic action. I would rather see a press announcement by you framed in the context of having a wider range for the federal funds rate, which certainly will be understood by the market though maybe not by the public. And it will probably be better understood by the market than our moving into a new operating procedure. That coupled together with a rather dramatic increase in the discount rate--and letting the fed funds rate move up to a fairly high level--would be a preferable action to me. However, I do recognize, as you mentioned earlier, that it's absolutely essential that we have a broad consensus [on whatever action we take today]. Accordingly, I will [not object1 if a consensus forms on the other side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. Roger Guffey questions and raises concerns about the proposed change in operating procedures, stating that it is a high-risk venture and that the Federal Reserve would be in a precarious position. He suggests that the same results could be achieved by using the present operating procedures.


Passage number 54.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Timlen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The only piece of information provided is the name "Mr. Timlen," which does not suggest any conflicting perspectives or opinions.


Passage number 55.
 10/6/79 -19- MR. TIMLEN. Mr. Chairman, it is clear to me that expectations of Some strong action by this group this weekend are at a high level. I'm not sure that the Committee should always respond to expectations, but in the circumstances today the proposal of combining something new and different with strong traditional steps has real appeal to me. For some time we've been hearing complaints that the United States is not dealing with the fundamentals. And in my mind, the rapid growth in the aggregates that we've been seeing is thought of as one of those important fundamentals. I'd say it is very important that the announcement connect this new technique with an effort to control the rapid growth in the money supply. The total package must not be perceived, as some have been in the past, as a flash in the pan. I'm not sure how well this will be understood. As a result, I would endorse those people who have strongly recommended that we have an in-depth explanation of this technique and its relationship to coping with the aggregates growth. I also agree with the remarks that Roger just made on the importance of a strong consensus coming out of this meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It primarily focuses on the speaker's personal thoughts and opinions regarding the need for action and the importance of explaining a new technique.


Passage number 56.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Governor Wallich without providing any further information or context, making it difficult to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 57.
 MR. WALLICH. I think the main argument in favor of the reserve strategy is that it allows us to take stronger action than we probably could by the other technique. in the other technique by the appearance of very high interest rates. In the new strategy interest rates become almost a by-product of a more forceful pursuit of the aggregates. I think we need stronger action because of the resurgence in inflation and the behavior of the aggregates and the dollar. I realize that this may involve a higher cost in terms of the length and depth of a recession. But I try to look beyond that and ask myself where we would be late in 1980 if very little inflation has been wrung out of the system and we resume an upward price trend from a much higher base. We are much more constrained Now, I wouldn't say that the proposed new technique is superior if the same strength of action could be taken by the existing methods. That's because the existing methods have the advantage that we know the interest rate and we don't run the risk of the rate going in the wrong direction and creating dollar problems. But I think the issue is really how strong an action we can take. And it seems clear that an action via the reserve strategy is capable of greater power. I've leaned toward that strategy for a long time, but I must confess increasingly less as I saw the interest rate becoming more important from the point of view of the dollar. There is that risk of interest rate uncertainty involved in the new strategy. We would have to guard against interest rates going in the wrong direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily discusses the benefits and drawbacks of the reserve strategy and expresses the author's personal preferences.


Passage number 58.
 MR. PARTEE. Which is what direction--up or down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a straightforward question asking for a choice between two options, "up" or "down."


Passage number 59.
 MR. WALLICH. it is quite clearly down. Upward we can control [through] money supply. We're aiming at a tight money supply, and that raises interest rates--or that is what we [are talking about]. But downward has a totally different implication. It involves a signal that we've switched policy and the markets are going to respond accordingly. Obviously, as we go into a recession there will be a time when interest rates will have to come down. They will probably come down by themselves if the time is right. And if it is feasible in terms of the exchange markets, then we should 10/6/79 -20 Iaccommodatel that and the more the better. But we need to watch this strategy in terms of what it produces for interest rates and for the exchange market so that we don’t get surprised by interest rate movements when they could be harmful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their perspective on controlling interest rates and the need to be cautious in order to avoid harmful interest rate movements.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 60.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just make a couple of comments. I‘m not sure it’s self-evident that in interest rate terms the new technique is stronger. It may or may not be, depending upon what happens to the money supply. I think that is inherent in the new techniqde. It also depends upon a judgment on how much traditional- type action we would take and I don’t think at this stage of the discussion we know the answer to those [questions]. We’ll never know the answer, no matter how long we talk, to what the money supply actually will do in coming months. And until we get further along in our conversation, we don’t know how strong our traditional-type actions will be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker suggests that it is not self-evident that the new technique is stronger in terms of interest rates, as it depends on factors such as the money supply and traditional-type actions. They also express uncertainty and state that the answers to these questions are unknown at this stage of the discussion.


Passage number 61.
 MR. MAYO. Paul, at some point I think we need to hear from your associates in New York as to how they would operate under this technique if we adopt it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It states that Mr. Mayo believes it would be beneficial to hear from Paul's associates in New York about how they would operate under a certain technique.


Passage number 62.
 I think that is part of-- CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We’ll get into that. I’m just getting general reactions now--and I think they should be rather general--of the type that we have had so far. Let me just say, too, that on the issue of interest rates coming down there probably are going to be differences of opinion; there always are. But I don’t think we can sit here today and say it would be a terrible thing if interest rates went up to 14 or 15 percent on the new technique, just taking some numbers that are used [in the staff paper]. if they come down off that peak to the neighborhood of where they are now, that may be inherent in the new technique if it’s successful under present projections of the money supply. And I’m not sure it’s terribly alarming--to me anyway--in the exchange market sense. It’s a matter of judgment. But I don‘t think we can get ourselves into a position where no matter how high rates go at some point with the new technique, any decline from a new peak is in itself a disaster. it might be great. It might actually encourage the feeling that we’re over the peak. I don’t think we’re in a situation where the interest rate differential vis a vis German interest rates--whether it is 5 percent or 7 percent--is an important market consideration. That implies a little more stable psychological atmosphere. Let me say it is overwhelmed by the psychology of the situation. Who is next here on the list. Ernie Baughman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and acknowledging that there may be differences of opinion on the issue of interest rates. They are also discussing the possibility of interest rates going up or down and expressing their own judgment on the matter. There is no explicit disagreement or contention with any other person or viewpoint.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 63.
 MR. BAUGHMAN. M r .  Chairman, i picked up on your earlier observation that we can get there either way--with some modification of our present technique or by shifting emphasis to reserves to a greater degree. I’m somewhat inclined to think that if we do announce that we have made a rather basic change in our mode of operation--in our intermediate if not ultimate operational target--that unless it obviously is a disaster fairly soon, it is something we are stuck with for some period of time. I don’t have any strong feeling as to which way we try to get where it seems we want to go at the moment. We can do it through the route of a monetary aggregates directive under our present format, with a broad range for the federal funds rate, lifted, and with a continued focus on targets set in terms of monetary aggregates. Or we can go the route that is suggested in the wire of 10/6/79 -21- putting greater emphasis essentially on intermediate targets or reserves. [Secretary's note: The memo entitled "Proposal for Reserve Aggregates as Guide to Open Market Operations," dated October 4, 1979 was wired to Reserve Bank Presidents.] But it seems to me that there's a good possibility that if we adopt that [latter approach] we will be read as de-emphasizing rather than additionally emphasizing the monetary aggregates as targets or objectives of policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and lack of strong feeling about whether to continue using the current method or to shift emphasis to reserves. They also mention the possibility of being perceived as de-emphasizing monetary aggregates if they choose the latter approach. This suggests that there may be differing opinions or debate about the best approach to achieving their goals.


Passage number 64.
 MR. PARTEE. Those are the objectives.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only states Mr. Partee's opinion or statement without any clear indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 65.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think so, but that will come out in a later discussion, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Although the speaker mentions that the topic of contention might come up in a later discussion, it does not indicate any current or ongoing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 66.
 MR. BAUGHMAN. We will be read as accepting some reserve measure as the objective--a kind of M target in the financial sector before we get over to the real sector. As I say, I agree with your suggestion that we can get where we want to go by either route. It would seem to me that it might be appropriate to take [action] in two steps. The first step would be an announcement that we are substantially broadening the operating range as far as the federal funds rate is concerned and that we are committing ourselves to more effective control of the monetary aggregates by that process. It seems to me that that would get the necessary attention in the market, and operationally I don't really see that it's much different.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Baughman, is expressing agreement with the suggestion, and is proposing a specific course of action that he believes would be effective.


Passage number 67.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage provided is incomplete and does not contain any information or context to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 68.
 MR. WINN. Paul, during this past period, the rumors were everywhere. One of the ones that bothers me the worst is the feeling of an explosion on the wage front. For example, we see banks violating the guidelines pretty generally. knowledgeable friends seem to be predicting 20 percent increases next year and that really frightens me. They all had solutions with respect to what we ought to be doing. But they never have as a solution that we should do nothing. So I've tried to [assess] what the risks and implications are of doing nothing in this area and that was rather frightening. Being s-ympathetic to what you're proposing, I wonder if we really have tried to look at the risks inherent in this. We've talked about the price on the international side and so forth, but what are some of the risks here. While we say we don't emphasize interest rates, the implication of this [proposal] is considerably higher rates. And if we think about that, what does that mean at least in the short run in terms of money flows. What does that mean in terms of those with prime plus 3 percent embedded in their costs. What does it mean to those institutions with short-term funding. What does it mean in terms of the commitments and lines of bank credit that will be accelerated. In other words, what are the risks on this side that we have to grapple with as well as the risks that we've talked about on the other side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Winn, expresses concern and fear about the possibility of wage increases and higher interest rates. He questions whether they have considered the risks involved in implementing certain proposals. There is disagreement or contention regarding the appropriate actions to address these concerns and risks.


Passage number 69.
 Some of my most CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think some of those will come out later in a more detailed discussion. Mr. Rice. M R .  RICE. Mr. Chairman, I favor moving to the new operating technique--the change of emphasis--at this time. I believe our current approach has not been working and we need to change our style. But in changing our style in this case we probably also are changing our strategy at the same time. I believe it's more than just a matter 1 0 / 6 / 7 9  -22- of operating technique, though I could be wrong. First of all, the psychological impact of a change in operating technique will be strong. I think it will be strong not only in domestic markets but also in foreign markets. In my view the foreign markets will read such an announcement as an expression of our determination to control the money supply, and that will have salutary effects. It seems to me that up to now what we’ve been doing is pushing up interest rates, largely in response to market expectations, and we‘ve been assuming in effect that we know what the appropriate level of interest rates should be. And when the market wants high interest rates, we end up supplying more reserves and the money supply increases. I think that if we moved to a technique where we decide what the money supply should be--and we operate directly on the reserve base to get as close to the level of aggregates that we want-- we would stand a better chance of producing the kinds of results we would like to see. The good thing about moving to this operating technique is that, contrary to some of the views that have been expressed, we introduce new uncertainty into the market. I think that’s a good thing. The new uncertainty will have the effect of cooling some of the speculative activity and perhaps have an impact on those demands for credit that are based purely on inflationary expectations and on the assumption that money will always be available at any level of interest rates that the Fed tries to establish. Probably the first reaction will be a sharp rise in short-term interest rates. But I do believe that the rise will probably be short-lived and that the period over which interest rates will remain high is much likely to be shorter than would be the case if we continue to follow our present approach of gradually ratcheting up interest rates in response to market pulls. Obviously, there are high risks involved; these risks have been outlined. But in the current circumstances I think these risks are acceptable. And in any case the risks are less than we would be accepting if we continued to follow our present approach. I would, however, like to have it understood that the money supply targets--the aggregates targets that we set--are important here. They are very important for the success of the program. I would also like to have it understood that interest rates should be flexible downward as well as upward. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It is primarily a statement of the speaker's opinion and beliefs about a proposed change in operating technique.


Passage number 70.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black. M R .  BLACK. Mr. Chairman, Governor Rice has made many of the points that I wanted to make, but I’d just like to say that I feel better about what I‘ve heard around this table than I’ve ever felt at any time since I’ve been attending these meetings. I think we are now on the road to formulating better monetary policy. I often think of our position as being analogous to that of a monopolist in the sense that we control the money supply. A monopolist has a choice of controlling either price or quantity but he can never control both. I believe we’ve been trying to control the quantity of money by setting the price and we have misjudged. We’ve jiggled the price, in terms of the federal funds rate, one way or the other, and we‘ve usually met with less than complete success in judging what quantity of money will be forthcoming from that. So, I think this gives us a much closer handle on the aggregates than we would have under any of these other approaches, although conceptually we certainly could do it by the old 10/6/79 -23- method if we had a wide enough band on the federal funds rate. But I don’t think we would know what federal funds rate we would have to choose in order to get the desired rate of growth in the aggregates. Now, I do think there are some broad considerations--and we’ll touch on some of these later--that we ought to address before we close today. The first is that the discount rate is going to play a very important role under this operating technique. If we have greater or less fluctuation in the level of borrowing, that’s going to make it more or less difficult to hit our total reserve target. So I think we‘re going to have to be very careful in choosing the appropriate discount rate. It will not necessarily be what we thought was appropriate in the past. My second point is that I think in your press conference you ought to state, among other things, that we would expect the federal funds rate, at least initially, to fluctuate more than it has in the past. You should also stress that there are various slippages in this mechanism; it is not a precise tool. I think you should also say why we have taken the action we have taken on the discount rate, because it will be important to explain why we’ve put it where we have. Another point I would emphasize, as the staff did, is that we are going to need a pretty wide range on the federal funds rate: it may mean that we have to let it move up sharply--or we may not--in the beginning. I agree with Henry Wallich that we need to watch it, at least initially, on the down side. I’d be inclined to put a floor on the down side until we know what the market perception is on this [approach]. That‘s because falling interest rates very early in the game, even though we appear to be controlling the aggregates. might be counter-productive. But I would want to see that floor removed as soon as the aggregates come under control. If I’ve seemed hawkish to some of you in advocating that we push up the federal funds rate to bring the aggregates under control when I thought they were growing too rapidly I think you‘ll view me as very dovish if I see them growing less rapidly than I believe they should. We have to be prepared to let the funds rate go down. Another point I would stress, which is in the material that was handed out by the staff, is that we have a problem in specifying the width of this band--whether it’s for a day, a week, or a weekly average and whether we take into consideration the settlement date and that sort of thing. My guess is that Emmett Rice has diagnosed correctly what will happen to interest rates; they will go up initially as people rush to obtain funds because they perceive that the supply will not be as readily available. But I think also that rates are going to move back down, partly because of the elimination of some inflation expectations and also because I believe we are indeed slipping into recession, which would naturally cause them to drop. Finally, as we get into the long run, there are a couple of items that we are going to have to think about. An example would be structural changes that we ought to consider making to improve our control mechanism. One such change might be lengthening the reserve period to maybe a month or we might want to drop the lag part, although I’m not persuaded on that. Certainly we would want to get rid of the graduated reserve requirements to the extent we could. 10/6/79 -24 And, if we lose the Merrill case, I think we’re going to be forced into this kind of targeting technique anyway. If we were to announce on the day of the meeting what in fact the federal funds band was, I think we could have some very disquieting effects in the market, whereas the announcement of a change in our money supply target would not really tell the market a great deal. Only the most sophisticated or lucky would be able to figure out the interest rate implications of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is expressing his approval and support for the new approach to monetary policy and offering some suggestions and considerations for the future.


Passage number 71.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 72.
 MR. ROOS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I assume that my credibility with you and my colleagues would be severely jeopardized if I came out flatly in opposition to this proposal. [Laughter] I also was told by my father to keep my mouth shut when things are going well. So all I’ll say is briefly: God bless you for doing this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing support and gratitude for a proposal.


Passage number 73.
 [Laughter] MR. GUFFEY. I would say that when Bob Black and Emmett Rice agree, I would expect everybody else to be able to agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and expects everyone else to agree as well.


Passage number 74.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There are one or two things that I didn’t agree with here but that’s okay. Do you want to take a little coffee break or not. SEVERAL. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any clear indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 75.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. we will return to a more detailed exposition unless somebody wants to say something at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they will continue with a more detailed explanation unless someone in the audience has something to contribute or say at that moment.


Passage number 76.
 MR. ROOS. Recognizing that, M r .  Chairman, rather than try to plug in numbers today and agree on detailed procedures--if, as I assume, we have a consensus on a change of approach--wouldn’t it be 10/6/79 -29- wise to ask the staff to work on that. Perhaps we could ask the Board staff as well as selected or interested staff representatives from some of the Reserve Banks to wrestle with the details of how to do this as well as the details of the specifications. That could be done between now and the time we would normally come here for our meeting in a couple of weeks. That might make sense rather than trying to work with these figures that we have seen for a very short time and that our research staffs, in most instances, have not even had an opportunity to react to. If you made this announcement on Monday and if there were a 10-day period for staff to try to put together more [precise] specifications and procedures, those could be circulated and we could discuss them at our regular FOMC meeting. Would that be more productive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting a course of action and asking for input on whether it would be more productive.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 77.
 Some of us are not professional economists and to sign off on specific numbers and specific details today - - CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will make two comments, Mr. Roos. I don’t think it would be more productive because I hope the Committee as a whole, at this particular meeting at least, will not get into that detail. We will be in an absolute morass if we attempt to arrive at some judgment as to whether the staff has made all these translations correctly and on precisely how we should proceed. If we decide to go on this approach, I believe we are going to have to go on it with the Committee indicating only broad guidelines. There is enough judgment involved that we can get a good sense of how the Committee wants this process to operate in a very uncertain world. And even in a two-week perspective, I don’t think we can attempt to have a technical resolution of all these detailed issues. There will be plenty of opportunity for that kind of [analysis] in the next few months and it would be relevant in terms of any further decision at the end of the year on whether or not to stay with this procedure. But inherent in the situation today, and I‘ll just put it very simply, the Committee has to have faith that it can give some general guidance and that we--basically the staff here at the Board under Mr. Axilrod’s direction--will translate that as best they can, within these general parameters, into operational numbers. And then, it has to have faith that Mr. Sternlight will use his best judgment in taking the figures that are produced here [in Washington] and deciding on precisely which day he will provide how many reserves to the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage shows disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 78.
 MR. ROOS. Well, I thought we were going to get into the numbers. I was off base there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement by admitting that their previous assumption about discussing numbers was incorrect.


Passage number 79.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, any way we go we have to get into the money supply number. If we’re going to go this way, the Committee is going to have to make a decision on the federal funds constraint and what biases--if I can put it that way--we want to introduce into the operations, particularly in the next couple of weeks. A number of people have referred to a point on which I fully agree: After going through this hullabaloo, if we have made some miscalculation here and the federal funds rate drops by a percentage point, say, next week, we are in a hell of a fix. So, I assume we would want to bias it on the up side. However these calculations come out, we want to have some sense of what the Committee wants to do in that respect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the need to make a decision and establish a plan regarding the money supply number and the federal funds constraint. They acknowledge the potential risks and express their assumption that the Committee would prefer to bias it on the upside. The speaker seeks clarity on the Committee's preferences and does not express any disagreement or contention with the ideas presented.


Passage number 80.
 10/6/79 -30 MR. ROOS. Couldn't your announcement say that over a mandatory period of a couple of weeks we are going to do this in an orderly, gradual, manner. Do we have to do it right from the beginning. M R .  COLDWELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Roos is simply suggesting a different approach or timeline for implementing a plan, but there is no explicit disagreement or conflict between the speakers.


Passage number 81.
 Yes MR. MAYO. No way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers are stating their opinions or emphasizing their point of view.


Passage number 82.
 MR. MORRIS. We are going to have to go through a learning procedure anyway. Even if we were to postpone it for a couple of weeks, we have a lot to learn and we might as well start learning now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that there is a need for a learning procedure and suggests starting it immediately rather than postponing it.


Passage number 83.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I personally don't think that the nature of the problems we have are susceptible to sitting down around the table and saying: "Do we use this figure or do we not use this figure." We can argue about that kind of thing if we are willing to adopt this experiment in a fairly rigid way for a period of a year. I, frankly, am not willing to take the risks of [operating totally on the basis of] some long-term equation or mechanical relationship that we know can be way off in a period of a month or in any particular week--or even in a 3-month period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 84.
 MS. TEETERS. But we don't want to keep the funds rate biased upward too long.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no disagreement or contention expressed in this passage. The statement simply expresses a concern about not keeping the funds rate biased upward for too long.


Passage number 85.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. Well, inherent in this technique, the Committee can keep it biased however it wants to keep it biased. We have to discuss that. But in the mechanics of the process that I described, let's say we biased it for the first two or three weeks, quite deliberately, and we were wrong. It turns out that in fact we didn't have to bias it to keep the money supply under control. But we biased it in that direction because we wanted to make extra sure that [the money supply] didn't rise. The result would be a slower growth in the money supply four, five, or six weeks down the pike than we otherwise would have gotten. Then, out of the mechanics of the system, unless we made a quite deliberate decision to bias it in the other direction, we'd have the expense of biasing it tight in the first place and biasing it easy down the road. Now, the Committee obviously can make a new decision at that point. The biasing is, I suppose, where the Committee thinks the major risks lie. Take [the current] money supply figure. It's already in the top of the range, so we'd be much more sensitive to missing it on the up side than to a little miss on the low side. Particularly initially, we would bias it in that direction, apart from the interest rate implications.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is discussing the mechanics and potential biases in the process, but there is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 86.
 MR. ROOS. In your announcement Monday, will you announce any figures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Roos will be making an announcement about figures on Monday.


Passage number 87.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. We would announce that we want to be within the targets for the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply states a desire or intention to be within certain targets for the year.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 88.
 MR. ROOS. Right, but not any more precise figures. What I'm worried about, for example--and I'm not trying to get specific--is the 8 percent monetary base figure referred to in this document. Our research staff said that if the people who watch this saw an 8 percent figure for monetary base growth, that would immediately destroy the credibility of the whole effort.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The speaker expresses concern about the 8 percent monetary base figure mentioned in the document and suggests that it could harm the credibility of the effort. This indicates disagreement or contention about the potential impact of that specific figure.


Passage number 89.
 1 0 / 6 / 7 9  -31- MR. WALLICH. I think that’s purely an [incidental] number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 90.
 MR. PARTEE. They will, of course, be able to make a calculation if we say we’re determined to be within the targets for the year. They will see how much more room there is for the remainder of the year for growth in the aggregates that we have been using as [our target] variables.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that if "we" say we are determined to be within the targets for the year, others will be able to calculate the amount of room for growth in the mentioned variables.


Passage number 91.
 MR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it consists of just one phrase, "Mr. Black."


Passage number 92.
 If we give them the adjusted figure for M1-- remember we cited the 1/2 to 4-1/2 percent-- MR. PARTEE. We might have to underline that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting that they might need to highlight or emphasize the adjusted figure for M1 when citing the range of 1/2 to 4-1/2 percent.


Passage number 93.
 MR. BLACK. We are going to have to clarify that one, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no apparent contention or disagreement in the passage. "We are going to have to clarify that one, I think" indicates that Mr. Black believes there is a need for clarification or further discussion, but it does not necessarily imply a disagreement with anyone else.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 94.
 MR. COLDWELL. MI. Chairman, I wonder if we shouldn’t at least make the initial decision if you are ready to go that far. Or if you want to discuss the specifications, which M r .  Axilrod can [expound on], we can go that route. ought to discuss specifications. But in my mind, at this point we’ve made no decision to go in this direction. I think that’s a decision we should make at the end oE the road, and citing some specifications may put some concreteness on this discussion in terms of whether we want to tolerate the risk. I just want to come back at the end to the question that M r .  Guffey put very well in stating the other case. There is a danger of a too high [funds] rate and there is a question of all this publicity and then falling short. There are these analytic difficulties: the instability in the demand function for money and the [multiplier] relationships that we work with. There is the problem that we may run into a situation where, in effect, our collective judgment tells us to do something different than what the aggregates are telling us to do. Do we want to get locked into a procedure that prejudices us so far toward worrying about the aggregates. Those are the questions that should be in our minds, questions we want to return to before making a final decision here. [We need to weigh that] against the knowledge that we can do something very comparable, to the best of our wisdom, by devising a package using the traditional technique--or the traditional technique as modified somewhat to accomplish the same immediate purpose. So that’s the final question. But let’s [proceed].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker raises questions and concerns about the decision to go in a certain direction and the potential risks involved. They also suggest considering alternative options.


Passage number 95.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can go that route.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 96.
 Maybe we MR. COLDWELL. I was merely raising the question of whether you wanted to get the specifications of the traditional as well as the new procedure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This statement is simply an inquiry about obtaining additional information.


Passage number 97.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don’t we [discuss the specifications], unless somebody wants to ask more about the mechanics. That will come out to some degree in the discussion anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests discussing the specifications unless someone has further questions about the mechanics, as the discussion will naturally touch upon them.


Passage number 98.
 MR. WALLICH. I‘d like to understand a little better the role of the discount window and the discount rate in this procedure. If we bias the reserve path in one direction or another, that will influence the volume of borrowing. That will then influence interest rates, which in turn will affect borrowing by virtue of the spread between the discount rate and the funds rate. We could leave it to that 10/6/79 -32- mechanism to control borrowing, we could leave it to the administration of the discount window to control it, or we could move the discount rate. It's not clear to me which way might be the best.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing a lack of clarity and seeking understanding about the role of the discount window and the discount rate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 99.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if we adopt this approach, that is one of the issues I had in mind when I suggested that the Reserve Bank Presidents might want to meet for further discussion this afternoon. One of the problems with this approach, it seems to me, is that the administration of the discount window is very confused at the moment. Inherent in the way we have been operating--to put it bluntly--there is no legitimate reason to borrow. Banks borrow because of the rate spread, but that's not really a legitimate reason. Now, that ignores computer breakdowns and that kind of thing. Except for accidental circumstances or late on a Wednesday--and here I'm talking about the larger banks--under our present guidelines there really isn't a legitimate reason for banks to borrow from the discount window, as I understand it. I know I have had the experience in New York where the discount officer happily comes in to tell me that he called up bank x, which borrowed for the first time in six months, a few hundred million dollars. He asked them why they were borrowing. And the bank official cautiously says: "What the hell, I hadn't borrowed in a while and your rate looked pretty low." And the discount officer replies: "Well, you can't borrow for that reason." Now, if a Reserve Bank really enforces that kind of discipline, it doesn't get many borrowings. But it's obviously not enforced evenly. And I suspect there are no additional guidelines we can give the discount officers at the moment. We have to let events take their course. We have been doing it for years, and I suppose we can do it for a few more months. It will raise this question in the bankers' minds. I think we will have to develop a more coherent policy in a few months and it might be useful for the Presidents to think about these implications.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, there is disagreement or contention regarding the administration of the discount window. The speaker expresses their concern about the confusion and lack of legitimate reasons for banks to borrow from the discount window. They also mention that the enforcement of borrowing guidelines is not consistent, indicating a disagreement or contention within the system.


Passage number 100.
 MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, if I might add a point. If the Committee goes this route, I was planning to have a conference call with the discount window officers. My intent would not be to say anything about their administrative procedures but to explain that they might expect more volatile movements in borrowing than under existing procedures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 101.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Whatever they are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Whatever they are" does not indicate contention or disagreement. It is open-ended and does not express a conflicting opinion.


Passage number 102.
 MR. AXILROD. I wanted the discount officers to be aware that they shouldn't be shocked if one bank is in and another one is out, because the funds rate might exhibit more volatility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact or informing the discount officers about potential volatility in the funds rate.


Passage number 103.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What I visualize happening--but it may not if we move the discount rate frequently enough--is that with the volatility in the funds rate, more and more banks will be tempted to borrow despite the presumed guideline against it. So the discipline that now exists will break down, and the same level of borrowings will mean something quite different than it means now. But it's very hard to measure that. How do we prevent that from happening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presenting a potential scenario and expressing difficulty in measuring or preventing it.


Passage number 104.
 MR. BLACK. They might arbitrage out some of the fluctuations we would otherwise have in the federal funds rate, too. 10/6/79 -33- CmIRMAN VOLCKER. No question that the federal funds rate will be influenced by the discount rate. It is now, but it will be more so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Both Mr. Black and Chairman Volcker seem to agree on the influence of the discount rate on the federal funds rate.


Passage number 105.
 MR. BLACK. It seems to me that the main [objective] ought to be to set the discount rate at a level--if we can figure out what that is--that would reduce the volatility of borrowing, which would enable us to get at total reserves more precisely. I think that would mean that we should try to keep the discount rate at a penalty rate most of the time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Black, is expressing his opinion and suggesting a course of action, but there is no disagreement or conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 106.
 That, of course, has implications for our-- CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that is the implication of this technique in the long run but not in the short run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the perspective of the speaker regarding the implications of a technique both in the long and short run.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 107.
 MR. EASTBURN. There is a question here of how the Reserve Banks should report all this to their boards of directors. I think some of the sharper directors will raise questions about what the role of the discount rate is and what their role is with respect to this new mechanism. We are going to need to consider this. My guess would be that we’d view this as a special program for a special period and that we’d probably want to handle it more through the administration of the window than to develop a whole new procedure to make the discount rate a flexible one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Eastburn anticipates that some directors will raise questions about the role of the discount rate and their own role in relation to the new mechanism. This suggests a potential disagreement on how to handle the situation and whether a new procedure is necessary.


Passage number 108.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I haven’t thought about it a lot, but I presume that the discount rate would be more flexible but not so much more flexible [as to preclude1 a variety of requests from various Banks in a timely fashion. So there wouldn’t be any special problem. I think we are going to have a lot more requests for discount rate changes. But we’ll need them to provide a menu of choices in the short run as to where we set the discount rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply presenting their thoughts on the potential flexibility of the discount rate and their prediction of an increase in requests for rate changes.


Passage number 109.
 MR. MORRIS. You may remember, Paul, back in 1974 we were operating the discount window with a 4 percent spread between the funds rate and the discount rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a fact or reminiscing about a past event.


Passage number 110.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we can do that, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses their belief that they can also achieve something.


Passage number 111.
 MR. COLDWELL. Sure, we can do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a simple statement where Mr. Coldwell agrees to do something.


Passage number 112.
 MR. MORRIS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage based on the given information. The passage needs to be provided in order to analyze the presence of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 113.
 Administration of the window can control-- CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, it can ultimately control it if we make that decision. Did you want to say something, Phil.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply discussing the control and decision-making abilities of the window administration.


Passage number 114.
 MR. COLDWELL. Well, M r .  Chairman, it seems to me that there are at least four major decisions the Committee needs to make if we are going to move to a reserve targeting procedure. I‘m not saying that is the [decision]; as you said, you want to come back to that. The first decision is what target we should aim at. That’s [addressed in the memo in the footnote] at the bottom of page 3 .  My preference would be in between the two alternatives shown there. I don’t like the idea of aiming at the upper half [because of] the potential for a miss and I question whether we can get as far down as the midpoint of the target. So I would suggest to the Committee that we might aim for 5 percent growth in M1 for the full year, which would 10/6/79 -34- connote something around 3 percent for September to December and a quarterly average, if I calculated this right, at about 4-1/2 percent. the borrowing is the key there. If we're going to bias it on the basis of the present borrowings it would be $1.2 billion. I would allow a little more leeway, say, up to $1.5 billion. The second decision is how much bias to put in, and I think The next decision, as I read this paper, is what to do if CDs stray off path badly. That, I think we would have to play somewhat by ear but if they really take off, then I would adjust the nonborrowed path. Finally, it seems to me, we have a fundamental question of where to constrain the federal funds rate. I would suggest to the Committee the possibility of a range of 11-1/2 to 14-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is offering their own suggestions and preferences, but there is no direct opposition or argument present.


Passage number 115.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me comment. Let's take what you said about CDs as given without objection and reduce the variables by one. You suggested one particular way of biasing this and I would just note that in some sense it depends upon what you mean by bias. If you fill in a money supply figure of 3 percent from September through December against the projection of 4.6 percent, in concept you have already biased it toward higher interest rates. Then to specify borrowing above the current level in the context of this operating procedure would imply a double biasing, I suppose. Aiming for 3 percent would be biasing it in favor of higher interest rates and then you would take out a little more insurance by raising the borrowing level. I think mechanically that's the way it comes out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing different ways of biasing and does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 116.
 MR. COLDWELL. And I am speaking in terms of the next 2 to 3 weeks with this sort of biased arrangement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply discussing a biased arrangement for the next 2 to 3 weeks without any conflicting opinions mentioned.


Passage number 117.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, in the money supply sense you [can] call that a bias. That would be [a bias] for the quarter. I guess it's only a 2- to 3-week bias in the sense of higher interest rates. M R .  PARTEE. But if we put in 3 percent for the money supply for September to December, Phil, given the fact that we can't affect October--assume it comes in at 4-1/2 percent--that means we are putting in a November-December growth of about 2 percent. The demand function is still there and we can affect the supply, but it would mean that we would be moving toward a negative number for December. That's really a very tight bias.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 118.
 MR. MORRIS. Well, if we follow Phil's formula, we do have a little room to miss on the up side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply discussing a formula and mentioning that there is a small margin for error on the positive side.


Passage number 119.
 If we shoot for the-- MR. PARTEE. Well, the 4.6 percent [growth in M1 for September to December] is not at the very top. That gives us 5.3 percent for the year and the top of the M1 range is 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no explicit contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the growth in M1 for September to December and comparing it to the top of the M1 range.


Passage number 120.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Growth reaches the top for M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that growth reaches the top for M2.


Passage number 121.
 MR. PARTEE. Well, the M2 is a little [above] and M3 is below. There has been a shift from the thrift institutions into the banks and that accounts for some of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining their analysis of the M2 and M3, suggesting that the shift from thrift institutions to banks might be a factor in the observed changes.


Passage number 122.
 l0/6/79 -35- CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 123.
 Well, these numbers are illustrative MS. TEETERS. What is the projection for October, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage provides a request for information but does not involve any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 124.
 MR. AXILROD. For Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only states that Mr. Axilrod speaks on behalf of someone or something, but it does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 125.
 MS. TEETERS. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: There is disagreement or contention in the passage because of the use of the word "Yes."


Passage number 126.
 MR. AXILROD. 4.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a simple statement that mentions a person's name without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 127.
8 MR. PARTEE. We already have to have a November-December averaging below October.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement made by Mr. Partee is simply stating a requirement or condition without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments presented.


Passage number 128.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether this facilitates the discussions or not. Let's for the moment concentrate only on the money supply and the federal funds constraint. Those are enough variables to consider. And we'll consider any further bias later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is simply stating their uncertainty about whether a certain factor facilitates discussions, suggesting to focus on specific variables in the meantime, and suggesting to address any potential bias afterwards.


Passage number 129.
 MR. B A U G W .  I find Governor Coldwell's suggestion fairly reasonable, all things considered.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states that the speaker finds Governor Coldwell's suggestion fairly reasonable, suggesting agreement or approval rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 130.
 MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I would like to see a wider range on the federal funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Rice, is expressing his desire for a wider range on the federal funds rate.


Passage number 131.
 MR. COLDWELL. Wider, Emmett.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement made by Mr. Coldwell.


Passage number 132.
 MR. RICE. Yes, wider on both the low and the high sides. I would like to see something like 9 percent on the low side and 15 to 16 percent on the high side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Rice simply expresses his preference for wider percentages on both the low and high sides.


Passage number 133.
 MR. WALLICH. What we would do if it went to 9 percent-- intervene in the [exchange] market in very large amounts to offset the effects.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 134.
 MR. RICE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no direct indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of the word "yes" does not necessarily imply disagreement or contention in this context.


Passage number 135.
 MR. WALLICH. And probably be defeated. M R .  RICE. Why would we probably be defeated. M R .  WALLICH. Because it's not the effect of the interest rate as such. That doesn't play a big role in the short run. The exchange market would be the symbol but all over the world they would be saying the new procedure really is a form of easing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 136.
 MR. RICE. I really don't see how they could say that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 137.
 MR. COLDWELL. Well, I don't think we need to set this for all time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the opinion of Mr. Coldwell.


Passage number 138.
 It seems to me that a fed funds rate constraint of 11-1/2 to 14-1/2 percent for 2 or 3 weeks-- CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can come back to the question of scheduling the next meeting. My own instinct at this point is to delay what would have been the regular meeting for a week just to provide another week's experience. back. We'd be coming back in less than 2 weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the possibility of delaying a meeting for another week to gather more experience.


Passage number 139.
 MR. ALTMANN. Yes, a week from Tuesday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 140.
 It seems awfully quick to come 10/6/79 -36- CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My own thought is why not delay it a week so we would have another week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a thought or suggestion.


Passage number 141.
 MR. TIMLEN. We have another event associated with the next meeting--the annual meeting of the retirement committee. That meeting is about the Federal Reserve’s retirement system and it brings all the Presidents here. Then they would have to come back again the next week for the FOMC meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating the schedule of events and meetings related to the Federal Reserve's retirement system. There is no explicit contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 142.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe we can even change that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is not expressing any contention or disagreement. It suggests the possibility of changing something and does not present opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 143.
 MR. TIMLEN. We’d just need to know in order to change our schedules.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Timlen is simply stating a fact and indicating that they only need to know something in order to make a change.


Passage number 144.
 MR. COLDWELL. Well, it wouldn’t be too bad just to have an informal discussion at the time of the next scheduled meeting, even if you decided you didn’t want to have a regular FOMC meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply suggests that having an informal discussion during the next scheduled meeting, instead of a regular FOMC meeting, would not be a bad idea.


Passage number 145.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We may not even be having a regular meeting then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement does not involve any disagreement or contention. It is simply expressing uncertainty about the occurrence of a regular meeting.


Passage number 146.
 MR. BAUGHMAN. Is it presumed, Mr. Chairman, that we would release to the public the same items of information as we do now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a question posed by Mr. Baughman regarding the release of information to the public.


Passage number 147.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you mean in terms of the actual directive. I see two things that would be in the directive. One is the money supply target, however expressed, from now to the end of the year. And the other is the federal funds constraint. M R .  MAYO. But with the usual lag. This would not be in your press release Monday or today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is discussing different components of a directive, specifically the money supply target and the federal funds constraint. There is no indication of disagreement or conflicting opinions between the speakers.


Passage number 148.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the following passage as it only states the title or position of Chairman Volcker without any additional context or information.


Passage number 149.
 NO MR. COLDWELL. We do get caught with that, don’t we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response is a statement agreeing with Mr. Coldwell.


Passage number 150.
 That’s because we would have to release this-- CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let’s worry about that later. I don’t see that we have to release it before 30 days, but we will decide that subsequently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion about not needing to release something before 30 days and suggesting that the decision can be made later.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 151.
 MS. TEETERS. I think Phil’s target [proposal] is too strict. In a sense, he’s choking [the money supply]. And that seems to me ridiculous, given the underlying state of the economy as we see it. I think if we aimed to be within the upper part of the range [for the year]--aimed for 4.6 percent [for September to December]--we’d tend to offset the dangers of putting this economy into an actual tailspin. It’s all right to control the money supply, but we don‘t have to cut it off completely, Phil, which is what your proposal would do for the last two months of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Ms. Teeters disagrees with Phil's proposal to strictly control the money supply, stating that it would be ridiculous given the state of the economy. She suggests aiming for a higher range to avoid the danger of a tailspin.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 152.
 MR. PARTEE. I must say that I agree with Nancy. If this is the nature of the detail, then I can‘t agree to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. 

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Partee, is expressing disagreement with the nature of the detail mentioned earlier. He states that he cannot agree to it.


Passage number 153.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the thing to do at the moment is just to concentrate on the money supply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the speaker's opinion on what they believe should be the focus at the moment.


Passage number 154.
 10/6/79 -31- MR. PARTEE. Well, if you want to go around the table, I would view the figures in the right-hand column [at the bottom of page 31 as quite appropriate objectives. I would be prepared to bias the initial funds rate range. Oh I forgot, you don‘t want [us to address] the funds rate yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their view and acknowledging that they forgot about a specific request.


Passage number 155.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have to sometime; let’s discuss the whole bias issue. We can [talk about] both the funds rate range and the money supply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests discussing the issue of bias and considering both the funds rate range and the money supply.


Passage number 156.
 MR. PARTEE. I would leave the money supply [range unchanged] and bias it with the funds rate range in the initial go-around. Then we can review the funds rate range depending on progress. I would point out that with that projection for the first month [of the quarter] being above the 4.6 percent--and September deposits have determined reserves for the first 2 weeks of October--we already have a bias in the money supply €or the initial two weeks of operation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is giving their suggestion on how to handle the money supply and bias it with the funds rate range. They also provide a projection and point out an existing bias in the money supply. There is no opposing viewpoint or disagreement present.


Passage number 157.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I’ll let that go. I won’t get into that technical point of whether we bias the operation--since the reserves of the forthcoming week are already in the bag--during that week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker mentions that they won't get into a technical point, suggesting that they are avoiding any contention or disagreement on the matter.


Passage number 158.
 MR. PARTEE. Yes, sure we do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee simply states that they do have something.


Passage number 159.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I think the answer is that we [start with higher] borrowings that first week. We start, even though we know we can’t affect the level of reserves that week. M R .  BLACK. We can affect deposits in that week, even though we are addressing the reserve needs of two weeks hence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they believe the answer is that they start with higher borrowings in the first week, even though they know they can't affect the level of reserves that week. They also mention that they can affect deposits in that week, even though they are addressing the reserve needs of two weeks in the future. The passage does not present any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 160.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We might affect deposits in that week. M R .  BLACK. And that‘s really what we are after, so I don‘t really think [money supply growth] is in the bag for October, Chuck. M R .  COLDWELL. I don’t either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Black and Mr. Coldwell express doubts about the money supply growth being achievable in October. Thus, their statements suggest a disagreement or contention.


Passage number 161.
 MR. PARTEE. I don’t think we are going to affect it much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee simply expresses his opinion that they will not have much impact.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 162.
 MR. BLACK. I agree that this is not going to affect it a lot, but conceptually it isn’t in the bag yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is a slight disagreement or contention in the passage. The phrase "conceptually it isn't in the bag yet" suggests that the speaker, Mr. Black, has a different viewpoint or opinion than others regarding a certain concept or idea.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 163.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it’s a matter of degree. We have two proposals: one for 3 percent M1 growth and one for 4.6 percent. M R .  MAYO. I would like to throw a third one on the table. I’d make it 4 percent. I think we need to shade it, but I don’t want to shade it as much as Phil suggested. M R .  BLACK. I’m getting confused here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mayo suggests a third proposal of 4 percent M1 growth, which is different from the previous proposals of 3 percent and 4.6 percent. This leads to confusion expressed by Mr. Black.


Passage number 164.
 Are you talking about the September-- MR. MAYO. [Growth for] September to December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 165.
 MR. BLACK. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage provided only contains a statement or dialogue without any disagreement or contention expressed.


Passage number 166.
 10/6/79 -38 MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, could I ask a technical question of the staff regarding the right-hand part of the table on page 3. You say, Steve, that the right-hand panel shows the fourth-quarter growth rate consistent with a yearly increase in the upper half of the long-term range. I didn’t have a chance to do the arithmetic on this. Do you mean right at the upper end of the range or somewhere within the upper half of the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a request for clarification and does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 167.
 MR. AXILROD. The growth rate shown there produces a rate [for M11 for the year of 5.3 percent. The range for the year, suitably adjusted, is 3 to 6 percent. So, that 5.3 percent is about halfway between the 4.5 percent middle of the range and the 6 percent upper end of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a set of numbers and their relationship without indicating any conflicting views or opposing arguments.


Passage number 168.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just compare the third from the right column on the bottom table with the column at the left on the top table. The target ranges are given at the top of page 3 and the growth for the year is given at the bottom of page 3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing instructions on how to compare two columns and referring to specific pages for the necessary information. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 169.
 MR. STERNLIGHT. Mr. Chairman, those of us who have the Axilrod-Sternlight memo in wire form have a different pagination.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply states that individuals who have the Axilrod-Sternlight memo in wire form have a different pagination, suggesting a difference in page numbering or organization.


Passage number 170.
 MR. COLDWELL. It’s on a different page.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a neutral observation.


Passage number 171.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there is a target range for M1, M2, and M3. Just write them down along side the growth for the year in the upper half of the target ranges. They are: 3 to 6 percent for M1; 5 to 8 percent for M2; and 6 to 9 percent for M3. So [growth for the year] is right at the top of the range for M2 and somewhat below the top, but in the upper half, of the ranges for M1 and M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply provides information about the target ranges for M1, M2, and M3 and the actual growth for the year, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 172.
 MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, do you want the growth rates [we prefer] stated in terms of the growth for the year or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification about how the growth rates should be stated.


Passage number 173.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. From September through December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 174.
 MR. COLDWELL. September to December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage only mentions a time period and does not present any statements or arguments that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 175.
 MR. PARTEE. That’s going to be the operational period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a statement by Mr. Partee, but there is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 176.
 MS. TEETERS. I would support the 4.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of support for something.


Passage number 177.
6 percent MR. AXILROD. There‘s going to be variability. It’s possible to get different September-to-December growth rates for the same quarterly average, as I’m sure the Committee realizes, depending on when in the quarter the growth occurs and all that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about the possibility of variability in growth rates based on timing.


Passage number 178.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The operational one is September to December, even though that doesn’t assure precisely that quarterly average.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact about the operational period.


Passage number 179.
 MR. AXILROD. Or you could use the quarterly average and have varying growth rates for September to December, whichever you want.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In the passage, there is no contention or disagreement being expressed. It is simply offering a suggestion or alternative approach without any opposition or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 180.
 MR. MAYO. Steve, 4 percent for September to December would give us a 5 percent growth rate for the year, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The question asked by Mr. Mayo is seeking clarification and confirmation of a calculation.


Passage number 181.
 10/6/79 -39- MR. AXILROD. I would have to translate it into the quarterly average.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 182.
 MR. BLACK. The quarterly average would hold it to around that, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 183.
 MR. AXILROD. The Committee’s target is for Q4 1978 to Q4 1979. If we had a quarterly average rate of 5.9 percent [for the fourth quarter] the rate [for the targeted period] would be 5.3 percent. To the degree that you lower the [rate desired for the remaining] months to what you were suggesting--and depending on when exactly in the quarter that slower growth occurred--it would affect that quarterly average. If it occurred early in the quarter, the quarterly average would go down more than if it occurred all in December, say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing the potential effects on the quarterly average rate of growth depending on when slower growth occurs. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage.


Passage number 184.
 MR. MAYO. Well, that’s why you are emphasizing September to December because that would at least bypass a variable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any disagreement or contention. Mr. Mayo is seeking clarification or further information by asking why the emphasis is on the months of September to December.


Passage number 185.
 MR. AXILROD. This shows the slowing that’s going to occur. The slowing is in process, but the effect on the quarterly average is delayed because we are going into the quarter with such a high rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that there will be a slowdown, but the impact on the quarterly average is delayed due to the high initial rate.


Passage number 186.
 MR. COLDWELL. And we already have 5 percent for the first three quarters. Am I right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It appears to be a statement of fact or confirmation by Mr. Coldwell.


Passage number 187.
 MR. AXILROD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. We cannot make any conclusions about the tone or nature of the conversation between Mr. Axilrod and the other party/parties involved.


Passage number 188.
 MR. MAYO. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only states that Mr. Mayo said "Yes," without providing any information about what he is agreeing or disagreeing with.


Passage number 189.
 MR. COLDWELL. So with 5.3 percent, M1 growth would actually be going up in the fourth quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Coldwell, is simply presenting a statement without conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 190.
 MR. AXILROD. We are coming off a 9-1/2 percent rate in the third quarter. CIiAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are starting the fourth quarter high, so it’s very hard to get that down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod simply states a fact about the previous quarter's rate, and Chairman Volcker acknowledges the challenge of reducing it further in the following quarter.


Passage number 191.
 MR. BLACK. It seems to me that we can target better on what we want the growth for the year to be than on September to December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MR. BLACK is stating an opinion and suggesting a different approach to targeting growth.


Passage number 192.
 MR. MAYO. Well, that’s true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "Well, that's true" indicates agreement rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 193.
 MS. TEETERS. Oh, I don’t agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states that the person, Ms. Teeters, does not agree with something. However, without the context of what she is disagreeing with, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the overall passage.


Passage number 194.
 MR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions "Mr. Black" without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 195.
 Well, I know it has to be translated into [the rate for the September-to-December period] for purposes of the operating technique, but it’s hard--unless you know what the pattern is apt to be between September and December-- MS. TEETERS. That‘s what we are doing. We would be determining a pattern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply discussing the need for translation and determining a pattern between September and December.


Passage number 196.
 MR. MAYO. Well, I agree with Bob.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Mayo states that he agrees with Bob. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 197.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the only number we can concentrate on operationally is the one for September through December, given the 10/6/79 -40- figures that have been shown here in the memo. We can make a precise arithmetic computation at lunch if we want to, I’m sure. Obviously, the lower that figure is, the more it takes a little off the annual growth rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the only number to focus on is the one for September through December, and discussing the impact of a lower figure on the annual growth rate.


Passage number 198.
 MR. BLACK. My point, Mr. Chairman is that the staff started with the numbers on the left-hand side, 4-1/2, 6-1/2, and 7-1/2 percent, or 5.3, 8, and 8 percent. And then they went back and produced a September-to-December figure. It’s very difficult for us to produce the figures here that would be compatible with what we might want for this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is simply explaining how the staff arrived at certain numbers and the difficulties they faced in doing so. There is no disagreement or contention expressed.


Passage number 199.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Chairman Volcker without giving any specific information or context. Therefore, it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 200.
 Just interpolate MR. MAYO. It seems to me we are better off, Mr. Chairman, to aim for a growth rate for the year and let the staff work it out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 201.
 MR. BLACK. That‘s essentially what I am saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is stating his perspective or opinion, but there is no opposing viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 202.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don’t think that’s right because a very small change in the growth rate for the year has a very big effect on the growth rate for the September-to-December period. And it’s that latter period that we are dealing with here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining the impact of a small change in the growth rate on a specific period.


Passage number 203.
 MS. TEETERS. Really, we have only 2 months that we can influence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement present in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact or their opinion about the limited time they have to influence something.


Passage number 204.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You just have to interpolate. If you went all the way down to 1.3 percent [for September to December] you would be at 4.5 percent [for the year]. So if you want to aim half way between [the two figures shown], the annual growth is going to be exactly half way between 4 . 5  and 5.3 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is providing an explanation of how to calculate the annual growth rate by interpolating between two figures. There is no contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 205.
 MR. PARTEE. But [the choice] has tremendous interest rate implications.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage presents a statement made by Mr. Partee about the interest rate implications of a certain choice. It does not mention any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 206.
 MS TEETERS. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage does not actually provide enough context or information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 207.
 MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I would support 4.6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements indicating contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Rice would support a 4.6 percent.


Passage number 208.
 MR. MORRIS. I would propose 4 percent for M1 and 7 percent for M2 in order to give us a little margin for error.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is making a proposal regarding percentages for M1 and M2, and states that it is intended to provide a margin for error.


Passage number 209.
 MR. MAYO. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The word "Yes" in this context indicates a confirmation or agreement with the previous statement.


Passage number 210.
 MR. BALLES.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I can't generate a response to that question.


Passage number 211.
 That’s fine with me MS. TEETERS. We have some margin [with the 4.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and acceptance with the statement made by MS. TEETERS.


Passage number 212.
6 percent] MR. COLDWELL. We haven’t got much margin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Coldwell is stating a fact about the margin they have.


Passage number 213.
 MS. TEETERS. It‘s 0.7 on the yearly average.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a numerical value and does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 214.
 MR. WALLICH. We need to do two things, in my judgment. One is to set a money supply target that causes the funds rate to rise but not excessively. The other is to set a range that won’t allow the funds rate to fall excessively. And to me it looks as if something like 4 percent on the money supply would probably do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker presents their judgment on setting a money supply target and suggests a specific value of 4 percent. However, without further context, it is not possible to determine if there is any disagreement or debate surrounding this statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 215.
 10/6/79 -41- CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me note that we have other instruments for biasing at the start, including the discount rate that the Board is going to have to decide upon here. If we raise the discount rate substantially, we are going to get an upward movement in the funds rate in the short run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The mention of raising the discount rate and its potential impact on the funds rate suggests a disagreement or differing opinions about the appropriate course of action.


Passage number 216.
 MR. COLDWELL. And the impact of the reserve requirement change can do the same thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is merely stating that the impact of the reserve requirement change can have a similar effect as other factors.


Passage number 217.
 MR. SCWLTZ. I‘m going to vote for the 4.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is simply stating Mr. Schultz's intention to vote for a certain candidate. There is no contention or disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 218.
6 percent CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Given a moment of hesitancy here let me make a suggestion, at least tentatively. Nothing is solid. I just want to move on. Let’s assume 4.6 percent for the moment, or 4.5 if you want a round number. There i s  obviously a good deal of concern that that is too high and a good deal of concern about what will happen in the short run. We can accept that. But in the interest of getting [the full] picture, if tentatively we say 4.6 percent, there is a lot of interest both in biasing [the outome in] the short run and in biasing the possible errors in the direction of not exceeding 4.6 percent because that indeed is getting pretty close to the upper end of the annual target. So let’s proceed on that basis for a moment and go to the federal funds range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 219.
 MS. TEETERS. Well, what are you going to do with the discount rate, take it to 12 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is a straightforward question that does not express any disagreement or differing opinions.


Passage number 220.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Chairman Volcker without any mention of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 221.
 Well, I think that’s obvious MS. TEETERS. If we take it to 12 percent and we want the federal funds rate around the discount rate, that means the funds rate should be approximately 12 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement given by the speaker without any opposing view or conflicting opinion.


Passage number 222.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I didn’t want to get into that question. I would assume that if we take the discount rate to 12 percent--unless we have a reverse bias in terms of the borrowings--that the federal funds rate is going to go up in the neighborhood of 1 percentage point under normal relationships.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is not expressing any disagreement or contention. It is simply stating a hypothetical scenario and making a prediction based on certain assumptions.


Passage number 223.
 MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 224.
 That’s 13 percent CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, whether any relationship is normal in this period, who knows. But I think that’s the best guess one could make and that would introduce the bias in the short run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is based on speculation and acknowledges uncertainty, rather than expressing disagreement with any previous statement or idea.


Passage number 225.
 MS. TEETERS. But to talk about a funds rate range, it seems to me we have to have in mind where we are going to put the discount rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of opinion by Ms. Teeters.


Passage number 226.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I agree. These things are very hard to [separate].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker states "I agree" which indicates that they are in agreement with something previously mentioned. The statement "These things are very hard to [separate]" does not introduce any conflicting ideas or opposition.


Passage number 227.
 MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, do we have to move on the discount rate immediately.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 228.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have to discuss that. Obviously, all these things have to be decided. But for myself, when I look at this potential package, I think there is enough risk of confusion in 10/6/79 -42- the announcement that an increase in the discount rate of 1 percentage point would be highly salutary in terms of our immediate objective. Intellectually, though, you can argue the other point. I just don't know whether we want to take the risk in the initial announcement of a possible interpretation that we don't really mean it. That's the problem that I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that there are different arguments to be made regarding the potential package and the increase in the discount rate. They mention that intellectually, one can argue the other point, suggesting a different perspective or disagreement. The speaker also expresses uncertainty about whether they should take the risk of being interpreted differently in the initial announcement.


Passage number 229.
 MR. MORRIS. The increase has to be at least one percentage point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "The increase has to be at least one percentage point" does not appear to contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a requirement or condition, without contrasting or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 230.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, maybe it's easier if we [discuss] all the [aspects]. Let me tell you what the Board has been discussing on reserve requirements. What I would presume the Board members will agree upon is a packaging together of all managed liabilities, with all its difficulties. That would include CDs, federal funds for non- members, repurchase agreements, Eurodollar takings--this is all very difficult technical business. One proposal is to make a basket of all those liabilities, establish a base date in September, and then [impose] a marginal reserve requirement of some size--some size meaning in a range of 5 to 10 percent--on any increase in the basket. We've discussed also [imposing a reserve requirement] on total outstanding managed liabilities. For purposes of discussion, and to get the whole picture out, assume a target of 4.5 or 4.6 percent for the money supply number. Assume the increase in the discount rate, which itself biases this initially and has the announcement effect as well. Also assume Phil Coldwell's initial federal funds constraint and a moderate assumption on the borrowings for 2 or 3 weeks of the nature he suggested, which involves very little change from the current level of borrowings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting different proposals and assumptions for discussion and there is no indication of any disagreement or conflicting opinions among the Board members.


Passage number 231.
 MR. PARTEE. Was his suggestion $1 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a question being asked and a suggested amount.


Passage number 232.
 MR. COLDWELL. I said $1.5 billion; it's $1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Coldwell, is simply stating a correction to a previously mentioned amount.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 233.
2 billion now CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's say $1.2 billion to $1.5 billion. I would feel quite differently, frankly, about that borrowing level without a discount rate change. I think we would probably lose too much without the discount rate change. Without the discount rate change I'd put in a much bigger bias on the borrowing side initially, in effect, to force the discount rate change very quickly. But the more I think about it, the other way of doing it--announcing a discount rate change with the package--seems much safer. With that kind of initial discount rate change, I think we can be relatively moderate in biasing on the borrowing. It wouldn't immediately force another discount rate change. So, that's somewhat of a "family" [of potential actions].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker initially expresses a preference for a discount rate change without an explanation as to why. However, as the speaker continues to think about it, they change their mind and decide that announcing a discount rate change with the package would be safer. This shift in opinion suggests a disagreement or conflict within the speaker's own thoughts.


Passage number 234.
 MR. TIMLEN. You are staying with the suggestion of an 11-1/2 to 14-1/2 percent funds rate range, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement between the parties involved. Mr. Timlen is simply asking if the suggestion of an 11-1/2 to 14-1/2 percent funds rate range is being maintained.


Passage number 235.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, for purposes of discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The given passage does not provide any contextual information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is a discussion happening, but without further context, it is unclear if there is contention or disagreement within that discussion.


Passage number 236.
 MR. MAYO. If we have a discount rate change to 12 percent, why would we want an 11-1/2 percent lower constraint on the federal funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 237.
 10/6/79 -43- CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, in those circumstances, I think the probability of going to 11-1/2 percent is negligible. M R .  MAYO. Sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker simply states their opinion about the probability of something happening without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 238.
 MR. COLDWELL. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "yes" indicates agreement or affirmation, but it does not necessarily convey contention or disagreement.


Passage number 239.
 MS. TEETERS. But I think we want a fairly wide range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion without any opposition or conflicting viewpoints mentioned.


Passage number 240.
 MR. MAYO. HOW symmetrical do we want to make it at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply inquiring about the level of symmetry desired.


Passage number 241.
 I grant that 12 is close to 11, closer to 11-1/2-- CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Phil probably figured it out. The 11-1/2 to 14-1/2 would probably make the range symmetrical around the best guess of where the actual funds rate might go in the short run. M R .  COLDWELL. It‘s a 13 percent midpoint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing reasoning and speculation based on their understanding of the numbers and the situation.


Passage number 242.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me say again that if we adopt this technique, I don’t think we can be at all sure where the fed funds rate will go in the very short run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is made by the speaker and solely reflects their personal uncertainty about the future movements of the fed funds rate.


Passage number 243.
 MR. WALLICH. It doesn’t matter all that much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich is making a statement and there is no opposing viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 244.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And it doesn’t matter all that much. M R .  WALLICH. It would disavow us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a simple statement expressing a lack of importance.


Passage number 245.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The passage is not stating any conflicting or opposing ideas. Therefore, there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 246.
 MS. TEETERS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I cannot provide an analysis or answer without the actual passage. Can you please provide the relevant passage?


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 247.
 It matters to you, Henry, if it goes down MR. WALLICH. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

There is contention or disagreement in the passage because Wallich responds with "Yes" to indicate disagreement or contention with Henry's statement.


Passage number 248.
 MS. TEETERS. It doesn’t matter to me if it goes down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. MS. TEETERS only expresses her indifference towards whether something goes down or not. There is no contention or disagreement present in this statement.


Passage number 249.
 MR. WALLICH. It doesn’t matter very much within a range that is set like this one here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that something doesn't matter within a specific range.


Passage number 250.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that‘s an important point--not so much for a decision today, but looking toward the future.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker acknowledges the importance of the point being made but states that it is not relevant for a decision being made in the present moment. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this statement.


Passage number 251.
 MR. SCWLTZ. Well, looking to the future, I may want to let [the funds rate] be more responsive, because in my mind that’s one of the advantages of this system. The technique fits the times; our situation is more volatile. So, that’s one of the reasons I like this. I would vote yes, for the time being, on the package that you presented.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Schultz, is expressing his support and agreement with the package that is being presented.


Passage number 252.
 MR. WALLICH. The rates that really would matter would be the other short-term rates; the funds rate matters much less. The other short-term rates, I think, would move up in relation to the discount rate and the money supply constraint. If the funds rate stays at the lower end of the band for a long time, then that would pull the other rates down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is expressing his opinion about the importance of short-term rates compared to the funds rate. He is stating that if the funds rate remains low for an extended period, it would have a downward pull on the other short-term rates.


Passage number 253.
 MR. PARTEE. My only concern is whether that [range] is too constraining on the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply presents Mr. Partee's concern about the range being too constraining on the funds rate.


Passage number 254.
 1016179 -44- MR. BALLES. I agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement indicates agreement between two parties.


Passage number 255.
 MR. MAYO. I agree, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Both speakers are in agreement.


Passage number 256.
 MR. PARTEE. I can see a real possibility that it will hit 14-1/2 percent and if we seem to lock on it, it will then establish that as the rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 257.
 MR. MORRIS. If we are in that situation, the Chairman can have a telephone conference and we can discuss whether we want to stay locked in or not. M R .  BALLES. The staff paper did recommend a range of 3 to 5 points didn’t it, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. MR. BALLES disagrees with MR. MORRIS about the recommended range of 3 to 5 points.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 258.
 MR. AXILROD. Yes. I don’t know about Peter--he can speak for himself--but I feel very strongly that if we are in any way going to be held responsible for this operating technique working out, a very wide federal funds rate range is necessary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage because the speaker (Mr. Axilrod) expresses a strong belief in the necessity of a wide federal funds rate range, whereas it is implied that Peter may not share the same perspective.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 259.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have a real conflict here in terms of the way we want to place our risks. I must say that pretty consistently in my own thinking I come down on the side of not wanting to let this federal funds rate go out of sight by accident in the initial stages. Now, that’s a matter of judgment. And the general tenor of the plan, of course, is to take whatever punishment--if that’s what it is--quickly and get it over with so rates can come down and that’s an offset. For once let’s get ahead of the market expectation in a sense and get in a position to [move rates] down, which is the other side of the coin. But we are going into unknown territory and there is a limit as to where my own sangfroid gives out here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions being conflicted and having a different viewpoint on the matter. They mention wanting to avoid letting the federal funds rate increase too much, while also recognizing the plan's goal of quickly taking any punishment and lowering rates. The mention of going into unknown territory and the limit of the speaker's own sangfroid further adds to the sense of disagreement or uncertainty.


Passage number 260.
 MS. TEETERS. May I suggest a 4 percentage point spread of 11-1/2 to 15-112 percent with consultation if it goes over 14-1/2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a suggestion made by Ms. Teeters without any mention of opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 261.
 MR. BALLES. I’d support that. That’s good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No
Explanation: There is no expression of disagreement or contention in the passage. The speaker states that they would support something, indicating agreement and approval.


Passage number 262.
 MR. BLACK. I‘d rather see it wider. M R .  COLDWELL. I think we ought to have some sensitivity to a 16 percent federal funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Black and Mr. Coldwell are expressing their own opinions and ideas, but there is no conflict between them.


Passage number 263.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Understand that even with this kind of constraint, on an individual day it might well be [outside the range]. SEVERAL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presenting a possibility or alternative scenario ("on an individual day it might well be [outside the range]").


Passage number 264.
 Oh, sure MR. COLDWELL. We are talking about a weekly average.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Oh, sure MR. COLDWELL" is more of a casual or sarcastic expression, but it does not indicate any disagreement or contention. The rest of the sentence simply states that they are discussing a weekly average, without any disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 265.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me ask a question. Are we very closely in the ball park here. SEVERAL. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking a question and receiving a positive response with agreement.


Passage number 266.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why not stop for lunch.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple suggestion or question to stop for lunch.


Passage number 267.
 MR. ROOS. I second that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In this passage, Mr. Roos is simply expressing agreement with a statement or proposal made by someone else. There is no evidence or indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 268.
 10/6/79 -45- CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't mean wander away for lunch. Let's take 10 minutes and come back to the table. SPEAKER(.). Where is lunch. SPEAKER(.). Next door.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 269.
 [Lunch recess] CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's try to reach some consensus on what the proposal should be like if we do it [under the old method]. And if we have a consensus on both of those, we could just vote up or down on which approach we like better, with as many people feeling comfortable about [our decision] as humanly possible. I think you can assume there will be a discount rate of 12 percent I should say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting a process for reaching a consensus and making a decision.


Passage number 270.
 MR. SCHULTZ. 12 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any statements or arguments that would indicate contention or disagreement. The speaker simply states a percentage without any conflicting or contradictory information.


Passage number 271.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A 1 percentage point increase. Under those circumstances, let me modify my proposal slightly. We work with a 4 . 6  or 4.5 percent target for M1, recognizing that people would rather see M1 growth come in somewhat lower, certainly, than higher. But that to us is a satisfactory target. In an uncertain world, all other things equal, the money market nice and equitable, expectations changing nicely, things settling down, it's possible we would feel better if it came in below than if we were embarrassed by it being too high. We have a discount rate of 12 percent. We have the reserve requirement change, which I think will be 8 percent, on a basket of managed liabilities. That is about equivalent to an added cost of 1 percent on those [liabilities]. That's the effect that has, mechanically. I don't know what that does to the prime rate, but [the added cost to banks] is just marginal. If the banks want to be mean-- I've got to speak to the MA--they raise the prime rate and say that's our marginal cost of funds. If they want to be reasonable, they don't because that cost is only going to apply to a very small amount at the margin. I would be inclined to tell them at the ABA that they shouldn't reach forever on the interest rate. That sounds like a good idea. In and of itself, I think [all] that means some increase in the federal funds rate. How much of an increase. Although this scenario only puts the discount rate at about or slightly above the current federal funds rate, it nonetheless, all other things equal, puts some upward pressure on the federal funds rate. In terms of the range, Phil suggested 11-1/2 to 14-1/2 percent. As I told you, it makes me nervous to think of [the rate] going up and getting locked in at a higher level. But if you want to put the upper end higher, I reserve the right to consult if the funds rate were to begin getting up that high. We could have that understanding. I am not talking about for a day; I think it would be fine if it went there for a day or a bit beyond.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is mostly a discussion about monetary policy and the potential impact on interest rates.


Passage number 272.
 MR. BALLES. Excuse me, Paul, are you talking about 11-1/2 to 15-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 273.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. That's what would appear in the formal record, whether or not we consulted later. Then in starting off, I would suggest a mild further bias. I think the discount rate 10/6/79 -46- in a sense is a bias to start with, at least to get the federal funds rate up. And there’s a bias in the sense that these projections, if they mean anything, are based upon a lower level of interest rates. So by getting the interest rate up we’ve biased it some already. I would suggest a mild further bias--for about 2 weeks maybe--and I could express that in one of two ways. We just take the operating flexibility depending upon how things develop. as a slightly higher level of borrowings, as we discussed before. But even that I don’t think is necessarily essential, if as things developed it appeared that the federal funds rate in fact was settling down around 13 percent plus or minus. In other words, I’m saying let’s bias it enough, if we have to, to get that kind of federal funds rate originally if it doesn’t go up there by itself. Or, if it goes beyond that by itself, we probably don’t need any bias in the borrowing component. Now, that’s just going to be a matter of judgment in this early period. Peter is looking quizzical and wondering how he can make all these judgments every day. And he might miss. Inherent in this operating procedure is the possibility that the rate might be much higher or lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents different opinions and suggestions regarding the bias in interest rates and borrowing components. There is a discussion about whether or not to introduce a bias and how much bias should be introduced. This indicates a level of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 274.
 It could be expressed MR. PARTEE. The borrowing is a starting point, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion about the borrowing being a starting point, using the phrase "I think."


Passage number 275.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We would be biased toward a slightly higher level of borrowing unless we found the funds rate going to 14, 15 percent. If that appeared to be happening, we just wouldn’t bias it at that point. That should be consistent with all these relationships, though it would never work out in practice on a weekly basis. Doing nothing else should bring the federal funds rate to around 13 percent, but who knows what will happen in this jumpy market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their viewpoint towards borrowing and how they would respond if the funds rate reaches a certain percentage. They also acknowledge that the situation may not work out exactly as planned in practice, but there is no disagreement or argument presented.


Passage number 276.
 MR. AXILROD. M r .  Chairman, if I may [ask a question]. I assume that means, in giving Peter some estimate of the nonborrowed [reserve objective], he might start with a level of borrowing that is somewhat higher than the $1.1 to $1.3 billion it has been running on average in the past 3 or 4 weeks. So initially in constructing the path for nonborrowed reserves that seems consistent with the money growth path the Committee sets, we would reduce the total by having a level of borrowing that is somewhat higher [than it has been recently].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by someone addressing a chairman and discussing a potential scenario or approach.


Passage number 277.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that would be the initial assumption. But if the funds rate goes up well beyond the 13 percent area, and if we still had time in the week, I think you would reverse the bias.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In this passage, the speaker is expressing their own thoughts and ideas about a hypothetical situation. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention with others.


Passage number 278.
 MR. MAYO. Just to pin it down, are you thinking of $1.5 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 279.
 MR. AXILROD. Well, in a way I’m a little puzzled because our knowledge of the relationships comes through a whole span of rates. As we get to very high rates, it may be that banks‘ willingness to borrow becomes stronger. If their willingness to borrow is about the way it has been, I would be thinking about $1.5 billion. But the banks may become more willing to borrow and we may have to think of a higher level of borrowing for the same federal funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that their knowledge of the relationships comes through a whole span of rates. However, they also acknowledge that the banks' willingness to borrow may become stronger at higher rates. This suggests that there is uncertainty and differing opinions regarding the level of borrowing for the same federal funds rate.


Passage number 280.
 10/6/79 -47- CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Don't forget, there is estimating in this procedure. We don't know from day to day what the level of borrowing is going to be for the week, particularly when there's so much of it on the last day. So what we are looking at is some guess of what the borrowing is going to be for the week. Peter might be sitting there without all that much borrowing initially in the week with the federal funds rate very high but his projection could show that there are going to be huge excess reserves accumulated by Wednesday and that the federal funds rate should come way down on Wednesday. What I'm saying is that if he's in that situation, even though we don't have much reported borrowing at that stage, if the fed funds rate is way high in the range we don't bias it so much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the process of estimating borrowing levels and projecting future federal funds rates.


Passage number 281.
 MR. STERNLIGHT. My guess, for what it's worth at this point, is that pushing borrowing to a billion and a half dollars might tend to push the funds rate higher, but that's just my feeling.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Sternlight is simply expressing his personal opinion or speculation without challenging anyone else's viewpoint.


Passage number 282.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Higher than 13 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "higher than 13 percent" simply states a value without any conflicting opinions or contradictory information.


Passage number 283.
 MR. COLDWELL. There is a possibility it might go the other way, though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Coldwell is simply stating that there is a possibility for something to go in a different direction.


Passage number 284.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, it might go the other way, in which case we would retain the bias. None of this is going to be cleared up until the end of the statement week; that's the nature of it. I think you ought to have a better estimate than usual of what the borrowings will be this week because you know what the total reserves are going to be, given that they are based on deposits two weeks earlier. But you still [don't know] the distribution of reserves in the banking system or what excess reserves are going to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The author is simply discussing the uncertainty and lack of clarity regarding borrowings and reserves in the banking system.


Passage number 285.
 MR. AXILROD. Well, we know what the borrowings are going to be. We can tell that. It's a question of what rates are going to fall out of those borrowings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply discusses the certainty of the borrowings and the uncertainty of the rates. There is no disagreement or contention presented.


Passage number 286.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you can't even tell what the borrowings are going to be because you don't know what excess reserves are going to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is expressing uncertainty and making a factual observation rather than presenting an argument or disagreement.


Passage number 287.
 MR. AXILROD. That's right; we know what free reserves are going to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presented as a straightforward fact.


Passage number 288.
 MR. STERNLIGHT. Another tricky little thing, if we are going to start something [different] as of right now, is that we are within a statement week. The statement week has just two days left as well as a partial holiday, which is usually associated with lousing up the estimates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a potential complication or challenge they may face if they start something new at that moment.


Passage number 289.
 So there may not be very much of-- CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I don't know what we do in these two days.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting or opposing ideas. It simply expresses uncertainty or lack of knowledge about what to do in the mentioned two days.


Passage number 290.
 MR. STERNLIGHT. Play it by ear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 291.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Play it by ear the first two days.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "play it by ear" typically implies an informal or flexible approach to a situation, which doesn't necessarily involve contention or disagreement.


Passage number 292.
 And one of those two days is a Wednesday, so-- MR. MAYO. Would you expect to get action from us and our boards of directors on Monday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a fact about the timing of receiving action from boards of directors.


Passage number 293.
 10/6/79 -48- CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have a request for a [discount rate] increase of 1 percentage point, so the Board can act. And I still don’t know whether we are going to be making this announcement this afternoon or not. If we are, I don’t know what you can do [about contacting your directors] on Saturday, anyway. If we are not going to announce until Monday, I still don‘t know what you can do because I don’t know whether we want to-- SPEAKER(.). We can get them on Sunday MFt. MAYO.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the logistics of announcing a potential discount rate increase and how it may affect the ability to contact directors.


Passage number 294.
 We could probably get some of them, but with it being a long weekend in Chicago-- MR. COLDWELL. It‘s not a good idea if you are going to wait until Monday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion that waiting until Monday is not a good idea due to the long weekend in Chicago.


Passage number 295.
 MR. PARTEE. Since you’ve already got the [request on the discount] rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that the person already has the request on the discount rate.


Passage number 296.
 MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, may I make a strong plea that you allow the rest of us to get in on this [discount rate action]. Some of our directors in San Francisco were [pushing] strongly for [an increase such as1 this in our last telephone meeting a week ago. I asked them to hold off until we could--1 did not say it in these words but it’s what I really had in mind--get a coordinated package. Is there any reason that you see as compelling to announce it Monday morning rather than in just a few hours. We can get our directors together on Monday morning and I think it would look better if all the Reserve Banks did [the discount rate increase] at the same time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is making a plea for the rest of the directors to be included in the decision-making process and is suggesting coordinating the announcement of the discount rate increase for a more unified approach.


Passage number 297.
 MR. PARTEE. The foreign exchange markets are open. MFt. MORRIS. We can’t wait.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Mr. Partee and Mr. Morris are sharing factual information about the foreign exchange markets being open and the need to take action.


Passage number 298.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let’s come back to that at the end; let’s finish this meeting. Is that broadly agreeable as an alternative package.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is not a source of contention or disagreement. It suggests changing the discussion topic temporarily and returning to it later.


Passage number 299.
 MR. EASTBURN. Paul, I missed the aggregates figures that you proposed. Are they the same as you had before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply a question asking for clarification.


Passage number 300.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The aggregates are the ones on the right- hand side of page 3, recognizing that we’d rather miss on the low side than the high side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a preference for missing on the low side rather than the high side.


Passage number 301.
 MR. PARTEE. A little on the low side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that something is "a little on the low side." There is no indication of disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 302.
 MR. COLDWELL. No, I don’t agree with you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information indicating contention or disagreement between Mr. Coldwell and the other person. It only states that Mr. Coldwell does not agree with the other person's statement.


Passage number 303.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The alternative, it seems to me--though we could fiddle around with the percentages--would be basically the same. We‘d do the same reserve requirement change. We’d do the same with the discount rate. And then we‘d move the federal funds rate basically to 13 percent, and put a 12-1/2 to 13-1/2 percent range on it, say. We could operate a bit more flexibly than we have before to the extent that that’s possible, borrowing a little from what we’re talking about in the new technique. But we’d have a much tighter 10/6/79 -49- constraint [on the funds rate1 relative to what we just talked about on the new technique.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a possible alternative course of action.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 304.
 MR. COLDWELL. Reserve requirements.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

The passage does not provide any clear context or information about what exactly Mr. Coldwell's position or stance is on reserve requirements. Without more information, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 305.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, the reserve requirement [change would be the same]. I think that’s essentially it. I don’t think I left anything out here [relating to the provision of] reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their belief that the reserve requirement change would be the same and that they haven't overlooked any information related to the provision of reserves.


Passage number 306.
 MR. COLDWELL. Targets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about targets, contention, or disagreement.


Passage number 307.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the same. We’ve got to have a money supply target, which I presume would be the same. However, any of those [targets] could be altered.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with the idea of having a money supply target and assumes it would be the same as suggested previously. They also acknowledge that any of these targets could potentially be changed.


Passage number 308.
 MR. ALTMA”. Are they the same as under the existing directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It is simply a question asking if "they" (referring to MR. ALTMA) are the same as under the existing directive.


Passage number 309.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, the same as in package number 1. So it‘s a longer time horizon [for the money supply target] than we would ordinarily have. And if that objective is stated another way, it would have to be interpreted that if [money growth] were running ahead of this track, we would use the upper part of the 12-1/2 to 13-/12 percent range we are talking about. And if it’s running below, we’d use the lower part of the range. I say again that I think the difference largely comes down to the constraint we are putting on the fed funds rate. That course of action would be very much preferred by our friends elsewhere in the city, in terms of the general framework. I don’t think it makes a lot of difference, actually, as we modified the other approach. I don’t want to make a federal case out of this, but it’s nevertheless true. I’ve just tried to state here what I think is more or less the equivalent in immediate market impact. I suppose you could say that we should be a little tougher in the conventional package to [equalize] the psychological effects that we’d get from the talk about the reserve target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily discussing the different approaches to setting a money supply target and the potential market impact of each approach.


Passage number 310.
 MR. BLACK. I think that‘s clearly true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black is expressing his agreement with a statement.


Passage number 311.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Remember that one of the dangers of the approach we have been talking about is that we may miss the target anyway, and we are a little less vulnerable to that with the conventional approach. The problem wouldn‘t disappear if we missed the targets either way. But without going through the rigmarole of a new dedication to [achieving] them we are a little less vulnerable. Maybe I ought to put that federal funds rate that I talked about a little higher to make the [two alternatives] fully equivalent, say, 1/2 point or 1/4 point higher. We could talk about that. These are basically the two propositions we have before us. What I want to know is if there is a strong preference--it doesn‘t have to be unanimous--for one of them. Let’s first take our famous preference [poll]. Let me say the second one would be a little tighter on the federal funds rate than I suggested earlier--[by moving it] at least to 13 percent or a little over 13 percent to make the psychological impact equivalent. How many would prefer the traditional approach. This is a matter of preference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve contention or disagreement. It is simply a discussion about different approaches and preferences without any conflicting opinions or arguments being presented.


Passage number 312.
 MR. BAUGHMAN. Voting members or all of us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context that suggests contention or disagreement among the participants. It simply mentions Mr. Baughman and refers to "voting members" or all of them, without any indication of disagreement or argument.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 313.
 10/6/79 -50- CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we will take everyone now. Raise your hand if you prefer the present method. Does everybody else prefer the other or--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is evident when the speaker asks for a raise of hands to determine preferences between the present method and the other method. The fact that the speaker is seeking to understand the preferences of the group suggests that there is disagreement or differing opinions.


Passage number 314.
 MR. EASTBURN. HOW many was it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple question being asked.


Passage number 315.
 MR. ALTMA".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage "MR. ALTMA". The passage is incomplete and does not provide any information or statement that can be analyzed for contention or disagreement.


Passage number 316.
 Three or four--I'm not sure CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Hold up your hands a little higher, even if you don't feel strongly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
This passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply requests for the reader to hold up their hands a little higher, potentially to see or perceive something better.


Passage number 317.
 MR. ROOS. These are those who feel we should continue as with everything we said this morning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is referring to a group of people who agree with the position mentioned earlier in the morning.


Passage number 318.
 MR. COLDWELL. It's just continue the regular procedure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is evident from the phrase "just continue the regular procedure," which suggests a continuation of the existing process without any objection or dispute.


Passage number 319.
 MR. ALTMA". It's five.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The given sentence is incomplete and does not provide context for any potential disagreement or contention.


Passage number 320.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. HOW many would prefer the other alternative. Is that everybody else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply asking for a preference or choice without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 321.
 MR. ALTMA". Twelve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions the name "Mr. Altma". There is no context or information provided to suggest any form of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 322.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is quite clearly a great majority who want the new technique. Now let me ask the question slightly differently. How many feel strongly about this. I doubt that anybody thinks it's a matter of life or death but I just want to see how strong the sentiment is. SPEAKER(.). I think it's big.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While the speaker is seeking to gauge the strength of sentiment about the new technique, there does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply wants to understand how strongly people feel about it.


Passage number 323.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who has a strong preference for moving in the new direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply asks who has a strong preference for moving in the new direction, without presenting any conflicting opinions or viewpoints.


Passage number 324.
 MR. ALTMA". 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given text. The passage consists of a person's name and numbers, which do not convey any form of dispute or disagreement.


Passage number 325.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're in that camp, Nancy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 326.
 MS. TEETERS. I feel queasy about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not showing any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker, Ms. Teeters, is feeling queasy about something without indicating any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 327.
 MR. PARTEE. Well, some preference. M R .  MAYO. Your feeling is semi-strong, Nancy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The conversation seems to be a casual discussion where Mr. Partee expresses a preference and Mr. Mayo acknowledges it without any disagreement or debate.


Passage number 328.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, let's look at the voting members Who has a strong preference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that now the discussion will shift to the voting members and their preferences. There is no disagreement or contention being expressed.


Passage number 329.
 MR. ALTMA". Seven, again not counting you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a statement made by someone addressing Mr. Altma, stating that there are seven individuals present, excluding Mr. Altma.


Passage number 330.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did you count Nancy in or out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The question is asking for a confirmation about whether Nancy was included or excluded. It does not involve conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 331.
 MR. ALTMA". No. I didn't count Nancy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they did not count Nancy.


Passage number 332.
 MS. TEETERS. I'm in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: unable to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the full context.


Passage number 333.
 MR. ALTMA". Eight. SPEAKER(.).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement by Mr. Altma.


Passage number 334.
 Out of 11 10/6/79 -51- CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess that's strong enough that we ought to go with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 335.
 MR. PARTEE. I don't know how much difference it will really come down to. I think we have a better intellectual agreement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their perspective and opinion on the matter, but there is no disagreement or conflict present.


Passage number 336.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will just give you my interpretation of a non-mechanical [application], as I put it from the beginning, of the new technique. The difference isn't all that dramatic. There will be more emphasis on [the new technique] in the press announcement because it will be, in effect, a warning that the federal funds rate is going to be permitted to fluctuate over a wider range. Of course, we can say that in either announcement, but it will be said a little more strongly [with the announcement of the new operating method].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the differences and emphasis that will be present in a press announcement related to a new operating method.


Passage number 337.
 MR. SCHULTZ. I think we are going to get a bigger psychological impact than you think we're going to get.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Schultz is simply expressing his opinion about the potential psychological impact of something, without any opposing viewpoints or arguments presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 338.
 MR. BLACK. I do, too M R .  MAYO. Paul, one of the problems with the alternative is that we either adopt a wide range or start with a funds rate that's already above where it is now. In other words, if it's at a little less than 12 percent now, and we put our range at 12-1/2 to 14 percent or whatever you suggested, that raises another difficulty. Maybe it's mechanical. But from a realistic standpoint we almost have to widen the range on the alternative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. 

Explanation: Mr. Black and Mr. Mayo express different viewpoints regarding the range of the funds rate. Mr. Black agrees with widening the range, while Mr. Mayo points out the difficulties and potential negative consequences of doing so.


Passage number 339.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I said we would have to widen the ranges on the alternative [technique].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In this passage, the speaker is suggesting a solution or adjustment (widen the ranges on the alternative technique). There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 340.
 MR. MAYO. Almost to the full 4 points, if we are going to sell it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement or a suggestion.


Passage number 341.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me, for my [information], put it the other way. I just want to get a sense of this. Suppose we used the conventional approach; the range might be stated formally as 1 percentage point in width. But suppose I also said that in practice right now, as we usually say, we are going to aim for 13-1/4 percent and we are not going to move that from day to day or week to week unless there's a strong indication from the aggregates. I mean literally it's what we do now. How many people would find that acceptable or would prefer that. Maybe nobody, but I just want to get a feel of that. M R .  WALLICH. You mean announce that rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting a hypothetical scenario and seeking input or feedback from the listeners.


Passage number 342.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, do it just the way we do now. The market would be looking at Peter's actions over the next 3 days to find out that he was intervening at 13-3/8 percent on the up side and 13 percent on the down side. M R .  MAYO. Ugh. We lose any--1 hate to use the word--drama.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their preference to continue doing things the same way and mentioning the market's response to Peter's actions. The other speaker responds with disapproval but does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 343.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's interesting. Is everybody saying that they don't like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "That's interesting. Is everybody saying that they don't like that" is an inquiry about a topic that could potentially lead to a discussion or disagreement, but in itself, there is no evident disagreement or contention.


Passage number 344.
 MR. WALLICH. I still think it's the safer thing to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, is simply expressing his personal opinion about the safer course of action.


Passage number 345.
 10/6/79 -52- MS. TEETERS. I don’t, Henry, because all we’d be doing is tightening with no possibilities of [the rate] coming down again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Teeters, is expressing her belief that tightening would not have any effect on bringing down the rate again.


Passage number 346.
 MR. MAYO. It would look as if we are just chug, chugging, more [of the same]. It lacks the announcement effect of the other approach.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Mayo, is expressing an observation or opinion about a certain approach.


Passage number 347.
 MR. COLDWELL. You get your announcement effect out of the reserve requirement [change] .
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Coldwell is simply stating that the announcement effect is derived from the reserve requirement change.


Passage number 348.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a tentative directive written, which is quite general as you can imagine. [That is being distributed to you now.] We can vote on the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that a tentative directive has been written and will be distributed for voting.


Passage number 349.
 MR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage as it only provides the name "MR. BLACK." Further context or information is needed to make a judgment.


Passage number 350.
 Is this just in favor of the approach or does it have the specifications tied to-- CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Specifications, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that in addition to favoring the approach, the specifications are also tied to it.


Passage number 351.
 MR. COLDWELL. Well, I‘m not going to dissent against what the Board and Federal Open Market Committee think they ought to do if the majority is clearly in favor of package 1. I must admit that I think the M1 target is too high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 352.
 MR. BLACK. I concur, Mr. Chairman. I certainly would like to see it shaved down a bit because I think it is very important that we come within the ranges. And remember, we just announced 1-1/2 to 4-1/2 percent as the target on Ml and we are going to have to tell people that it‘s really 3 to 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply shows agreement and a desire to have the target range narrowed down.


Passage number 353.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" without providing any context or further information to indicate any conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 354.
 The announcement will say that MR. WALLICH. I share that view. I would like 4 percent rather than 4.5 percent. M R .  BALLES. I would, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. Both Mr. Wallich and Mr. Balles express agreement in wanting a lower interest rate (4 percent instead of 4.5 percent).


Passage number 355.
 MR. MAYO. I would, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The given passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement from Mr. Mayo expressing his agreement with something.


Passage number 356.
 MS. TEETERS. I wouldn’t.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage doesn't present any conflicting or contradictory ideas.


Passage number 357.
 MR. COLDWELL. Well, why don’t we take a vote on the 4 against the 4-1/2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a suggestion made by Mr. Coldwell to take a vote on a particular issue.


Passage number 358.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I’d be reluctant to fine-tune too much here. That is why I suggest 4-1/2 percent, recognizing that if market developments permit and if there are opportunities to get [Ml growth] somewhat below that without pressing the limits of our funds ranges, we ought to take them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing caution and suggesting a specific percentage, but there is no conflicting opinion or argument present.


Passage number 359.
 MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I could save the Committee some trouble in reading [this draft directive] by pointing out that page 1 is a repeat of the existing long-run target [directive language]. Page 2 is the new operational paragraph that is proposed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Axilrod is providing information and stating the contents of the draft directive.


Passage number 360.
 MR. MAYO. Mr. Chairman, would it be too much of a straddle to say that we were going to aim for a 4 to 4-1/2 percent range [for Ml] for September-December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 361.
 10/6/79 -53- CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just suggest this. Why don't we put in the directive at this point that we now estimate the ATS and NOW account effect at about 1-112 percent, which would make the equivalent range for M1 3 to 6 percent. I'm going to have to say that in the press conference, anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply making a suggestion and stating their plan for a press conference. There is no indication of any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 362.
 MR. MAYO. Well, my point isn't just to straddle more, but to cite an intention within a half point range. It seems to me that we've been range conscious on all of our aggregates so there's no harm in saying we are aiming in a range of 4 to 4-112 percent for September to December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their point about being range conscious and expressing the intention to aim for a specific percentage range.


Passage number 363.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could do that. Whatever way, this is not specifically in the directive is it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "We could do that" suggests a willingness to proceed with a certain action, while the question following it seeks clarification about whether the action falls within the given directive. However, both statements are independent and do not express disagreement or contention.


Passage number 364.
 MR. MAYO.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but you haven't provided enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Could you please provide the passage itself?


Passage number 365.
 No MR. COLDWELL. It will be in the minutes. CHAI- VOLCKER. It will be in the minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that something will be recorded in the minutes.


Passage number 366.
 MR. BLACK. You mean the statement of policy actions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Black is referring to the statement of policy actions.


Passage number 367.
 MR. ALTMA". The policy record.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage only states the name "Mr. Altma" and does not provide any information or indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 368.
 MR. COLDWELL. Policy record.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments, but rather mentions someone's policy record.


Passage number 369.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the release that comes out about a month [after the meeting].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply describes the timing of a release that occurs approximately one month after a meeting.


Passage number 370.
 MR. ALTMA". That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Mr. Altma" is simply providing information or acknowledging someone's identity.


Passage number 371.
 MR. KIMBREL. I hate to keep asking, but is the funds range 11-112 to 15-1/2 percent, as Nancy suggested.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kimbrel is simply asking for clarification on the funds range mentioned by Nancy.


Passage number 372.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's 11-1/2 to 15-1/2 as Nancy suggested, with a clear warning to you that you may get a call for a consultation if the rate gets up there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement is providing information about the current rate and suggesting a potential outcome. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 373.
 MR. COLDWELL. The way she stated it was that a consultation clearly would be called at 34-112 percent, wasn't it. M R .  MAYO. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Coldwell and Mr. Mayo agree that the statement was made indicating a consultation would be called at 34-112 percent.


Passage number 374.
 MR. PARTEE. I just wanted to point out that this last paragraph I think has a little range implied for Ml--and for the other aggregates--and the range is centered around 4-1/2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply pointing out their interpretation of the last paragraph and stating that a range is implied for Ml and other aggregates, with the center being around 4-1/2.


Passage number 375.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why. Oh, because of the "around" 4-1/2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a length of time, without any conflicting information or opposing views. The mention of "around" indicates an approximate measurement, but it does not introduce any disagreement.


Passage number 376.
 MR. COLDWELL. Well, if we are going to center a range, then I certainly would rather center it around 4 rather than 4-112 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In the passage, Mr. Coldwell is expressing his preference for centering a range around the number 4, rather than 4-112 percent. There is no contention or disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 377.
 MR. PARTEE. But this is the exact statement of what Paul suggested. It seems to me that at the press conference what he'd be saying is that we are determined to hold these aggregates within the targets previously announced. My point simply is that if we happen to come out at 5 percent for September-December we wouldn't be outside 10/6/79 -54- the target range. I think 4-1/2 percent does imply a [bit of a] range. Now for safety, we'd rather be on the lower side of 4-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their understanding of the situation and their point of view.


Passage number 378.
 MR. BLACK. There isn't any safety on M2, Chuck.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or indications of contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement without any conflicting views or opposing arguments.


Passage number 379.
 MR. PARTEE. Again, it seems to me that you can trade that M2 off against M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any indication of contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion or suggestion.


Passage number 380.
 MR. BLACK. It may well come in less than that anyway with disintermediation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting or opposing viewpoints. It simply mentions the possibility of disintermediation leading to a decrease in time.


Passage number 381.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we are dancing on a pin a little bit here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "dancing on a pin" is used metaphorically and typically means discussing or debating a trivial or philosophical idea. In this context, the speaker is acknowledging that they might be nitpicking or overanalyzing the topic, but there is no clear disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 382.
 MR. MAYO. Yes, I accept Chuck's point. I think it's well taken.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Mayo explicitly agrees with Chuck's point and acknowledges that it is well taken.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 383.
 MR. PARTEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The presence of the word "Yes" indicates that there is indeed contention or disagreement in the passage. The absence of further context prevents us from fully understanding the nature of the disagreement.


Passage number 384.
 We're going to have an awfully hard time-- CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are going to be awfully delighted if we come in any place within these ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The first sentence expresses a potential difficulty, while the second sentence expresses a positive outcome. However, there is no contradiction or disagreement between these two statements.


Passage number 385.
 MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, is this communication, this [directive], going to be kept within this group as far as publicity--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It solely pertains to a question asked by Mr. Roos about the confidentiality of a communication within a specific group.


Passage number 386.
 MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is impossible to determine from the given information whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Further context or content is needed to make a conclusion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 387.
 Except for the press conference MR. ROOS. There are aspects that I think could cause some trouble with the analysis. I'm talking about the wire and the [decision].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The use of the phrase "cause some trouble" suggests that there are potential issues or disagreements regarding the analysis of the wire and the decision.


Passage number 388.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. By all means, that is kept strictly confidential. M E .  KIMBREL. Mr. Chairman, we seem to be getting close together and I sure would hate to have my friend Mr. Roos cast my vote [as my alternate] but I have to leave and I just want to vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 389.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we are ready to vote. We are voting specifically on this directive. Those blanks are to be filled in with 11-1/2 to 15-1/2 and I think we write in the sentence there about consultation when the funds rate is "in the upper part of the range" or something vague like "toward the top.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No - The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states the speaker's opinion and offers a suggestion for filling in the blanks.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 390.
 *' MR. PARTEE. Toward the top.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is indicated by the phrase "Toward the top," suggesting that there is disagreement or differing opinions among the parties involved.


Passage number 391.
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Toward the top. And I think what we mean by that is something like 14-1/2 percent. We are talking about 4-1/2 percent "permitted," if you will. Obvious we'd rather have less, if things develop so that we can do it without putting untoward pressure on market rates. And what we are saying clearly is that if this money demand function collapses we'd be delighted to come in below 4-1/2 percent. It is not going to collapse before we meet again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 392.
 MR. MORRIS. For security reasons you'd prefer not to get the other Reserve Banks in on the discount rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a preference for not involving other Reserve Banks in the discount rate for security reasons.


Passage number 393.
 10/6/79 -55- CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's just get this vote over with. I believe you understand this slight bias in the way we play that. We are thinking of a federal funds rate ideally in the 13 percent plus range, initially. That would be a highly satisfactory response, but we don't have any close control over it--it could be more or less--and that would affect our biasing decisions. I think we are ready for a vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and stating that they are ready for a vote.


Passage number 394.
 MR. ALTMANN. All right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


