Passage number 1.
 MR. FISCHER.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  And without objection.  Let me call now on Lorie Logan for the Desk report.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The conversation is progressing smoothly, and there is no sign of conflict or opposing views.


Passage number 2.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is not asserting any conflicting or opposing viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 3.
 WILLIAMS.  I have a question on charts 7 and 8 about measures of U.S. inflation expectations.  I’m a little bit puzzled by how to read these different things.  As I understand it, the primary dealer five-year, five-year-ahead estimate of inflation hasn’t really moved.  The Board briefing said it’s little changed since the last FOMC meeting.  So the primary dealers, the economists, haven’t changed their views.  And then when you look at the actual movement in the Board’s five-year, five-year-forward inflation compensation, the Board’s yield-curve model suggests in parsing the data that most of the decline is actually due to reductions in risk premiums while the estimates of changes in inflation expectations account for only a few basis points—again reading from the Monday morning Board briefing. So those two answers are the same.  Inflation expectations haven’t changed.  But then you have chart 8, and there you’re asking the primary dealers who have already self-identified that they don’t think there’s a change in longer-run inflation expectations, “Why do you think longer-term rates have come down.”  And they say, well, it must be the A, B, or C.  Maybe there’s a D, E, and F here, too.  I mean, what do I make of that.  You’re asking people who themselves don’t believe something what they think the market’s doing, and how should we weigh evidence like that.  And how do you weigh the evidence from the yield curve model.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Williams, is expressing confusion and skepticism about the different measures of U.S. inflation expectations and the conflicting information they provide. He questions the reliability of the primary dealers' views and the accuracy of the yield curve model.


Passage number 4.
 MS. LOGAN.  I can’t speak about the yield curve models, but I think others will.  Looking at the series, you see that the dealers don’t often change those expectations.  They’ve been very, very steady historically, even when we’ve seen other drops in breakevens.  So it could be that they’re just very, very sticky in the way they’re filling out their survey responses.  But I don’t really have a good explanation other than the fact that when they look at why market prices have moved and assume what other people think, they split it fairly evenly between the risk premium and inflation expectations, and the market commentary on those various factors fall into both of those buckets.  So, I think there’s likely a mix of risk-premium changes and inflation-expectations changes.  I don’t know if someone else wants to talk about the models.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing their thoughts and lack of explanation regarding the yield curve models and the reasons for changes in market prices.


Passage number 5.
 MR. POTTER.  The question for panel 8 was, why do they think this has fallen, not what is their expectation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating the question that was asked in panel 8 and does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 6.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is not stated to have any contention or disagreement. It is not clear what "MR" refers to, so it is difficult to provide a more specific explanation.


Passage number 7.
 WILLIAMS.  But it’s their guess.  I mean, you used to fill this out, Bill.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Williams, is simply stating that it is the guess of someone else (referred to as "they") and reminiscing about how the person referred to as Bill used to fill something out. There is no clear opposition or contradiction present.


Passage number 8.
  [Laughter] VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  In the second chart, they’re not expressing their own views.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting or opposing views or opinions. It simply mentions that the individuals in the second chart are not expressing their own views.


Passage number 9.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any context or specific content provided. Please provide more information for a more accurate analysis.


Passage number 10.
 WILLIAMS.  No, I understand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Williams, states that they understand something, indicating agreement or agreement with the previous statement or argument.


Passage number 11.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  They’re expressing the views of others.  Just like everyone around the table could have a view.  We could wrongly express our view of others, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that people can express the views of others and that it is possible to mistakenly express our own views of others.


Passage number 12.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 13.
 WILLIAMS.  That’s exactly my point.  They’re just guessing, in some way.  “Well, the market has gone down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: There is disagreement between the speaker (Williams) and the subject they are discussing (the market analysts). Williams is arguing that the market analysts are merely guessing, implying that their predictions are unreliable.


Passage number 14.
  I guess it’s something—” VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty or lack of knowledge by saying "I guess it's something."


Passage number 15.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but without the actual passage, I cannot determine if there is contention or disagreement present. Could you please provide the passage?


Passage number 16.
 WILLIAMS.  That’s really what you’re getting out of chart 8.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 17.
 MR. POTTER.  You also get the buy-side participants who haven’t done this as much, and so those responses are interesting in some ways.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their interest in the responses of buy-side participants who may not have much experience with the topic being discussed.


Passage number 18.
 MS. LOGAN.  I think that’s right.  Some of the various stories behind these moves fall into “risk premium” and some of them fall into “inflation expectations.”  I think that’s why they think there’s a combination.  I don’t understand why what they’re filling out for their own inflation expectations doesn’t move more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states the thoughts of Ms. Logan about the stories behind certain moves in the context of "risk premium" and "inflation expectations." There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 19.
 MR. EVANS.  I’m confused.  So the question in chart 8 is asking the dealers, “Here’s a change in a market price.  How do you parse that.”  Conditional on the fact that they don’t see inflation moving, how are they supposed to answer that.  Because it’s a market price that’s moved.  Is it supposed to be other risk premiums as all of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing confusion and seeking clarification on a question.


Passage number 20.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any specific information or statements that can lead to contention or disagreement. It is only mentioning "MR," which does not give enough context to determine any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 21.
 WILLIAMS.  It’s a guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "It's a guess" simply indicates that Williams is making an assumption or speculation, but there is no opposing viewpoint or argument present.


Passage number 22.
 MR. EVANS.  Or are they supposed to say, “Can’t do it because I don’t believe it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply presents a question without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 23.
” MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a standalone phrase without any opposing views or conflicting statements.


Passage number 24.
 WILLIAMS.  I would say it’s a little something more.  I’m just downplaying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not express any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Williams, simply downplays something without confronting or contradicting anyone.


Passage number 25.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  They don’t know what the answers of other people are to the first question yet, right.  And so they see this market price moving and so they’re saying, “Well, I think other people have changed their expectations in some way, but I haven’t.”  That’s how I would parse this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining a thought process or perspective on how they interpret the market price.


Passage number 26.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 27.
 WILLIAMS.  The model.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not clear from the given information whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 28.
 MR. ENGLISH.  In terms of the model, I think you had it exactly right:  Our preferred yield curve model parses this as only a pretty small decline, just a few basis points, in expected inflation.  Then there’s a piece having to do with inflation risk premiums.  That also knocked inflation compensation down some.  And then there’s a piece that the model attributes to liquidity premiums on TIPS, and that actually was a fair amount of it.  That piece come in when you get big movements in rates.  But the upshot is that the model, at least, would say there wasn’t a lot of evidence here for lower expected inflation 5 to 10 years out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining different factors that contribute to the decline in expected inflation.


Passage number 29.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is not providing any information or presenting any statements that could lead to contention or disagreement. It is not discussing any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 30.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a polite conversation where one person thanks the other.


Passage number 31.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I just had a quick comment, which is that I think it’s useful to have these decompositions that are on figure 8.  But in my own thinking, I don’t like putting too much weight on them.  Even if the breakeven is declining because of risk premiums, we sometimes act like that’s something we can safely ignore.  The decline in risk premiums is coming because people are worried about a combination of low economic growth and low inflation happening at the same time.  That’s what drives down those risk premiums.  I think we should be more concerned about low inflation if it’s happening in a low-growth event than if it’s happening when other things are going well.  And that’s exactly what’s reflected in risk premiums.  So, at least in my own thinking, while I find these decompositions useful, I don’t like to let them drive my thinking about expected inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and preferences regarding the use of decompositions and the consideration of risk premiums in thinking about expected inflation. They are not disagreeing with anyone else's viewpoint or argument.


Passage number 32.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Just one more word on that.  There is interesting work that has been done here using inflation caps and floors to look at the risk-neutral distribution of inflation compensation that comes out of that.  That’s shifted down—as you would expect from panel 7—but it’s really the high-inflation outcomes that seem to have been marked down.  So you might see from that both reduced risk of an outcome in which there’s a boom and high inflation and maybe, as a result of the reduction in that tail, a lower risk premium as well. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is just providing information and analysis.


Passage number 33.
 MR. FISHER.  Just to complicate this discussion a little bit, we have the Board’s five-year, five-year inflation compensation measure.  Barclays also has a measure.  And if you compare the two, the Board measure is, if I read this correctly, about 2.2-something percent.  The low is 2.09 in the recent recovery.  Barclays’ measure, looking at your graph that I have here, is 1.79, well above, though not far from its recovery mean.  So I’m curious,  Could you could just give us a quick brief on what the difference is between the two, and why ours is superior or why theirs is inferior, or why don’t we use both.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 34.
 MR. ENGLISH.  If I get this wrong, Simon will correct me.  But I think the Barclays measure is a tradable one under which they are picking particular securities—a particular TIPS and a particular nominal Treasury—whereas the Board staff uses a measure that’s estimated based on the whole yield curve.  So the Board’s measure smooths through variation around the yield curve that we think is idiosyncratic, that is, that has to do with fitting errors related to factors influencing specific securities.  In addition, our yield-curve estimation throws out the on-the-run and, I think, once-off-the-run nominal securities, which can trade at a premium in relation to other securities.  We use our method because we think it’s better, because we think it’s pulling in all of the information from across the yield curve, and it’s smoothing out some idiosyncratic factors that can show up in the Barclays measure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining the differences between the Barclays measure and the Board staff's measure of estimating yield curves.


Passage number 35.
 MR. FISHER.  Does the Board differ from the New York Fed in terms of its conclusion of longer-term inflation expectations being well anchored, that most of the movement that took place was due to a reduction in the inflation risk premium.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The question asks if there is a difference in conclusion between the Board and the New York Fed, but it does not indicate any conflicting views or contradictory statements.


Passage number 36.
 MR. ENGLISH.  That’s what our model says.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage only states a fact or statement without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 37.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  The New York Fed staff agrees with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage indicates agreement among the New York Fed staff.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 38.
 MS. LOGAN.  Yes.  I think the evidence we have from the survey suggests it’s a mix.  I don’t know if I would put a lot of weight on the distribution.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker acknowledges that there is evidence suggesting a mix of opinions, but expresses uncertainty about the significance of the distribution.


Passage number 39.
 MR. POTTER.  The research staff at the New York Fed can replicate the result that the inflation risk premium is falling.  It’s up to all of you how much weight you want to put on the model, the survey, or just the fact that it has fallen here on all the measures and in Europe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the research staff at the New York Fed can replicate the result of the falling inflation risk premium, and it's up to the listeners to decide how much weight to give to different sources of information regarding the falling premium.


Passage number 40.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you for clarifying, I think.  [Laughter] CHAIR YELLEN.  So, other questions for Lorie on financial market developments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple exchange between Mr. Fisher and Chair Yellen without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 41.
 MR. BULLARD.  I just wanted to follow up on this discussion.  I do think it’s interesting to break down these five-year, five-year forwards, but they are talking about what is going to happen in the period 5 years from now out to 10 years.  In my opinion, these things should never change.  If we really had credible policy, they should never change.  And you kind of see that in the primary dealer five-year, five-year-forward estimate.  What they’re saying is 2.3 percent, which is basically 2 percent on the PCE.  So I guess this is CPI-based for the dealers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and discussing their interpretation of the data, but there is no direct disagreement or arguing happening.


Passage number 42.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement indicated in the given passage.


Passage number 43.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  I would be interested in the future to break down the five-year because I think we should be able to control inflation over the five-year period.  And that’s what I’ve been a little bit more concerned about recently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no explicit contention or disagreement present in this passage. Mr. Bullard expresses his interest in breaking down the five-year period and his concern about controlling inflation, but there is no opposing viewpoint or contradictory statement mentioned.


Passage number 44.
 MS. LOGAN.  We also asked for the average probability distribution for the five-year, five-year-forward CPI inflation rate in the survey.  And that distribution didn’t shift at all either. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents two statements about the results of a survey without any conflicting perspectives or conflicting viewpoints being expressed by the speakers.


Passage number 45.
 MR. EVANS.  On chart 7, the primary dealer five-year, five-year-forward estimate doesn’t seem to move much.  That’s reminiscent of the Survey of Professional Forecasters.  Do they behave the same; is there really any difference between them.  The dealers must contribute to the Survey of Professional Forecasters, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a series of statements and questions asking about the behavior and relationship between the primary dealer five-year, five-year-forward estimate and the Survey of Professional Forecasters.


Passage number 46.
 MS. LOGAN.  I haven’t looked at the differences between them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that they have not looked at the differences between them.


Passage number 47.
 MR. POTTER.  The only difference is that you can get an implied five-year, five-year-forward estimate from the Survey of Professional Forecasters.  You have to take the 10-year and the 5-year forecasts and basically subtract them; the Board staff will do that.  The dealer survey has a direct question on the five-year, five-year forward, which might trigger in their minds, “The Fed is credible, I’m going to put down 2.3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage is discussing different methods of obtaining a five-year, five-year forward estimate. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 48.
” MR. EVANS.  Right.  I ask because when I’m briefed on the Survey of Professional Forecasters, it doesn’t really move very much, and I’m not quite sure what to think about that.  I can either take extreme comfort in it, that we’re locking down long-term inflation expectations, or it could be that nobody is paying attention and they just filled the survey out.  And I know that, over a longer period of time, the Board staff has used the SPF inflation expectations, in the 1980s and whatnot.  So I wonder if there is any analysis of the difference of those two—more out of curiosity than anything else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing curiosity and seeking clarification about the Survey of Professional Forecasters and its implications for inflation expectations.


Passage number 49.
 MS. LOGAN.  I think even when you look at our surveys and who fills them out, you find that parts of the surveys are filled out by the economists, and certain questions they take to the trading desk.  And it could be that the economists, in filling them out, write down their own expectations, and they go ask the trading desk for the decomposition of the change.  So you can be getting a mix of who is responding.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply discussing the process of survey completion and how different individuals contribute to filling out the surveys.


Passage number 50.
 MR. EVANS.  That was my interpretation. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Then let’s turn to questions for Simon on the various programs.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response of "Okay" indicates agreement or acceptance.


Passage number 51.
 MR. LACKER.  I think it’s a good idea to tell the market how we’re going to do things.  In the current primary dealer program, if you become eligible you can apply to get in.  So having reopened the ON RRP a couple of times now on an ad hoc basis, it would be an open question for market participants as to whether there is going to be another round.  And I think we owe it to them to lay out a plan.  I think closing it and having it be a one-time deal is more consistent with the Committee’s view on this being a transitional arrangement to some extent—it might be a couple years, but a transitional arrangement—than would be a continual reopening.  So I like Simon’s proposal for announcing publicly that it would be a one-time opening and then it’s closed.  Now, I took it that you were proposing that it would be open if people drop out.  Is that what you were saying, that it’s a constant number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their agreement with Simon's proposal to announce that the program would be a one-time opening and then closed. They also mention their understanding of the proposal being discussed about keeping it open if people drop out, but there is no disagreement expressed.


Passage number 52.
 MR. POTTER.  Just to correct one thing, I don’t think the previous openings were ad hoc in any way.  We were building up a list, and we changed the criteria as we added them.  That was presented to the Committee over a number of years.  The difference this time is we’ve not really established a way in which the overnight RRP is available.  You are correct that this will be a number of extended counterparties.  We would find that number from how many that we will be adding, and we would then manage the list.  In managing the list, the main issue would be for a money fund.  Can it keep its assets under management above $5 billion.  Currently, there are seven that don’t meet that criteria.  We should think about whether we want to keep them on there if we have an application from, say, a money fund that has a large amount of assets under management, and we’re operating with that limit.  That would be the kind of management that we are talking about.  So it would not be the case that the list would stay static.  That’s inappropriate, due to changes in business models and declines in assets and other things that the counterparties might have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing explanations and clarifications about the process of managing a list of extended counterparties.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 53.
 MR. LACKER.  I think I heard you say there would be a fixed number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, is expressing doubt or disagreement with the statement made by someone else.


Passage number 54.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes.  That would be an upper limit.  I don’t think you’d want us to try and hit that upper limit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Potter is simply expressing his understanding that the upper limit mentioned is not something desirable or feasible to achieve.


Passage number 55.
 MR. LACKER.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 56.
 MR. POTTER.  But we would make sure that we didn’t go above that upper limit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Potter is suggesting a course of action without any opposing views mentioned.


Passage number 57.
 MR. LACKER.  So people could roll off as they fell off eligibility, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a fact about people rolling off as they fell off eligibility. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 58.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes, if we thought that it was appropriate to do that.  It would be the same with a primary dealer whose capital fell.  That would be more stringent. CHAIR YELLEN.  But if a year from now a new participant who met all of the existing criteria wanted to get into this, could that happen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Potter and Chair Yellen seem to be discussing a hypothetical scenario and there is no indication of disagreement.


Passage number 59.
 MR. POTTER.  Assuming there was space.  Yes. CHAIR YELLEN.  They would.  So this isn’t your last update.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a straightforward conversation where one person is making an assumption and the other person is confirming it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 60.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The passage states that Mr. Potter is part of the conversation by using the word "Yes." This suggests that there is agreement or acknowledgement between Mr. Potter and another person, indicating a lack of contention.


Passage number 61.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  If there was space.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the following passage.


Passage number 62.
 MR. POTTER.  So it’s not a list that would just decline.  We would keep it constant, because I think if it declined it wouldn’t meet some of your needs.  And you also would have to think through what you’d like that list to look like if you want to use term RRPs as a more traditional draining tool.  The reason we built it in the way that we did is we started with the money funds that had the most assets under management, because we felt they had the most capacity to drain.  We went through various waves in which we added money funds with smaller assets under the management as a precaution that if it was decided that liftoff was going to be in, say, 2011—which some people thought at that time—we wanted to get the most capacity in place straightaway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining their reasoning and decision-making process in determining the composition of a list.


Passage number 63.
 MR. LACKER.  This seems like a reasonable approach.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, states that the approach mentioned seems reasonable.


Passage number 64.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Just to clarify this, in principle, there could be a queue at some point, though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states that "in principle, there could be a queue at some point." This is simply a statement acknowledging the possibility of a queue, without any sign of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 65.
 MR. POTTER.  There could be a queue.  There’re a lot of issues that we would address in terms of management.  For a primary dealer, the performance metric is reasonably clear.  How active are they in the operations that we have.  In this case, imagine we have a really large money fund that’s not active, but that every day goes out and says, “Hey, I can put my money at the Fed, and I can get the overnight RRP offer rate.  So offer me a better rate.”  Would we want to kick that money fund out.  Probably not, because it’s affecting the conditions in the money markets.  So we’d have to look quite carefully at how to sequence that.  If you wanted a small buffer above what we added, you could do that.  But remember, we’ve got nearly the whole universe right now.  If you look at the chart there, to be honest, it’s not a really big restriction.  The big restriction is probably telling the market, “We’re done.  We’re not changing the eligibility requirement in the future.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear disagreement or contention. It is mostly discussing different management issues and considerations.


Passage number 66.
” VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That seems more important than the limits on the number, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is expressing an opinion and does not involve any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 67.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes.  But I think one of the things people wanted is not to give a signal that somehow you’ve changed your mind on the overnight RRP being temporary.  And this is a way of trying to help with that. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no direct disagreement or contention in this passage. Mr. Potter expresses his opinion about what people might want, while Chair Yellen responds by acknowledging his perspective. However, there is no clear opposition or dispute between them.


Passage number 68.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  I’d like to switch gears over to the last two slides that you have on the segregated balance accounts.  In terms of the legal and regulatory issues that remain unresolved, is there any reason not to resolve them.  It would seem, as for all our tools, we would want to at least have the option to be able to pull them off the shelf if necessary,  Is there a counterargument to why we wouldn’t get these things verified.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question posed by Mr. Rosengren, seeking clarification about unresolved legal and regulatory issues and potential counterarguments against verifying certain things.


Passage number 69.
 MR. POTTER.  Having been involved in lots of these issues, I would say that we should do anything that we are able to resolve within our four walls.  Whenever we talk to outside groups—we’d have to talk to the FDIC, the OCC—we have to be careful how we talk to them.  That’s a more significant step.  But if there’s sufficient support, then it’s clearly fine, because there is no chance of the story getting out, which might be misleading about what the Federal Reserve might do.  And I was trying to be clear, this is really a Federal Reserve service that we’d offer.  It’s not an FOMC tool.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is conveying their perspective and discussing steps that should be taken within their organization. There is no conflicting opinion or contradicting ideas presented.


Passage number 70.
 MR. ENGLISH.  One other point, just to be clear, one of the regulatory aspects would be actually changing regulations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states a point without any opposition or contradictory statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 71.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. This is because Mr. Potter's response indicates agreement or affirmation with a previous statement or question, suggesting that there is no disagreement or contention in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 72.
 MR. ENGLISH.  When you did that, it would be a very public thing.  And I think at that point it would be hard, then, to step back, if you went that far.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The use of the word "hard" implies that there is potential disagreement or contention about the potential consequences of taking a certain action.


Passage number 73.
 MR. POTTER.  There are some regulations the Federal Reserve would have to change itself.  For those, though, we can do them within the Board until we announce it. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a conversation between Mr. Potter and Chair Yellen, discussing the regulations the Federal Reserve may have to change.


Passage number 74.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes, just following up on this.  Did I read the memo correctly that this would require the Federal Reserve Bank to execute a contract with the customer of the bank who’s placing the deposit with the bank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a clarification question.


Passage number 75.
 MR. POTTER.  I’m not a complete expert on the SBAs.  There are other people in the room who might be better at this.  This is my impression of what happens:  There would be an arrangement that the bank would want to make.  They would bring this proposed bilateral relationship between the bank and the lender to the bank to the Federal Reserve for approval.  The Federal Reserve would say it’s okay to have that.  Clearly, we would want to make sure that the standard rules that we have about who’s opening bank accounts would apply, and there could be other considerations as well as to what that counterparty looked like to the bank that was borrowing from them when they opened up the account.  So there would be some involvement from the Federal Reserve in that sense, and if I got that wrong, someone in the room can correct me.  I think there are five appendixes, and they have a lot of the details in them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Potter about his understanding of the SBAs and the role of the Federal Reserve. He acknowledges that he may not be an expert on the topic and invites others in the room to correct him if he is wrong.


Passage number 76.
 MR. LACKER.  Madam Chair, this seems like an involvement in the Reserve Banks on the other side of the banking industry with their customers that seems operationally cumbersome.  We’ve talked about segregated balance accounts before, and we’ve got essentially two theories for why there’s a spread between the funds rate and IOER.  Balance sheet costs seems like a really compelling theory.  The idea that competition in the United States banking system isn’t sufficient to narrow that wedge seems less persuasive.  These are really only useful in that second case, and it seems like a lot of operational machinery for something that just doesn’t seem that useful.  I don’t know if this is the time in the meeting when you’re soliciting comments. CHAIR YELLEN.  We are soliciting comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any direct contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, is expressing his personal opinion and skepticism about certain practices, but there is no explicit disagreement or argument presented.


Passage number 77.
 MR. POTTER.  The FR 2420 has allowed us a lot of insight into who is borrowing in the federal funds market.  The FHLBs clearly have lists of banks that they feel have very high credit status, and that is likely to produce a less competitive outcome than one in which all banks are treated on equal footing.  If all banks are treated on close-to-equal footing, you would get a better distribution of reserves within the system.  What you’re seeing is, it’s flowing to the foreign banking organizations because they have slightly lower balance sheet costs.  There are other banks that might have that as well who aren’t as competitive with an FBO because they don’t look to the FHLBs to be as good a credit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their observation and opinion about the distribution of reserves within the system.


Passage number 78.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Isn’t there also, Simon, a second issue, which is the fact that the smaller banks would be less likely to be bound by the leverage ratio.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking a question and seeking clarification from Simon.


Passage number 79.
 MR. POTTER.  That’s what I meant.  They’re not as close to the leverage ratio.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply clarifying their previous statement.


Passage number 80.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So you’re accessing a different part of banking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that the reader is accessing a different part of banking. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 81.
 MR. POTTER.  They are subject to different regulatory rules than some of the large banks.  We know a lot of the reserves are at the really big banks, and they clearly have a different regulatory environment than smaller banks.  What we don’t know is whether smaller banks could be effective in attracting loans because they’re smaller banks, and they’re not as useful as a larger bank to most people with large amounts of money.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not exhibit contention or disagreement. It presents the speaker's uncertainty and lack of knowledge about smaller banks' effectiveness in attracting loans compared to larger banks.


Passage number 82.
 MR. LACKER.  If I could just respond, the phenomenon you’ve described has been part of the funds market forever.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states that the phenomenon described has been part of the funds market forever. There is no disagreement or contention presented in the passage.


Passage number 83.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes, it has.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 84.
 MR. LACKER.  And we viewed the funds market as reasonably competitive back in the day when we were targeting the funds rate.  I’m sure there were spreads from time to time based on residual bank credit risk premiums, and I’m sure from time to time there was a basis point or two of maybe some competitive friction, but it’s hard for me to buy that this is a really gigantic effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their belief that the funds market was reasonably competitive in the past, acknowledging potential spreads and competitive friction, but expressing skepticism that these factors would have had a substantial impact.


Passage number 85.
 MR. POTTER.  I agree.  I would love to have the FR 2420 and see if the stability of funding flows that we see now—and I could probably name the top five banks who get most of this from the FHLBs—ever existed before.  Usually when you see that kind of stability, it’s probably not completely consistent with a perfectly competitive market, but it might be a very efficient market. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show contention or disagreement. Both Mr. Potter and Chair Yellen seem to be expressing agreement and understanding of the situation being discussed.


Passage number 86.
 MR. FISHER.  I’d like to look at the memo on enhancements to the effective federal funds rate, and make a point on that.  I think the plans are thought out and sensible—substantially expand coverage, all the pro arguments.  My only concern is the proposed timeline.  I wanted to ask a question on that because this memo indicates that the Desk proposes to announce sometime later this year its intention to change the FFER data source and publish the OBFR.  But it’s not likely to be ready to actually begin publication until “late summer.”  Is there any way to accelerate that publication.  My real concern here is, does this affect liftoff.  Because if we wait until late summer, and let’s assume we want to move earlier than that, is this going to be problematic.  Is there a way to accelerate the process.  You went through putting it out for comment and so on.  Could you shift the publication of the revised FFER forward and delink it from preparation for the OBFR.  I’m just curious because that’s what caught my eye in reading this memo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve disagreement or contention. It is simply a discussion about a proposed timeline and a concern about its potential impact.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 87.
 MR. POTTER.  I think that we can only go out for the changes in the data collection once.  So that’s one of the constraints.  We have to use the Federal Register.  We have to take in the comments, and we have to respond to them.  We have a project plan that’s tried to look carefully at that.  I think—Josh, you can correct me—we’ve tried to take out as much time on that project plan as possible.  I don’t believe that somehow delaying the publication of the overnight bank funding rate is going to affect the ability to use a different set of transaction data, but, Josh, you can correct me because you are closer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Potter says that delaying the publication of the overnight bank funding rate will not affect the ability to use a different set of transaction data, but he invites Josh to correct him if he is wrong, indicating that Josh may have a different opinion.


Passage number 88.
 MR. FROST.  In addition to giving the Federal Register notice some time, I think we also need to give the banks some time.  There’s a pretty substantial system change that they would need to make to make sure they were getting all of the data to us that we needed.  We tried to wring out as much of the fat as we could from that timeline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply acknowledges the need to give both the Federal Register and the banks some time to adapt to a substantial system change. There is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 89.
 MR. FISHER.  I guess my real question is, is this going to affect liftoff at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if something will affect liftoff.


Passage number 90.
 MR. POTTER.  It will not affect liftoff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Potter, states a fact or opinion without any opposition or disagreement from other characters.


Passage number 91.
 MR. FISHER.  Make adjustments to the data we’re collecting after liftoff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage simply states that Mr. Fisher wants to make adjustments to the data after liftoff, it does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 92.
 MR. POTTER.  We have a number of contingencies in place if we have problems with the existing broker data, and we would implement those contingencies if that was the case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Potter, is simply stating that they have planned for potential issues with the existing broker data and would put their contingency plans into action if necessary.


Passage number 93.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.  Madam Chair, obviously I don’t want this as an excuse to delay liftoff.  We should lift off when we’re supposed to lift off and the Committee agrees to lift off.  I just wanted to make that point.  CHAIR YELLEN.  Further comments.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, agrees with the idea of lifting off at the agreed-upon time and simply wants to emphasize that point.


Passage number 94.
 MR. POWELL.  On the SBAs, my understanding has long been that the FDIC looks ill on any kind of secured borrowing.  I see in the memo that we’re limiting it to 1-, 2-, and 3-rated institutions, but have we socialized this idea with them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification about whether a specific idea has been communicated to the FDIC.


Passage number 95.
 MR. POTTER.  I think there have been some discussions at the staff level.  It’s obviously a little bit different taken as a formal proposal from the Federal Reserve to the FDIC, where I was careful to talk about what we can do within our four walls and what we do when we go outside, and there are always risks associated with that. I think that my understanding of the logic of the proposal would suggest that this doesn’t do any harm necessarily to the FDIC in terms of the deposit insurance fund, which is what they’d be concerned about because the notion would be that you would be attracting funds that wouldn’t be there.  However, for a large bank that has an amount of reserves right now, they could switch that into an SBA, and that wouldn’t be available in resolution.  I think, Bill, that’s one of the things that you thought was a possibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply discussing their understanding of a proposal and its potential implications.


Passage number 96.
 MR. POWELL.  I could be wrong, and I guess there is one way to find out, but it may be sort of a principle thing to them that they just don’t want that kind of encroachment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not involve any disagreement or contention. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about a situation and suggesting that there may be a principle at play that individuals do not want a certain type of encroachment. However, there is no conflicting viewpoint or argument present.


Passage number 97.
 MR. POTTER.  The FDIC has been clear on certain principles with the Federal Reserve over the last six or seven years, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage states that the FDIC has been clear on certain principles with the Federal Reserve over the last six or seven years. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this statement.


Passage number 98.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Governor Powell, I think a key question here with regard to this issue is that there are two elasticities to worry about.  One is, if you had SBAs, to what extent would that increase the number of small and medium-size banks that would sign up for SBAs with borrowers, provide extra competition, and boost market rates closer to the IOER rate.  The other elasticity is just as Simon was saying.  You have large banks with a lot of reserves.  Some of their customers might say, “Gee, it would be appealing to have a secured deposit rather than an unsecured deposit.”  So you’d get a shift of the funding into, I guess, not a deposit but secured funding and out of deposits.  If that elasticity was large and the first one was small, this isn’t a great thing to do.  If you thought that the second elasticity was small and the first one was large, then you get a lot of traction on rates.  It’s very hard to know, but I think at some level that’s kind of the decision that you face.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing two different elasticities and the potential effects they could have.


Passage number 99.
 MR. POTTER.  And it’s hard to test this because it’s a service rather than a tool. CHAIR YELLEN.  Comments or questions.  Okay.  Then let’s turn to Fabio, who is going to discuss testing of reverse repurchase agreement operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that testing of reverse repurchase agreement operations will be discussed.


Passage number 100.
 MR. NATALUCCI.2  Thank you, Madam Chair; I will be referring to the exhibits labeled “Proposals for Reverse Repurchase Agreement Operations.”  In my remarks, I will review the staff’s recommendations regarding additional RRP testing over the next intermeeting period.  These tests were the subject of one of the memos you received ahead of the meeting. As noted in the top panel of your first exhibit, reflecting in part the experience gained since September, the staff now recommends that the Committee authorize a series of preannounced modest decreases and increases in the ON RRP rate after the October FOMC meeting.  In particular, the ON RRP rate would first be lowered from the current level of 5 basis points to 3 basis points, then raised to 7 basis points, and finally increased to 10 basis points.  The rate would be held at each of these levels for two weeks before finally being returned to 5 basis points.  A draft resolution that would allow such testing by temporarily expanding the authorized range for the ON RRP rate to 0 basis points to 10 basis points is attached to your handout. Varying the ON RRP rate would affect its spread relative to the IOER rate and could provide additional information about the effect of that spread on money markets and the demand for ON RRP.  In addition, changes in the ON RRP rate could assist in the assessment of the effectiveness of the ON RRP rate as a floor for short-term interest rates.  Of particular interest may be the results of the testing at 7 basis points and 10 basis points, as these may provide greater insight into the extent to which the proximity of the ON RRP rate to the zero lower bound is influencing the strength of the floor.  The staff recommends that a full schedule of any planned ON RRP rate changes be preannounced by the Desk following the October FOMC meeting to reduce the chance that rate variations would be read as signaling a change in the stance of monetary policy. The bottom panel discusses possible testing of term RRPs to address market pressures at year-end.  Most market participants expect that balance sheet constraints combined with high level of reserves in the system will once again exert downward pressure on money markets around year-end.  In the past, dynamics similar to those visible around quarter-ends have been observed around year-ends, but generally with more pronounced effects.  This anticipated pressure raises two questions.  First, does  2The materials used by Mr. Natalucci are appended to this transcript (appendix 2). the Committee desire to take action to address it.  Second, if the Committee does desire to do so, what action could it take. The Committee may wish to test the ability of supplementary tools to improve control over short-term interest rates and to help prevent a deterioration in money market liquidity as pressures build near year-end.  If so, the staff recommends that the FOMC consider conducting a series of term RRP operations that span December 31, 2014.  These operations would provide one of relatively few remaining opportunities prior to liftoff to meaningfully test the utility of additional supplementary tools and determine their efficacy in helping to control short-term interest rates.  By increasing the availability of safe money market instruments ahead of year-end, term RRP operations could temper the potential for a buildup of pressures in money markets in the final weeks of the year.  For example, such operations could absorb some demand that would otherwise push down rates on term securities, such as Treasury bills, that mature after the turn of the year.  In addition, these tests may also signal to the market that the Committee, while not inclined to increase the overall limit on ON RRP usage, does have additional supplementary tools available and is prepared to deploy them if warranted.  Finally, the Desk conducted open market operations in order to limit temporary market strains over quarter- and year-ends prior to the financial crisis, so doing so may not be seen as particularly surprising by market participants. Such a term RRP exercise could be sized to try to offset the anticipated decline in the available stock of safe money market assets that tends to occur around year-end.  A staff analysis suggests that on quarter-ends in 2014, the supply across a number of types of money market assets has declined, in aggregate, by about $150 billion to $200 billion.  However, this staff analysis omits a number of significant asset classes, including bilateral federal funds and Eurodollar activity, due to a lack of daily data; in addition, the increase in demand observed at the September 30 ON RRP operation exceeded these amounts.  Accordingly, $300 billion of term RRP over year-end might be a more realistic estimate of what would be required to meet the increase in demand for safe money market assets. The Desk could announce following the October FOMC meeting that it has been authorized to conduct term RRP operations in December to cross year-end, with a cumulative size limit of up to $300 billion, and that it will announce specific operational details by early December.  By helping to resolve some of the uncertainty regarding the availability of safe money market instruments ahead of year-end, and thus facilitating advanced planning by market participants, the early announcement should avoid the “scramble” that reportedly took place in the short period between the September FOMC meeting and quarter-end. The staff recommends that term RRP operations be conducted at several different times over the course of December.  For example, fixed-quantity auctions could be conducted each Friday in December for $25 billion, $50 billion, $100 billion, and $125 billion, with each operation settling the Monday after the auction and maturing on January 2, 2015.  Bidding behavior and movements in money market rates associated with these operations could provide readings of year-end pressures over the course of December.  Of course, this proposal is preliminary, and should the Committee pursue this option, it would need to be refined based on market participants’ feedback, operational considerations, and evolving market conditions, including issuance plans by the Treasury Department.  Once the specific plan is determined, the staff could submit it to the Chair for approval, notify the Committee, and release the operational details to market participants.  A draft resolution for such an approach is included in the handout. Alternatively, the Committee may find it desirable to take no action to address year-end pressures, for example, if meeting participants are concerned about appearing to accommodate “window dressing” behaviors by banks and are comfortable with potentially significant downward pressure on short-term rates.  This strategy would provide a second observation of the performance of the current framework on quarter-ends, without the potentially confounding surprise factor of an announcement relatively late in the quarter, as was the case in September.  In addition, taking no action could reinforce the FOMC’s earlier communication that occasional day-to-day volatility in money market rates is acceptable and that the ON RRP facility will remain small. Another possibility would be to mix these two approaches by testing term RRPs over year-end and then, so long as the test went well and liftoff did not appear imminent, allowing the March quarter-end to pass without Desk action. Depending on your decisions regarding these testing issues, we will have copies of the Desk statement available for review tomorrow. Thank you.  That concludes my prepared remarks.  We would be happy to take your questions. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information and recommendations, but there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 101.
 MS. MESTER.  I have a question on each part of the proposal.  Are you intending to recommend any further testing in December.  If so, what would those tests be.  And then, on the volatility and the term RRPs, we have always had year-end volatility in this market, and it seems to be the rule rather than the exception.  Is there some expectation that this year, in particular, it is going to be worse than it typically is.  And that it’s going to actually have an effect on financial conditions or the macroeconomy.  Or is the proposal being made purely because you want to test a tool.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is simply a series of questions seeking clarification and information.


Passage number 102.
 MR. NATALUCCI.  I think your first question has to do with the change in the overnight RRP, and the plan here is to test changes in the overnight RRP rate down and up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating a plan to test changes in the overnight RRP rate.


Passage number 103.
 MS. MESTER.  Right.  I understand that.  But are you going to come back to us in December with further tests.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker appears to be seeking clarification or confirmation about whether further tests will be provided in December.


Passage number 104.
 MR. NATALUCCI.  In addition to this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unknown.


Passage number 105.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I think it’s possible we will think that there is something further that we want to test.  Probably not at the December meeting, because then we’re going into year-end and that’s going to be a strange enough period that I don’t think we’d learn anything from a test.  The current testing exercise expires at the end of January, so we may come back in January and want to talk about additional testing that we would do after that.  But we don’t have a particular plan right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing a potential future situation and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 106.
 MR. NATALUCCI.  On the second part, I think it would be interesting to do the testing for a couple of reasons.  This is one of the last opportunities before we get to liftoff in which we know there are downward pressures on rates, and so testing the tool exactly when we could check whether it would be effective or not would be, I think, an interesting experiment.  There is also the issue of intensifying balance sheet shrinkage over time, as has been evident with regard to regulatory constraints, particularly from foreign banks.  So I think it’s a combination of the two.  There is a sense that year-end is going to be very strong in terms of a restriction of the supply of safe assets, as well as providing one of the few opportunities at a time when we know there will be downward pressure, so it will be interesting to test the tool at that point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and reasoning about why testing the tool would be interesting.


Passage number 107.
 MR. POTTER.  I do think it’s hard to get a neutral read from market participants on this, because they will always want us to help, and I think that was part of your point.  To make their lives easier, we used to do operations to smooth the effective rate close to these financial reporting dates.  We might think that it was difficult to hit the funds rate target exactly on year-end or at the end of a quarter, but in the old days we wouldn’t want the rate to be firm going into that. One of the other things that has changed is this $450 billion of cash from the asset purchases that you have added to the system over the past year relative to the previous year-end.  That money has to find its way home.  At some point, as we’ve seen at quarter-ends, some of the traditional, conventional ways start to freeze up and you have to find other ways of putting that cash into an asset or a bank account.  And that could produce more disruptions, but it could go just as smoothly as the September quarter-end did.  For example, suppose we told you there was a 20 percent chance that it would be more disruptive than usual.  Would you want to do something about it.  The main thing here, I believe, is to test a tool that we think would be useful, and this would look like a really good circumstance to test that tool.  Just as raising the rate to 10 basis points will be a good test if repo rates, when we raise to 10, were actually below 10—if repo rates were at 20, that’s not going to be helpful for us.  We view year-end as a set of conditions in which we could test how effective the term reverse repurchase agreements are.  And we learn a lot from that testing, both operationally and how effective it could be in assisting interest on excess reserves, along with the other supplementary tool of overnight RRP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It discusses potential challenges and changes in the market, but there is no direct conflict or differing opinions presented.


Passage number 108.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I just want to reiterate a point here.  In July, we sent the Committee a memo that said basically, “What if the current plans for liftoff don’t work so well.  What’s plan B.”  And the first addition that you could do is move the administered rates higher.  The second was term tools, TDF and term RRP.  We are testing TDF now.  The breakable TDF seems actually to be going pretty well.  That’s pretty interesting.  Year-end would be a terrific time to do a test of term RRP at a time when we know there will be downward pressure on rates.  You don’t know how big that downward pressure will be, but it seems like a really opportune time to get a good test in size of that term tool, which we may need when the time comes. CHAIR YELLEN.  Vice Chairman Dudley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing different options and suggesting that a test of the term RRP tool could be done at a favorable time.


Passage number 109.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  If I could just add to what has been said, it seems to me that you want to test everything that you need to test to make sure that, when you do lift off you actually do have monetary control.  That would be point number one.  Point number two is, it is very likely that when we lift off it is going to be right before quarter-end and so we may want to have those tools in place and really understand how those tools are actually going to operate.  I would much prefer doing a test of term RRP before we get to liftoff than to use it sort of sight unseen. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes, if I could just reinforce that.  If the Committee is contemplating June as the time of liftoff, or alternatively September, these are quarter-ends.  Our meetings occur just before quarter-end.  If you think about the practical difficulties, we decide to raise the target range for the first time, and immediately we are swamped with year-end pressures so that instead of our rate going up, it goes down.  We don’t have anything in place to deal with that, and these term RRPs are an attractive way, without raising the size of the overnight RRP facility, to deal with pressures and create a better environment in which we have more confidence when we lift off.  Unfortunately, June, September, December, and March are our press conference key meetings, and so we have to face the fact that these quarter-end pressures are going to be with us probably at the moment we do decide to lift off.  Although you don’t care if this pressure shows through to the market once in a while, I think that would be problematic, at least the first time, and we should try to make sure we can deal with them.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a discussion about the practical difficulties and potential risks associated with lifting off and the importance of testing and understanding the tools that would be used. The speakers seem to be in agreement on the need for testing and preparation.


Passage number 110.
 MR. LACKER.  I want to talk a little bit about the pressure on rates in the couple of days before quarter-end.  MarketSource provides a great set of descriptive information about what was going on in markets after our announcement.  And it was pretty clear that after the announcement of our parameters, people placed a lot of weight on the probability that the RRP rate would be set below 5 basis points.  The description led me to believe that people are essentially taking out insurance by locking up funds over that horizon and were willing to take a lower yield now on, say, five-day funds across the quarter-end in order to insure against maybe even getting a negative rate at the RRP.  Now, at a five-day horizon, that’s just a traditional sort of yield curve consideration. Before, when we pegged the funds rate, it was the only rate we pegged.  Now we do peg the IOER rate, and we’re going to smooth that through the quarter-end.  The IOER rate isn’t going to move over quarter-end.  So what we’re talking about is this spread to IOER.  If rates are going to be soft in the days leading into year-end, isn’t the natural response for us to raise the cap at year-end, so we’re sure we can nail the rate at 5 basis points.  And if we do that and markets are pretty confident that the cap we have for year-end—and this is one of the staff’s proposals—is going to nail it, then we’re not going to get the softness in the days ahead.  So I’m not sure why that’s not the best option for this. Now, I understand that the Committee, in its discussion of the cap on the overall size of the facility, came to a judgment that reflected a variety of considerations about the footprint, financial-stability concerns, the idea of people running into this facility, and so forth.  Well, if that judgment leads us to want to leave the cap in place at year-end, then my understanding is that these term RRPs are not going to count against this cap.  So they are sort of an end run around the cap; they are sort of loosening up the Committee’s decision about $300 billion being the optimal amount.  To my mind, it seems like extending the cap on quarter-end or year-end is the logical solution, if we want to do this.  Now, personally, I think in the past we have let a lot of volatility show through at year-end, and it doesn’t affect the one-year rate, it doesn’t affect the six-month rate.  We have generally lived with a fair amount of year-end volatility and haven’t viewed it as problematic until now.  Now I understand the consideration about the end of June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 111.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes, what’s different is that this time we are going to be presumably taking off before a quarter-end and that would not be a good time to be unable to show monetary control.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that taking off before a quarter-end is not a good time to be unable to show monetary control.


Passage number 112.
 MR. LACKER.  For one day.  For one day, okay.  For one day, let’s raise the cap.  Triple the cap for one day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is proposing to raise the cap for just one day, suggesting a temporary change that does not seem to be disputed by anyone.


Passage number 113.
 MR. NATALUCCI.  Can I respond for a second and maybe offer a different perspective.  I think there’s a difference between overnight and term RRPs in terms of footprint and the financial-stability consideration.  So in terms of footprint, this is a temporary thing that you do in that period, and it would end after quarter-end or after year-end.  It doesn’t have the same footprint that raising a cap in general has.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is offering a different perspective on the topic being discussed.


Passage number 114.
 MR. LACKER.  While it’s in place, it does.  I mean, it diverts intermediation flows while it’s in place.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement in the passage is presented as a factual statement about the effects of a certain policy or mechanism ("it diverts intermediation flows while it's in place"). There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 115.
 MR. NATALUCCI.  But only for a limited horizon, and the financial-stability consideration that we raised about the overnight RRP that generates the run dynamics is not in place here.  This is a different settlement system.  So it doesn’t generate the run dynamics that raising the cap or the expectation of an increase in the cap would. I also think there are a couple of differences between raising the overnight RRP cap and having term RRPs.  One is that depending on the size, it’s not obvious that increasing the cap on one day at the end of the year would remove the same amount of uncertainty that having a series of term RRPs would.  If I am a market participant, I’m not sure whether I have access to the auction or not.  So some uncertainty stays.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not seem to contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily presents a discussion of different aspects and considerations related to the overnight RRP and term RRPs.


Passage number 116.
 MR. LACKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I cannot accurately answer your question without the passage you are referring to. Could you please provide the passage so that I can evaluate it for contention or disagreement?


Passage number 117.
  There’s no amount that— MR. NATALUCCI.  Oh, there is, of course.  As I said, the $300 billion in term RRPs amounted to the estimated increase in demand for safe money market assets.  Maintaining the constraints set by the Committee until year-end, the removal of uncertainty could not have the same effect.  That’s the second piece, which is, you get readings of market prices if you do a series of term RRPs where you’re starting out in December and you can adjust the size.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Natalucci, is simply adding his comment and explanation to provide further clarification or information.


Passage number 118.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I agree with everything Fabio said, but the even more fundamental thing I took from earlier discussions around this table was you all really didn’t want to show a willingness to adjust the size of the overnight RRP program, and so I took as a basic assumption that we weren’t going to increase the size of the overnight RRP program.  Instead, we’d take this opportunity to test the term tool, which I wanted to do anyway, which I think is valuable. But I agree.  As I think we pointed out in the memo, an alternative approach would be to greatly increase the size of the overnight RRP around year-end, and if the Committee wanted to do that, I think that would work.  But we really did take seriously the thought that that could be read as a signal that the Committee was more willing than it actually was to adjust the size of that program.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. English, agrees with everything Fabio said and also agrees with the idea of not increasing the size of the overnight RRP program. He suggests an alternative approach but acknowledges that the Committee may not be willing to adjust the size of the program.


Passage number 119.
 MR. POTTER.  President Lacker, let me play out a scenario for you.  We get to December 28, and we’ve told people we’re going to increase on New Year’s Eve.  On December 28 we cap out.  Rates get lower.  On December 29, we cap out again.  Then, on that next day, we suddenly raise it to $600 billion and it works quite well.  There will be a lot of people at that point who say, “Well, why don’t you extend the $600 billion for the whole week between Christmas and New Year.”  I think we’re trying to avoid that kind of dynamic.  It’s not obvious to us when exactly would be the right time to start increasing the cap because at the year-end, it might not be as effective to do it, say, on this one day as it would be at a regular quarter-end. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting a scenario and expressing uncertainty about when it would be appropriate to increase the cap. The response from Chair Yellen does not disagree with the speaker's statement.


Passage number 120.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Fabio said a good bit of what I might have said, Jeff, in response to your observation.  I think there’s not going to be a perfect alternative here, and we have recognized that in our discussions over the last couple of meetings.  We have aims that are somewhat in tension with one another.  Number one, as the Chair just stated a few moments ago, is wanting to have a lot of credibility at the point of liftoff and perhaps for a meeting or two thereafter.  Number two is not wanting to put in place a program which invites a significant change in the financial industry that may, in turn, increase the chances of runs in periods of stress. I think what’s being proposed here is a way to avoid signaling in advance that we’re going to have a cap increase if there are any problems with the floor.  I don’t think anybody is taking that off the table, but what I think the staff is proposing here is a way to determine whether a mix of instruments will do the job sufficiently so that we don’t have to raise the cap.  If what we learn in December is, notwithstanding the mix of instruments, there’s still an awful lot of softness that makes a majority of the Committee uneasy, then we might actually have to think about raising the cap when we lift off.  But this is a way of giving ourselves a chance of not doing that. By doing this, we’re going to lose some information that we might otherwise have had by just keeping the $300 billion cap.  Suppose everything goes well in December.  We’re not going to know whether that’s because participants adjusted and made arrangements beforehand or because of the term.  We’re not going to know whether it was because September 30 was a special date, because that’s the day on which balance sheets are frozen for stress testing and CCAR purposes, or whether it’s just an end-of-quarter issue. So we’re not going to know some of that, but that’s what happens when you have to make policy decisions in real time.  You’re not able to do everything you want.  Although there are elements of this that I sort of regret, I really do think this is the best way to try to balance those two ends which are potentially in tension with one another, and it gives us the best shot at an outcome that doesn’t compromise either of those goals.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 121.
 MR. NATALUCCI.  I guess one way to respond, to try to regain some of the information, would be not to do it in March.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Natalucci is suggesting a possible response to regain information.


Passage number 122.
 MR. TARULLO.  That’s a good point.  So what I was going to say is after this is done, we can in January debate whether (a) we would like to have the cap, (b) we would like to keep everything that we had in December, or (c) we want to kind of “go cold” and see what happens in March without any program at all.  But we can decide that in January on the basis of whatever information we get out of this. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Mr. Tarullo and Chair Yellen are discussing different options and suggesting that a decision can be made in January based on the information they have.


Passage number 123.
 MR. LOCKHART.  A question on how you structure the ON RRP testing regime.  Did you think about whether it is operationally feasible, rather than to target specific overnight reverse repo rates, to actually target spreads to market rates and, therefore, tactically move with what’s going on in the market as you test these overnight reverse repo rates.  Is that possible.  It seems to me that’s a more nuanced approach, but, at the end of the day, it’s closer to what a real-world outcome would be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no clear disagreement or contention present in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting an alternative approach and asking if it is operationally feasible.


Passage number 124.
 MR. NATALUCCI.  I’ll let Simon respond, but I think the rate is easier because we have control where we want the rate to move.  Money market rates, in a sense, are exogenous to us.  Currently, they’re relatively high.  You will have to move it quite a bit and get quite a lot closer to where we are now, for example, to target a specific spread.  So, in some sense, that’s a limitation.  Just going after the ON RRP rate might limit the utility of the test because if rates are very high, you might not get much traction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply explains the different factors and limitations involved in determining the rate.


Passage number 125.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Simon’s reference to today, the GC repo rate of 20 basis points, or something like that, makes it unfeasible to target spreads.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or indications of disagreement or contention. It is simply stating a fact about the GC repo rate and its impact on targeting spreads.


Passage number 126.
 MR. POTTER.  Operationally, we could certainly do it.  We could announce that we’re going to have a spread over a certain rate, which is publicly known.  We have an internal rate that’s not publicly known.  That would be the most useful one for us.  I think it’d be a bit of a step to start publishing that rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Potter, is discussing the possibility of announcing a publicly known spread rate and expressing some hesitation about the idea of publishing the internal rate. However, there is no opposition or disagreement presented in the passage.


Passage number 127.
 MR. ENGLISH.  With all that said, I think one advantage of what we’ve proposed is that we can lay it all out in advance so people will know what’s coming, and I think there’s an advantage to that in two respects.  One is it just lets people think about it and plan a little bit.  The other is that there’s no risk of any sort of surprise leading people to think that we’re signaling about policy or anything like that.  We’re going to write down a path under which the overnight RRP rate goes down and then it goes up and then it comes back to 5 basis points, and it’s very clear that there’s nothing up our sleeve.  We’re just going to do some testing of what happens when that rate moves around.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the advantages of their proposed plan.


Passage number 128.
 MR. LOCKHART.  The preannouncement is really a critical consideration, then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of fact about the importance of a preannouncement.


Passage number 129.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I think it’s very helpful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. English's opinion that something is helpful.


Passage number 130.
 MR. POTTER.  In terms of not confusing people.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage. The sentence is simply stating a fact without any conflicting opinions or arguments expressed.


Passage number 131.
 MR. NATALUCCI.  And the memo had an example of what could be a schedule, for example, a specific up and down, a specific guide through the month of December, mid-December. CHAIR YELLEN.  A two-hander, President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply includes a statement by Mr. Natalucci and a response from Chair Yellen.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 132.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Yes, please.  To follow up on this point, do you think there’s any possibility that by announcing the schedule in advance—you’re going to go up, going to go down—that you’ll limit what you actually learn from the exercise because there will be some endogeneity that people will plan.  How does that figure into how you would then interpret what you see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking a question about the possibility of limiting the learning experience by announcing the schedule in advance, while also mentioning the potential endogeneity that people may plan. This suggests that there is a disagreement or contention about the effectiveness and implications of announcing the schedule in advance.


Passage number 133.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I think we’re hoping that it will be the reverse in the sense that people know that the rates will be low for a while and then high for a while.  That gives them time to plan and adjust so that we’ll see a little bit closer perhaps to what we would see if there were more durable changes in rates, if we just raised the rate and left it high for a while.  I think our hope was that we’d get a little bit better information, but I guess it’s hard to know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a viewpoint regarding the potential effects of varying interest rates.


Passage number 134.
 MR. NATALUCCI.  I think we note in the memo that there is some reason it might go in the other direction if you think that there are switching costs from moving away from your counterparties and coming to the Federal Reserve, and you know that it is going to be raised only for two weeks.  Then, in some sense you’re trading off that you don’t want to send any signal in terms of monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing a potential scenario and weighing the trade-offs of sending signals in terms of monetary policy.


Passage number 135.
 MR. POTTER.  I think raising the rate above 5 basis points without telling people that you’re going to bring it back down would send a very confusing signal. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: Both Mr. Potter and Chair Yellen seem to be expressing their opinions or concerns about raising the interest rate without informing people about bringing it back down, but there is no clear contention or disagreement between them.


Passage number 136.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I just want to come back to the basics in terms of what helps me decide this.  The reason we placed a cap is that we were worried about the flight-to-safety demand.  We wanted to focus on supply-driven demand, downward pressure.  So a simple question:  By employing this, are we certain we won’t confuse the market between the two or will we be clarifying whether we really are providing this facility to deal with supply-driven demand pressures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fisher is simply asking a question and seeking clarification on whether the market will be confused or not.


Passage number 137.
 MR. NATALUCCI.  I think the dynamics are different.  For example, the financial-stability concern that we had was a situation in which the money funds or the cash lender would take money away from broker-dealers or other banks and come to the Federal Reserve, so the flow of money would go from the borrowers into the funds.  At year-end, you have different dynamics.  Those are the dealers that are shrinking their balance sheets, and so the cash lenders left with uninvested cash are looking for a home, for a safe harbor.  The directionality of flows, in some sense, is different.  So that wouldn’t raise the financial-stability concern that we had.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is explaining that the dynamics of the financial-stability concern are different during year-end compared to other times.


Passage number 138.
 MR. POTTER.  It’s the way that you said it.  It’s not the flow in leaving, it’s trying to think about what the fluctuation of supply is, which is exogenous to this type of event.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Potter is simply expressing his perspective and explaining his understanding of the situation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 139.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The response from President Lacker to thank Mrs. Yellen indicates a subtle disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 140.
 MR. LACKER.  I want to follow up about the rate.  You talked about wanting to learn more about the effect of the proximity of the rate to the zero bound.  When you vary the rate, you’re also varying the distance between the interest rate on excess reserves and the RRP rate.  And I think it’s not identified, right.  I mean, the econometric term—President Williams will correct me if I’m wrong, I’m sure—is I don’t think they’re separately identified.  You’re not going to be able to disentangle the two.  I was wondering if you have a strategy for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Lacker is simply asking a question and seeking clarification about the identification of certain variables.


Passage number 141.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I think there is a problem, and it’s just there unless we move the IOER rate as well, and then it just looks like you’re tightening policy.  So eventually we’ll do that experiment, too.  Do it for real.  But I think that we may get at least some signal about the effects of the zero lower bound because we’re going to go down to 3 basis points; we’re going to go up to 10 basis points; going down to 3 is 3 basis points on the spread between IOER and overnight RRP, but also going closer to the zero lower bound.  When you go up to 7 basis points, you go up to 10 basis points.  For example, if there’s a nonlinearity, you could attribute that to the zero lower bound, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 142.
 MR. LACKER.  But you need some auxiliary hypothesis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Lacker is simply stating that an auxiliary hypothesis is needed.


Passage number 143.
 MR. ENGLISH.  That’s right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. English simply acknowledges that the statement being made is correct.


Passage number 144.
 MR. POTTER.  It’s also good to move one thing and hold the other thing constant as well.  There’s some econometrics related to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It discusses a concept in econometrics without presenting opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 145.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.  You get the point.  It’s going to be hard to draw any independent inference, because you’re obviously looking for information about what happens when IOER rate is 125 basis points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply agrees with the statement that it will be difficult to draw any independent inference.


Passage number 146.
 MR. ENGLISH.  And it’s going to be very imperfect information about that, but I think it’s better to have the information we can get than not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. English is expressing his opinion that having some information is better than having none at all, but there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 147.
 MR. LACKER.  My recollection of the Committee discussion is that there wasn’t that much interest in a spread of 20 or 15 basis points between the IOER and ON RRP rates.  So why are we interested in testing 15 basis points for the spread, and 10 basis points for the rate now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 148.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Again, if we could move them both without implying monetary policy tightening, I think that would give us better information.  But this is a way of getting a handle on how sound is the floor that we get from the overnight RRP rate, and what is the effect on demand for this facility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is merely discussing the possibility of obtaining better information by moving certain things without implying monetary policy tightening.


Passage number 149.
 MR. NATALUCCI.  Assuming you tried to pick points on the demand curve by moving the rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a hypothetical statement and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 150.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes, I know, but you’re also varying the spread to IOER.  So it doesn’t tell you the effect of the rate alone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In this passage, Mr. Lacker simply acknowledges a fact and expresses an understanding. There is no explicit disagreement or contention present in the statement.


Passage number 151.
 MR. POTTER.  But the simple thing is, will repo rates move with the overnight RRP.  That will tell us something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In this passage, Mr. Potter is stating a simple question or situation. There is no contention or disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 152.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The answer is no because the passage does not provide any context or statement that indicates contention or disagreement. It only mentions a person's name without any accompanying information.


Passage number 153.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  And will demand go up or down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply poses a question and does not present any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 154.
  MR. POTTER.  The ideal would be demand doesn’t change, we just move the rates up. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Both Mr. Potter and Chair Yellen are discussing an ideal scenario without expressing differing opinions or conflicting views.


Passage number 155.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  In the memo, on page 9, the staff suggests that the Committee could emphasize that it was employing term RRPs as a test of its term RRP tool, that the Committee had not decided whether or not such operations would be used in the future.  I think that kind of communication would be desirable, so should I take that as being part of what is being proposed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they believe the suggested communication would be desirable.


Passage number 156.
 MR. POTTER.  Well, that statement, if you approve this, would be crystal clear about this.  This is just a test.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a neutral statement about a statement being clear or a test being conducted.


Passage number 157.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Okay.  I just wanted to be clear.  Thanks. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Are we ready to decide these questions.  We have before us two separate resolutions.  So let’s go to resolution 1, which pertains to the offering rate.  Do I have a motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The individuals in the passage are simply asking for clarification and preparing to make a decision.


Passage number 158.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage shows agreement and cooperation. The phrase "So moved" indicates that someone agrees with or supports a motion, and their statement is followed by the chairperson's agreement or acceptance with the phrase "Second."


Passage number 159.
 MR. FISCHER.  Second. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  All in favor.  [Chorus of ayes]  Any opposed.  [No response]  Okay.  Let’s go to resolution 2 on trying the term reverse repurchase operations at year-end.  Do I have a motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. All members are in agreement.


Passage number 160.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "So moved" is simply expressing agreement or support for a previous statement or proposal. It does not convey any form of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 161.
 MR. FISCHER.  Second. CHAIR YELLEN.  All in favor.  [Chorus of ayes]  Any opposed.  [No response]  Okay.  Great.  So those two resolutions on year-end testing pass.  And finally, we need to ratify domestic open market operations since the September meeting.  Do I have a motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage describes a series of resolutions and a voting process, but there is no indication of any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 162.
   MR. FISCHER.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thanks.  Without objection.  Okay.  The Board meeting is now ended.  So let’s continue.  Let’s go to the economic and financial situation, and I’ll ask Eric Engen to start us off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The participants are simply discussing and moving forward with the meeting agenda.


Passage number 163.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thanks.  I have two questions.  First, I want to thank the staff for doing all of the work on the dollar.  I raised it at the last meeting.  I wanted to see what would happen if the dollar went up a lot.  You did a lot of work describing that.  I have one very short question on the dollar.  What probability would you put on the 10 percent appreciation scenario materializing.  That’s the question for Steve. Then I have sort of a meta question about the Tealbook forecast.  I don’t know that anyone can actually answer this question.  Maybe I actually got it wrong.  But it seems to me, when I’ve been watching how the Tealbook updates their forecast meeting to meeting, it seems like the Tealbook takes on movements in the real economic variables only partially.  So if payroll employment is really strong in a quarter, they think, well, it’s going to be weaker next quarter.  And they do seem to take on the 10-year Treasury yield only partially, because the Treasury yield is sort of anchored by the path of the federal funds rate.  But when I look at how the Tealbook reacts to movements in the dollar and the stock market, it seems that the staff takes it on to a much greater degree.  In other words, they sort of mark to the current value of the dollar and the current value of the stock market.  I guess I don’t completely understand.  First, is it true that there is this difference.  And, second, if there is this difference, what’s the logic behind it.  It seems to me if the forecast, in fact, is the right forecast, then shouldn’t the stock market and the dollar, just like the 10-year yield, adjust to how the forecast materializes.  Is my supposition correct.  And if it’s not, tell me why.  And, if it is correct, then why the difference for some aspects of the Tealbook forecast.  I ask because I notice the Tealbook seems to move around a lot meeting to meeting based on how these financial variables move.  I ask myself the question, should we be reacting so much to market developments.  That’s sort of a meta question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit statements of contention or disagreement. The speaker is asking questions and seeking clarification on the forecasting methods used by the Tealbook, but there is no overt disagreement or debate present.


Passage number 164.
 MR. KAMIN.  Why don’t I start with the dollar to buy time for my colleagues.  On the dollar, I think there are two questions.  First, what is the probability of it indeed increasing by 10 percent.  I think our staff actually looked into these variations in the dollar historically using our data and came up with a number in the neighborhood of 10 percent.  So a 10 percent chance of it rising that much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting information and sharing their perspective on the probability of the dollar increasing by 10 percent.


Passage number 165.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Over what period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage because it simply states a question without any conflicting opinions or viewpoints.


Passage number 166.
 MR. KAMIN.  Actually, maybe Chris over there could answer that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting that someone else might be better suited to answer the question.


Passage number 167.
 MR. ERCEG.  Three quarters.  That it would rise 10 percent within three quarters.  Some of our staff ran a random walk model of the dollar and assessed the probability that it would rise at least 10 percent within three quarters.  It came up with a number on the order of 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact or an observation about the results of a model that was run by their staff.


Passage number 168.
 MR. KAMIN.  Okay.  I thought Vice Chairman Dudley’s question was, over what historical period did you do that analysis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 169.
 MR. ERCEG:  I think they went back roughly 30 years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is providing their opinion or belief about a certain topic without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 170.
 MR. KAMIN.  All right.  Fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kamin simply expresses agreement or satisfaction with something.


Passage number 171.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That’s a good answer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "That's a good answer" is affirming and does not express any conflicting opinions or viewpoints.


Passage number 172.
 MR. KAMIN.  Let’s put it this way.  If you have to think of choosing a random date in that 30-year period compared with now, it seems to me, based on the evolution of the economy, that now it might have a higher likelihood.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion based on their analysis of the economy.


Passage number 173.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes.  I would think it would probably be higher than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is a speculative statement expressing a personal opinion.


Passage number 174.
 MR. KAMIN.  So 10 percent will be the low number there.  And then, your other question is, well, how do we adjust our forecast in light of these changes in asset prices.  Certainly, for the dollar, I think our view takes into account a couple of things.  Number one, the basis for our forecast, before we add things onto it, is a random-walk model generated under the assumption that the current level of the dollar incorporates all expectation of future developments that the market already perceives.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining their perspective on how to adjust their forecast in light of changes in asset prices. They mention using a random-walk model and taking into account market expectations.


Passage number 175.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But isn’t that future expectation based on their view of how the economy is going to evolve.  And our view of how the economy would evolve might be different.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply suggests that different people may have different views on how the economy will evolve in the future.


Passage number 176.
 MR. KAMIN.  Right.  And when that is true, that is when we add to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a fact about a situation without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 177.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Okay.  You do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple acknowledgement or agreement.


Passage number 178.
 MR. KAMIN.  Exactly.  That’s when we look at how we think interest rates are going to evolve.  We compare it with how the market thinks interest rates are going to evolve.  And if, for example, we think that U.S. interest rates are going to rise more than the market expects, then we expect that in the future the markets will be surprised by interest rates rising.  In that circumstance, the dollar will rise, and we will build that into our current forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining how interest rates are analyzed and how it affects the forecast for the value of the dollar.


Passage number 179.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But there are these level shifts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "But there are these level shifts" is a simple statement and does not present any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 180.
 MR. KAMIN.  Yes.  But then when the level shifts happen, we basically, in that random walk way, start with the new level and then add our “surprise factors” on top of that, just because we think that it incorporates all of the incoming information that has occurred. And an important point to make, which I think will distinguish this from the 10-year bond yield, is that we don’t really have any good anchors for what the exchange rate ought to be.  In other words, you can come up with measures of the equilibrium exchange rate or an equilibrium dollar based on, for example, current account considerations or things like that.  But we think that those are extremely poor attractors of the actual dollar.  In other words, the dollar tends not to move toward whatever equilibrium you pick.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is mainly providing an explanation of how the exchange rate is determined and the challenges in predicting its movement.


Passage number 181.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I can see that.  And how about the stock market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging that they understand something and then asking a question about a different topic.


Passage number 182.
 MR. ENGEN:  As you correctly pointed out, our longer-term interest rates are anchored by our assumed path for policy rates.  On the stock market, we do not have an anchor that is as hard and fast, say, as an assumed path for the policy rate, but we do have a view that is informed by models on what the equity premium will be moving toward.  One way to think about it is, if our view on the equity premium at the end of the medium term is unchanged, then our path will not level-shift for stock prices.  The current changes will be retraced at some other time.  And indeed, in this Tealbook, the reduction in current equity prices, at least at the time of the Tealbook, was greater than the reduction in the endpoint further out.  We actually have slightly faster assumed equity price increases over the medium term. To give a little bit of advertising, not in this next round but the round after, we are planning one of our framework memos that will discuss how we put together the models we use for our financial assumptions.  But that equity-premium model is informed by earnings projections as well as projections for the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining their views and how they inform the models used for financial assumptions.


Passage number 183.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Okay.  Good. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of a series of affirmations and acknowledgements.


Passage number 184.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I had a comment and a question.  My comment builds on the conversation we had earlier about market-based measures of inflation compensation.  I know that Tealbook, Book A, makes significant use of market-based measures of inflation expectations.  And as I talked about earlier, I find these market-based measures particularly helpful.  I especially like what the Tealbook calls their “model-free” nature.  This is the language used in figure 1 in the box “Recent Declines in Inflation Compensation” on pages 52–53.  These market-based data are reflecting the assessments that actual households and firms are putting on the likelihood of events, but also the nature of the losses that are going to be affecting them during those events. If we see that risk premiums are moving around, as I indicated earlier, it is telling you something about how bad the households and firms expect those events to be, not just how likely they are going to be.  And I think that’s something we should be taking into account in our own assessments of policy.  So I hope the analysis presented to the FOMC by the staff will continue to feature these market-based probability distributions. My own staff would be happy to work with the Board staff or the Federal Reserve Bank of New York staff on increasing the use of such data.  That’s my comment. My question is about the long-run inflation outlook.  So we get back to 2 percent, even though underlying inflation right now is at 1.8 percent.  What makes that happen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily a comment and question from Mr. Kocherlakota.


Passage number 185.
 MR. ENGEN.  In both this Tealbook and prior Tealbooks, the factor that is the most important—it’s the key factor—is the credibility of the Committee.  With an understanding that we certainly don’t have great ideas and knowledge of how expectations are formed and what influences them, we assume that the credibility of the Committee will eventually get inflation expectations of wage and price setters back up to 2 percent.  Now, the longer-term projection in the previous Tealbook had the unemployment rate going below the natural rate, and that helped to move actual inflation back to 2 percent more quickly.  But it was still based on our assumption of credibility.  And it’s our assumption of credibility now that gets inflation eventually back up to 2 percent, but, I would note, at a much slower speed than what we had even in the previous Tealbook.  Then, with some undershooting on the unemployment rate, it was 2020 when the longer-term projection got back to 2 percent.  It now is only 1.9 percent, still below 2 percent, in 2020, and it’s not back until the end of 2021 or 2022.  So it’s a slower process, but it’s that assumption of credibility that is the key.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting their analysis and assumptions regarding the credibility of the Committee and its impact on inflation expectations.


Passage number 186.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  But statistically, I guess that’s some kind of autonomous movement in underlying inflation.  I mean, you don’t really have a good way to model it.  I’ll let you answer that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by one person, Mr. Kocherlakota, requesting an answer or explanation from someone else.


Passage number 187.
 MR. ENGEN.  That’s basically correct.  It’s an assumption that it will eventually move up to 2 percent.  We do not have a good model by any means on how those expectations will change. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speakers are agreeing with each other and discussing a topic without any conflicting views.


Passage number 188.
 MR. FISCHER.  Do you think that the 0.3 percentage point difference between the PCE price index and the CPI could explain how we get to 1.8 percent, and the markets get stuck there because the markets think we’re looking at the CPI.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking for the opinion of the person being addressed.


Passage number 189.
 MR. ENGEN.  I guess that’s possible.  In terms of market-based expectations, say, from TIPS, clearly those are based on CPI.  So they should be adding a differential in terms of about one-third of a percentage point, the difference between CPI and PCE inflation, on average.  I don’t know whether the expectations of actual wage and price setters—aside from people in financial markets—are taking account of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their understanding of market-based expectations and pointing out that they are not sure if other individuals are considering this factor.


Passage number 190.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple exchange of words between two individuals.


Passage number 191.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I, too, have two questions.  I’ll start with the question that builds on really quite a notable markdown in economic growth in the first quarter and the first half of next year from the September Tealbook.  The question is:  How and when will we be able to confirm which track we’re on.  The October Tealbook has solid 3 percent growth in the final quarter with payroll gains at about 225,000, and then starting at the beginning of the year, we slow down.  I think that’s the basic narrative.  Would it be fair to say that it’s not clear whether the data are coming in closer to the October or the September Tealbook until well into the first quarter at best, and maybe quite a bit later.  And if we’re thinking about a liftoff decision, my question is:  What will you look at to distinguish which track we’re on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any contention or disagreement. It is a question posed by Mr. Lockhart regarding economic growth and how to determine which track the data is pointing towards.


Passage number 192.
 MR. ENGEN.  Well, first of all, on your first point that things are slowing going into next year, the main changes in this Tealbook were to the financial conditioning assumptions.  Those take a little time to start to build in, and so at least right now, because of some other factors, we don’t see large effects in this second half of the year.  I guess, as always, we’ll look at the incoming data and make some assessment of what we think it implies as we move forward, so no different process than normal in terms of trying to assess which track we’re on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the process of assessing data and making assessments based on it.


Passage number 193.
 MR. LOCKHART.  The second question is to Steve on how SIGMA models the exchange rate sensitivity of U.S. exports.  You seem to have concluded that there’s potential, at least, for a fairly strong effect over the next three years of a higher dollar, particularly if we get the shock of 10 percent.  I took a look at the structure of exports, and 27 percent of them are to North America, essentially two-way flows around supply chain effects, so arguably probably not all that sensitive.  Some of them are commodities, and the commodity prices themselves have gone south as the exchange rate has gone north.  So how do you think about that.  I mean, the basic question is:  How price-sensitive do you think exports really are, and how does that then translate into a GDP effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement and question posed by Mr. Lockhart regarding the exchange rate sensitivity of U.S. exports.


Passage number 194.
 MR. KAMIN.  The results that we’ve recorded in the papers and in the Tealbook, first of all, are based on actual physical regressions of our exports on exchange rates and foreign output.  So to the extent that there are issues like two-way trade, a heavy commodity component, and other factors that might end up reducing the responsiveness to price of these exports, that will show up in our regressions.  Our parameters in some sense already incorporate that.  Broadly speaking—and I’m happy to be corrected by our experts over there—a 1 percent rise in the dollar will depress exports in the neighborhood of 1 percent; is that right, Joe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their findings and methodology without any contradictory or conflicting statements.


Passage number 195.
 MR. GRUBER.  Yes, that’s about right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Gruber agrees with something.


Passage number 196.
 MR. KAMIN.  And then, with exports being only a little over 10 percent of U.S. GDP, that translates effectively into about one-tenth on GDP.  Then, in terms of the judgmental forecast that we discussed and showed you in the paper that went to the Committee, that gets ramped up by about another half, taking into account spending multipliers.  CHAIR YELLEN.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a discussion of GDP and forecast numbers.


Passage number 197.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  My question is for Nellie, and it’s really on your last two bullets.  Two weeks ago when the 10-year Treasury fell below 2 percent, I assumed that the Bloomberg feed was wrong and thought it was quite peculiar that something that was so actively traded and is generally viewed as so liquid could move so much.  And when I tried to find the economic news, there wasn’t really anything that struck me—there were some soft reports, but nothing that seemed two standard deviations out of what anybody would have expected. So understanding how that market could move so much relates to your last two bullets, and I was wondering, do we have position data on broker-dealers.  What kind of information are you using.  Because when we start thinking about exiting and there actually is news about rates going up as opposed to rates going down, the same processes in reverse could be very destructive of what we’re trying to accomplish.  I think these last two bullets have become increasingly important as we’ve seen such a big and liquid market move so much.  So what kind of data are you pulling in to try to think about that.  I’d just be curious whether we have the data we need to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for information and expressing curiosity about the data being used to analyze the market and potential risks.


Passage number 198.
 MS. LIANG.  Let me start by saying we are still very much looking at this, and we want to be careful not to suggest that we know.  In the data that we have available, at least if you look at Treasury futures, say, at the CME, you can see moves—Treasury prices started to rise and yields fell on the retail sales, and then there was a window starting around 9:34 where you saw some big moves.  There are data from the CME that are at 100 milliseconds or some kind of unit like that.  You do not know who is on what side, but you can see to a limited extent the size of order books, and you can see volumes and, of course, prices.  There are some data from the Treasury market—for example, BrokerTec, which we have access to—and there are people pulling that together now.  There are limitations on us receiving the actual position data the CFTC would have.  There are, literally, indemnification clauses in the Dodd-Frank Act that require us to do some work, but we are talking to CFTC staff and working on that.  If we had all three of those, and maybe one more, we would get a pretty good picture.  Whether we can get them all together is hard to know, but I do think we’ll be able to develop a reasonable picture, maybe not exact, but if we have the CFTC data we could probably do it better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining the data that is available and the limitations they face in obtaining certain data, but there is no conflicting or opposing viewpoint expressed.


Passage number 199.
 MS. LOGAN.  Just to add to Nellie’s comments, we have the two big electronic trading platforms in the over-the-counter market, eSpeed and BrokerTec.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply mentions the existence of two electronic trading platforms in the over-the-counter market without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 200.
 MS. LIANG.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage states "MS. LIANG" without providing any further information or context. Without additional information, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 201.
 MS. LOGAN.  And we have some order book data, and we suspect we’ll be able to get those with names that would identify who was an algorithmic trading shop and who was not.  That may be useful in understanding what a typical trade day looks like and then what these days look like.  We have some positioning data that we get from the primary dealers, but that’s just the primary-dealer entity within the institution, and those are usually weekly in terms of the actual security.  Then we have broader data that we can look at in coupon buckets of Treasury securities that they have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 202.
 MR. POTTER.  The MarketSource piece on Friday is worth reading for what we knew as of Friday.  It gives you a feeling for how big the moves were.  The move between 8:30 and 9:00 in the Treasury market was about a six-standard-deviation move relative to retail sales, and then after that I think, well, all hell broke loose in some sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement expressing the author's opinion or observation about the events in the Treasury market.


Passage number 203.
 MS. LOGAN.  And I think what’s interesting from the data we’ve looked at thus far is the volumes were record sizes.  So the trade sizes were very small, but there were very many trades going through at much smaller sizes, which was maybe different than the big price gap that we were hearing about on the phones when we first also looked at Bloomberg screens and thought there was a mistake.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating an observation about the trade sizes and the difference between the recorded sizes and the perceived price gap on Bloomberg screens.


Passage number 204.
 MS. LIANG.  Right, and then you see a correlation across assets as well, such as at 9:30.  The S&P 500 E-mini futures and some of the FX contracts did the same thing at the same time.  So there are some things to track down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply presents observations and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 205.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Any further questions.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. 

The passage consists of a speaker thanking another person and asking if there are any additional questions. There is no indication of disagreement or contention between the speakers.


Passage number 206.
 MR. FISHER.  President Rosengren asked one of the questions I was going to ask.  And there have been a lot of questions asked, so I have a comment disguised as a question.  It goes back to your comment about the Treasury.  When I was at the Carter Administration Treasury Department and then went to Brown Brothers—this is in the last century—I joined the Foreign Exchange Advisory Group.  It was a great business then, even though the markets were less sophisticated, because we had fewer currencies to worry about, we had a G-6.  One thing you learned is that it’s notoriously difficult to predict exchange rates, even then, especially short-term movements over a one-year time horizon.  And most models don’t—or didn’t then, at least—significantly do better than a forecast of no change.  Of course, you didn’t tell your clients that, because they paid you to recommend different strategies.  I don’t think things have much changed.  I read both papers very carefully.  The one thing I learned back then, which I still think is to be considered and which the paper in terms of the effect of the dollar on U.S. GDP and inflation did not really deal with, is, in the very end, why.  I’d like to see a fuller explanation of that. The one thing that matters is whether price movements move according to endogenous developments or exogenous developments.  I enjoyed reading both papers.  And I don’t mean to be too critical, but it was rather uninformative on that front, because you have a chicken-and-egg situation.  You could argue that one of the reasons that the dollar has appreciated is because our economic outlook has improved.  And indeed, the paper goes back to July.  Well, since July, I think by most measurements, compared with the assumption at the beginning of July, the outlook for the U.S. economy has improved.  That’s an endogenous development. Let me pose a question.  Could you do a little bit better or more on that last part of the paper and try to answer that in a fuller manner.  I think that would give us more insight than the observations that existed in the earlier part.  If it’s endogenous, then it is led by the fact that we are outperforming, or we have surprised to the upside.  And I think it makes a big difference.  It is less worrisome to me that we have dollar strength as a result of our output increases or improved economic performance than if it is the other case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While there is a comment disguised as a question and a request for a fuller explanation, there is no evident contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 207.
 MR. KAMIN.  We very much take that point, and that’s in fact why we added that section at the end of one of the memos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states that the speaker agrees with a certain point and even added a section to address it. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 208.
 MR. FISHER.  That’s a tiny section.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, is making a statement without any opposition.


Passage number 209.
 MR. KAMIN.  Right.  Why was it so tiny.  There are a couple of issues.  First of all, this is an issue of how to parse out the changes in the forecast that we have made, let’s say between July and now, and their effect on the U.S. economy.  And in that regard, you certainly have to take into account, what are these impulses that tend to drive economic growth up, and thus, lift the dollar.  And then, what might be the partial equilibrium direct effect of the rise in the dollar once it occurred, even an endogenous response to the U.S. economy’s better outlook.  Let’s put it this way.  Even if you fully took on board that much of the rise in the dollar might have been an endogenous response to the U.S. economy, in doing the exercise of parsing out the different influences on the U.S. outlook, you’d still want to know what that direct effect was.  That was one of the considerations in play. The other one was, when we took a serious look at what were the factors that lifted the dollar over the course of the last four months or so, we came to the view that there was some favorable incoming data on the United States that was indeed tending to boost the dollar, as well as unfavorable data for foreign economies.  But that was not the whole picture, and by our reckoning that wasn’t even most of the run-up in the dollar.  By our reckoning, most of the run-up in the dollar seemed to reflect worries or uncertainties about the outlook rather than markdowns to agents’ modal forecasts for the economies.  And so in terms of parsing through the effects, insofar as that wasn’t a genuine increase in U.S. growth, but was rather changes in agents’ distributions over future likelihoods of economic growth, we thought that a lot of that run-up in the dollar could thus be treated as if it were exogenous, at least in the growth process.  So that’s one of the other reasons why we tend to focus on explaining the exogenous run-up in the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing different factors that may have contributed to the rise in the dollar and is explaining their reasoning for treating some of the factors as exogenous. There is no argument or conflicting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 210.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  I suggest we take a break and resume at 3:45.  There will be an opportunity then for comments on financial stability, and then we’ll go into the economic go-round. [Coffee break] CHAIR YELLEN.  Next, there is an opportunity to comment on financial stability.  We won’t have a full go-round, but anybody who would like to make a comment, please feel free to do so.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a schedule being discussed and an opportunity for comments being offered.


Passage number 211.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Just to follow-up, my last question was on high-frequency data, and I did have an opportunity in the Supervision Committee to talk a little bit about data that doesn’t come out with such high frequency.  Both the Chair and Governor Tarullo have talked about wholesale funding, but there really isn’t very much data on the Y–9 or the Call Report, particularly the Y–9, where broker-dealers are.  And I think it actually would be useful to have a little bit more information on both the maturity structure of repurchase agreements and other wholesale financing arrangements, as well as to think about the collateral arrangements, because I believe it gets to some of the same issues that we were just talking about in terms of how sensitive interest rates are to movements, and how a very important intermediary might react when there starts to be a fairly large movement in interest rates.  So there is an opportunity to think more broadly, not only about the high-frequency data, but also about quarterly data that perhaps would give us a better feeling of how some of this financing occurred. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement made by Mr. Rosengren addressing the need for additional data on wholesale funding and its impact on interest rates.


Passage number 212.
 MR. TARULLO.  Eric and I had this discussion in the Supervision Committee yesterday.  I both agree with Eric and would note that there is going to be an opportunity, almost a necessity, to do something along these lines, as we have more regulations that take account of maturity structures, either for liquidity regulation purposes, or if, as is quite possible, we go ahead with a surcharge for the GSIBs that includes a component based on vulnerability to funding runs.  And this is actually the right time to think about how we want to standardize reporting, which would align with the regulatory categories that will get created.  I think there is not only an opportunity to do it, but that this is the time to do it.  And following up on yesterday’s discussion, we’re going to try to get input from certainly the LISCC supervising Reserve Banks, but also anybody else who wants to contribute, as to how exactly we want to make those changes. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is agreement in the passage. The speaker both agrees with Eric and believes that there is an opportunity and a necessity to do something along the lines discussed. They think this is the right time to standardize reporting and they are seeking input from others on how to make those changes.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 213.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’ll be brief.  I’d like to thank the staff for their excellent assessment of the financial-stability situation.  As we know all too well from past experiences, financial-system shocks can do long-lasting harm to achievement of our inflation and employment goals.  And adjustments to monetary policy do have the potential to reduce the probability of such shocks.  So I continue to see financial-stability analysis as vital in evaluating whether the current path of policy is appropriate. I want to make two comments on that.  One is about the linkage between our dual-mandate risks and financial stability.  I would encourage the staff to continue to integrate analysis of financial stability into the assessment of risks in the Tealbook.  The QS report, quite appropriately, focuses on vulnerabilities, but ultimately the FOMC needs to know how those vulnerabilities translate into risks to prices and employment, as I was describing.  To go even further, of course, it would be desirable, too, for us to know what monetary policy can do about those risks in the event that supervision and regulation are not adequate to control them.  This is obviously work in progress, an agenda that I know we all want to get to, but I think it will start to become more and more pressing as the economy improves. My second comment builds on something I said last time about the benefits of confidential supervisory information as an input into this kind of analysis.  I had some prepared remarks on this, but actually the point has already been made for me by Nellie’s presentation.  If we look at exhibit 2, at the bottom right, I thought the discussion of fund redemptions at Pimco was very nice and very helpful to the Committee, and that built on confidential supervisory information—information that is not in the QS report directly, but I think, nonetheless, could be of use to us.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Kocherlakota, expresses agreement with the staff's assessment and emphasizes the importance of financial-stability analysis in evaluating monetary policy. However, he also suggests that more integration and analysis of financial stability into the Tealbook is needed, as well as the consideration of the potential role of monetary policy in controlling risks. He also mentions the benefits of confidential supervisory information, which he believes could be useful in the analysis. There is no clear disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 214.
 MR. FISCHER.  Nellie, if I could just ask about the first and third charts on exhibit 2.  I don’t quite remember how you described what was happening in chart 1 on exhibit 2.  That’s a pretty impressive rise in the total outstanding of leveraged loans and high-yield bonds since 2004, and even since 2007.  So it just kept on going.  And the high yield spread, as seen in chart 5 on exhibit 1, is about 6 percentage points.  That’s a pretty high yield.  What are these bonds doing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification and expressing their observation about the charts and data presented.


Passage number 215.
 MS. LIANG.  Starting with exhibit 2, chart 1 and chart 3, that is the outstandings of leveraged loans and high-yield debt combined.  It grew in the early part of the 2000s, from 2004 to 2007.  Then we had a crisis.  There was a spike in default rates.  It flattened out.  It has now been growing again pretty rapidly.  This is something we look at because it tends to be a predictor of defaults in models that we use and a predictor of bond returns.  Following through to chart 3 on exhibit 2, the black line has the leverage ratios for speculative-grade firms.  These are the below-investment-grade, the single-B kind of entities.  And you can see their leverage ratios are picking up from, say, 2011, when they had bottomed out.  So these are designed to think about default rates rising over the next couple years.  Usually, there is a lag in the process. The high-yield bond spread at the bottom of exhibit 1 is currently about 350 to 400 basis points, and we decompose that into a near-term and a far-term piece.  The far-term spread is between years 9 and 10, where the assumption is that investors don’t have views about how defaults will change between years 9 and 10.  And so any differences in spreads presumably reflect a change in risk sentiment, and that’s the lighter blue line.  That’s at a low level, and we think of that as investor risk sentiment.  The near-term spread reflects the risk and the risk premium between years 2 and 3, and it’s a bit higher.  And it has turned up since July.  It could be capturing some expectation of higher credit risk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting information about leveraged loans, high-yield debt, and leverage ratios without any indication of disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 216.
 MR. FISCHER.  Okay.  Thanks. CHAIR YELLEN.  Any further comments on financial stability.  Okay.  Seeing none, why don’t we go into our economic round, and we’ll start with President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a transition to the next topic of discussion.


Passage number 217.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  My forecast for the real economy has not changed much from the last FOMC meeting, despite the financial market turbulence.  While some of the international data proved to be softer than expected, that surprise did not seem commensurate with the financial market movements of the last several weeks.  My current expectation is that some of the recent asset price movements will prove fleeting, leaving at most a small imprint on real domestic conditions.  In effect, I am assuming that there was a temporary flight to quality that will abate as incoming data show only a modest reduction in global growth.  While the dollar has appreciated, my forecast had already built in some appreciation.  As a result, I’ve only marked down my net exports slightly to reflect the somewhat greater appreciation of the dollar and somewhat weaker data in Europe than I had previously expected. I do have some concerns that the combination of an appreciated dollar and reduced prices for oil, grain, and other commodities makes it unlikely we will reach 2 percent inflation as quickly as many of our SEP forecasts predict.  Adding in the very modest increases in wages to date, it is quite likely that we will see both core and total PCE inflation rates remaining at 1½ percent or less for several quarters.  Because I believe that liftoff should not occur until there’s clear evidence that full employment is within reach and inflation is trending toward our 2 percent goal, my monetary policy assumption differs from that of the Tealbook in that it both defers liftoff and assumes a more gradual increase in interest rates after liftoff from the zero lower bound. The longer we remain well below our 2 percent target, the more risk we take that inflation expectations drift down, implying a loss of credibility with the public.  The experience from Japan and now Europe indicates that indifference to very low inflation rates can generate a significant loss of confidence in the ability of a central bank to hit its 2 percent target.  It is hard to rationalize a 10-year German bond trading around 85 basis points and a 10-year Japanese bond trading below 50 basis points with any confidence that 10-year average inflation rates will be anywhere close to the publicly announced targets.  The financial market attention to inflation breakeven rates highlights an increased focus on our ability to hit our 2 percent inflation target.  While I currently believe the flight to quality has temporarily distorted Treasury prices in a way that obscures the inflation expectations embedded in them, were the low inflation breakevens to persist, I’d become more concerned that they were signaling a downward drift in longer-run inflation expectations. While my baseline forecast for real variables has not changed significantly, I would say that the financial market turbulence has led me to place more weight on potential downside risks to my forecast.  There are at least two possibilities here.  First, it could be that the financial market movements correctly portend weaker global economic growth, in which case we will all be revising our forecasts downward over time.  But it’s also possible that a global tightening of financial conditions could weaken developed economies enough to cause a slowdown in growth.  In either case, I would become more concerned about whether we can reach our employment and inflation goals within the forecast horizon.  As many have noted, because of our limited ability to offset negative shocks when the funds rate is at the zero lower bound, the costs from the downside risks are much greater than those from risks to the upside.  This highlights the advantage of a patient monetary policy, which underlies my current forecast.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a speech by Mr. Rosengren outlining his forecast and concerns about inflation and financial market turbulence.


Passage number 218.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage.


Passage number 219.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Other than the barb about the Texas Rangers, I agree completely with what President Williams just said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker explicitly states that they agree completely with President Williams.


Passage number 220.
 MR. EVANS.  What, did they win the World Series.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question about whether or not "they" won the World Series.


Passage number 221.
 MR. FISHER.  They never have won the World Series.  But anyway, I would echo what President Williams said.  I agree nearly completely with what he just commented on. I’m going to talk a little bit about the Texas economy, my regional economy.  I want to make a special comment on oil, maybe refer to what I have heard from some of my interlocutors, and then just conclude.  Now, I realize that when you talk about the Texas economy, which is 98 percent of my District, to Texans, it’s like driving down the street with your windows open with your favorite song going full blast and annoying absolutely everybody else who is near you.  But bear with me for a second.  [Laughter] Our third-quarter job growth, which we have just calculated, was very strong at 3.9 percent.  Year-to-date is 3.5 percent.  More jobs have been created in Texas this year to date—304,300 according to my staff, and we have adjusted the data we get from the BLS and from the state—than the entire year last year.  It’s important to understand that employment gains have been broad based, not concentrated in energy.  Professional and business services have posted much stronger job gains this year along with another pickup in trade and transportation and, believe it or not, leisure and hospitality as a tourism spot, as well as even government spending.  These sectors take up a much larger share of the regional economy than energy.  We have been helped by economic growth in Mexico, and I’ll come back to that just in a second.  Our exports from the 11th Federal Reserve District are extremely strong. I want to correct a misinterpretation by the New York Fed of the October release for our Texas manufacturing output survey that was just released on Monday.  It was not weak; it was strong.  It indicated that manufacturing activity continued at a robust pace with strong positive readings in our production, general business activity, and company outlook indexes. Wage pressures remain elevated in my District.  Wages and benefits are increasing at a 3.6 percent rate.  Initial unemployment claims were down 9.6 percent in the third quarter.  Our unemployment rate is at 5.2 percent.  That is because our denominator in the calculation has been growing at 10 times the rate of that in the rest of the United States.  We have high growth in those seeking work.  Otherwise you would expect our unemployment rate to be somewhere in the 4s, or whatever it may be.  I think it’s important to understand that we are very much a diversified economy, growing very strongly, with very high job growth and an enormous supply of workers coming into our work system. Now, having said we are not energy concentrated, I do want to talk about energy, and the reason for that is because even though it’s only 2.6 percent of our employment, including support services, it is about 12 percent of the output of our District—I do have 990 wells in my District out of the 1,900 that operate in the country.  I pretend to know something about business, and I’d like to share that with you. I think it’s very important to understand that when you think about the effect of lower energy prices domestically, it has a different effect on different sectors of the energy sector.  For example, horizontal wells, which are the hot new thing, typically have a very big burst of production the first year or two, and then they have rapid declines from that point onward.  Whereas the vertical wells tend to produce over a much longer period.  I want to point to the example of the Haynesville Shale in Louisiana, where when U.S. natural gas prices began to crater in 2011, drillers just moved out of the area, and production is now 35 percent lower than it was at its peak level in 2011. That said, it may not be as damaging to our domestic production as we think.  There are offsets, and there are silver linings.  For example, as I have mentioned at many, many meetings here, a Beige Book retail contact noted that you just cannot find mechanics or technicians or truck drivers or welders or pipefitters in areas of the state in which the energy sector was booming.  We do now expect to see some relief on that front because of the horizontal well aspect.  Indeed, if you go through the cycle of those wells and these prices maintain, you might be able to have some release on some of the wage price pressures that we’ve seen.  There’s a little silver lining there.  In fact, the CEO of Fluor called to say that he realized I was about to retire sometime within the next year, and he offered me that I could probably make more money as a master welder working for his firm than I did at the Federal Reserve.  There’s a good anecdotal example for you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 222.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  You don’t have the training, Richard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Kocherlakota about someone's lack of training.


Passage number 223.
 MR. FISHER.  I know I don’t.  [Laughter]  I’m absolutely useless from that standpoint.  Or truck driving, for that matter.  We do find that people complain they can’t expand their small businesses because of the unavailability of workers.  So there might be some release that comes from this. Now, I want to talk about the international side of it.  Two iterations before you,  Madam Chair, every time the Chairman was called upon to make a statement or go to the White House to talk about energy, he would call me and say, “Call Exxon and find out what’s going on.”  I do talk to Exxon, as you know, and I indeed refreshed that memory talking to its CEO this morning—after having talked at length last week plus the other energy independent smaller operators and the larger integrateds.  I think it’s important to bear in mind that, from the standpoint of the Saudis, the Kuwaitis, and the Emiratis, they are not uncomfortable with $70 to $80 oil.  They’re not uncomfortable because their budgets will still work within that price range.  There is the added plus that it gives them a little shove for the Iranians and the Russians and gets rid of the nuisance of the Venezuelans.  It is their expectation, according to my interlocutors, that this price level could well maintain itself all the way through 2016.  It would not make them feel uncomfortable to do that.  They are building, indeed, their own budgets around $80 oil, and we are beginning to see in the oil sector some companies begin to build their budgets around $70 to $80 oil, which means a slight reduction in workforce, but not a dramatic one.  We will have to see how that obtains.  I just wanted to comment on that. From the standpoint of the retailers and those that operate shopping malls, which has been the weakest performing sector of the economy, this decline in oil prices, which translates into motor gas after a certain time interval—a time interval that depends, frankly, on how long they wish to capture margins.  When prices go up, typically the distributors and the retailers will have to move quickly because they have cash flow problems.  When prices go down, they spend as much time as possible capturing the margin.  We are beginning to see prices at the tank go below $3.  There’s a big article in the Wall Street Journal yesterday or today on that.  Indeed, the expectation among the large companies that I speak to, and the small operators, is that motor gas will be well below $3 in fairly quick order. There are positive knock-on effects, and I am hearing that from my interlocutors, certainly from the retailers and certainly from those that depend on the price of energy.  I think we need to take into account in our modeling—and I don’t know the degree to which we do—the positive effect of a decline in energy prices and how it might affect retail sales and consumption, as well as be an offset on employment or have counter crosscurrents on unemployment. Other interlocutors indicate that July and August were very strong months, that there was a slight tailoff in September, but that October is picking up.  I found most interesting my discussion with a very large retailer, whose name I won’t mention, but it is the largest in the world and is located in Arkansas.  In terms of its layaway sales—mind you, this is the bottom income quartile to the second income quartile—it has seen that basically 73 percent of the people that used that facility last year no longer feel the need for it.  If the company goes through its surveys and focus groups on what counts the most to its customer base—and, again, these are the bottom two income quartiles with a little bit of the surveys in the beginning of the third income quartile—the ranking in terms of the greatest concerns or interests are the price of gas, the price of heating and cooling, and then employment.  But when the company takes a deep dive into what the surveys say about employment, it’s no longer worry about finding a job or having a job.  It’s a question about wages and will their wages be raised.  Again, it may be backward-looking, as President Evans mentioned.  It is the most recent survey, and the company polls a survey and does focus groups almost weekly and, in some cases, daily. The bottom line, Madam Chair, is my view of the modal outlook for the U.S. economy has changed very little since our September meeting.  I have already factored in—or I had already factored in, and I refer to you to the previous meeting’s transcript—the likelihood of some financial volatility and some market correction.  Beyond that, the asset price changes we have seen over the past five weeks, I don’t believe, are really that large or have such a great effect on the economy.  With regard to the dollar, I think it is important, as President Bullard and President Lockhart pointed out, that we are very North America–centric.  Only 8 percent of our exports go to Europe, and I think we have to take that into account.  I’m less worried about the movement that has taken place in the dollar as well. I will add, to conclude, that I remain highly skeptical of the Tealbook’s assumed level of longer-term inflation expectations, and so remain highly skeptical regarding the baseline inflation forecast.  As to recent declines in market measures of longer-term expectations, I think that President Williams had a very good point, and I also accept the judgment of the New York Fed staff, who in their recent MarketSource report said that these reflect mostly a falling inflation risk premium rather than expected inflation.  As we go forward, though, I would agree with President Williams that we need to be alert to any indication that longer-term expectations are de-anchoring.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is providing their own perspective and insights on various topics, but there is no clear disagreement with any other person or point of view.


Passage number 224.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Can I ask a quick question. CHAIR YELLEN.  Oh, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply asks if they can ask a quick question and Chair Yellen responds affirmatively.


Passage number 225.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I take your point that the drop in energy prices has a benefit for households and then has a negative consequence for oil investment.  Where do you see the tipping point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply acknowledges the potential benefits of the drop in energy prices for households and acknowledges the negative consequence it may have on oil investment. The question at the end, about the tipping point, indicates a curiosity or inquiry rather than a disagreement.


Passage number 226.
 MR. FISHER.  It is very hard, Vice Chairman Dudley, and I keep asking this question, and I think part of it has to do with how our economy is currently geared and how it affects confidence.  One of the confidence pluses is the fact that we’re viewed as more energy-independent, and here’s where North America comes into play.  North America is energy independent if you take Mexico’s potential, Canada’s output, and our own.  Then you have a different equation from a geopolitical standpoint, and it also has a significant meaning for the 500 million people, which is the critical mass who live in those three countries.  I will add parenthetically that Canada is no bigger than Texas population-wise, but it is certainly bigger geographically.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include contention or disagreement.


Passage number 227.
 MR. TARULLO.  Barely.  [Laughter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no disagreement or contention in the passage. The response "Barely." is given in a lighthearted manner, indicated by the following laughter.


Passage number 228.
] MR. FISHER.  I do think it’s important to take into account the confidence-building factor that takes place here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about the importance of considering the confidence-building factor in a situation, but there is no opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 229.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I guess the question I’m asking is if energy prices fell to $80 a barrel, presumably consumers would benefit, but the oil production wouldn’t be really much affected, but if it fell to $60 a barrel, yes, you’d still get a benefit for consumers, but then you’d start to actually see an effect on production.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: This passage does not involve contention or disagreement.


Passage number 230.
 MR. FISHER.  Yes, what I’m hearing is the $70 number seems to be the crossing point.  Nobody knows, and the reason for that is because it not only varies field by field, but it varies within fields.  The Saudis have a two-year study effort on right now to determine the marginal lifting cost of oil in the United States.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information about the variability of oil lifting costs in the United States.


Passage number 231.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "right" is not enough to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage. More context is needed.


Passage number 232.
 MR. FISHER.  As best as I  understand it, both from listening to people in my region and talking to those that deal with the Middle Eastern governments in particular, the expectation is that we might get a dip below $70.  This is pure expectation, and, again, I don’t think they know any better than we do.  They’re just practitioners.  But the expectation is that it could dip below $70 briefly, but it’s likely it will stay in the $70 to $80 range for quite a sustained period.  What is a sustained period.  Don’t know.  What are they budgeting.  Out to as much as two years, but certainly one year, at least.  I can’t answer any more clearly than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is describing their understanding of the expectations regarding oil prices, based on conversations with people in their region and those who deal with Middle Eastern governments. They acknowledge that these expectations are uncertain and that there is no definite answer to the duration of the expected price range.


Passage number 233.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply consists of a brief exchange of gratitude.


Passage number 234.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Over the intermeeting period, my Bank focused our intelligence efforts on business sentiment, confidence in a 3 percent growth outlook, reaction to global risk developments, and indication of wage growth.  We had 65 one-on-one interviews across the Southeast, 14 roundtables, 4 advisory committee sessions, 6 board meetings, 2 of which were joint meetings with other Branches in other Districts.  I mention all of this simply to convey that our soundings were extensive. Reports of our business contacts confirmed a modestly improving tenor of business activity.  Demand conditions have generally improved, and the outlook over the short and medium term is for continued steady but not accelerating economic growth.  Optimism appears to have spread to locales that were previously less upbeat, such as southern Mississippi.  Of course, football rankings helped as well.  Reports from retail contacts were mixed and reflected continuation of the previously reported bifurcated recovery.  Low- and middle-income households remained conservative with discretionary spending.  However, as has already been pointed out, the lower gasoline prices are expected to ease some of the strain on lower-end consumers and allow for more discretionary spending. Worthy of note, I think, were reports from logistics contacts.  They reported the accumulation of inventories of consumer goods in anticipation of strong holiday sales.  A year ago, retailers reported they were keeping inventories intentionally lean as a precaution against the weak holiday sale season.  Regarding wages, we picked up no evidence of broad-based acceleration of wage pressures, although there are sporadic reports of growing wage pressures in the category of lower-skilled jobs.  Where there is competitive pressure for labor, we heard reports of employers altering total compensation packages by increasing incentive pay or enhancing benefit structures rather than raising base pay.  Credit across the Sixth District seems to be readily available to qualified borrowers.  Credit constraints continue to be reported by small businesses, but there are no suggestions that credit has tightened. I’ve not changed my economic growth outlook from that submitted in September.  I continue to expect medium-term growth around 3 percent, and I interpret the incoming data to be broadly in line with this expectation.  Our tracking estimate for the third quarter is near 3 percent.  Along with this growth forecast, I see employment conditions continuing to make progress as best evidenced by sustained payroll job numbers above 200,000 a month.  Regarding inflation, I marked my near-term projection lower in response to falling gasoline prices and the expected consumer price effect of the run-up of the dollar.  For the medium term, I’m still holding to the projection of gradual firming in wage and price growth, with some risk to the downside. I am not seeing anything in the data nor hearing anything material in reports from contacts in my District to question this basic outlook.  That said, it’s obvious there have been economic developments since the latest meeting that give pause, namely, the perception of slower global growth, appreciation of the dollar, and increased financial market volatility.  Some of our contacts did express mild concerns about slowing global economic growth and market volatility but did not mention the dollar. In this meeting’s Tealbook, the first half of next year has GDP growth tracking only around an annual rate of 2¼ percent, net jobs growth slowing to around 150,000 a month, and core inflation remaining stuck at 1.5 percent.  The Tealbook seems to incorporate effects of adverse international developments into the baseline forecast.  In contrast, I’m treating these concerns as downside risks to my growth and inflation outlook rather than taking them on board as aspects of the baseline. I think the sometimes ritualistic exercise we go through contrasting our forecast to the Tealbook serves, in this case, quite a good purpose.  We are setting up in this meeting a forward-guidance framework for moving toward a decision to initiate normalization.  We’re likely to agree on verbiage that, whether we like it or not, puts that decision to some extent “on the clock.”  This is the reality, I think, even with our strong admonitions that liftoff is data-dependent.  If the Tealbook is right about the first half of 2015, the weight of the policy decision next year would likely be on a projection of improvement versus my more optimistic, and hopefully data-confirmed, track of economic performance.  The Tealbook environment would be a very challenging circumstance in which to signal initiation of normalization of the policy rate.  Thanks to the staff for calling out a possible dilemma, I’ll have more comments on communication scenarios and strategy and forward guidance in the next round.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 235.
 MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  There has been little change in the outlook for the Fourth District economy since our latest meeting.  Moderate economic growth continues and the reports from business contacts remain positive despite the turbulence in financial markets and the Ebola scare, which had Cleveland, in particular, on edge because of one patient’s travel schedule.  Fifty-five percent of our contacts reported an improvement in business conditions over the past six to eight weeks compared with 8 percent reporting a deterioration.  Those responses yielded a diffusion index of 47, the same as in September but up from 10 last December. The manufacturing sector is playing a leading role in the improvement of the District’s economy.  About half of our manufacturing contacts reported better business conditions consistent with moderate expansion.  Although they were slightly less bullish than in September, many of our manufacturers expect demand for their products to remain healthy over the remainder of the year.  In the construction sector, nonresidential builders are doing very well, so well, in fact, that some are turning down work, and there are concerns about the availability of subcontractors.  As in the rest of the country, multifamily housing activity is strong, while single-family residential construction is slowly improving after a weak summer. Continued growth is reflected in the steady strengthening of District labor markets.  Employment in the District is growing at an annual pace of nearly 1 percent this year, up from just over ½ percent in the past two years.  The District unemployment rate fell over the intermeeting period and is down more than 1 percentage point from the start of the year.  At 5.6 percent, the District unemployment rate is now slightly less than its average over the 2001– 07 expansion.  There continue to be few signs of price pressures either building or diminishing among District firms, though firms have noticed the lower oil prices.  We continue to hear anecdotal reports of hard-to-fill jobs.  There are few reports of significant compensation pressures, but some are now increasing benefits to retain and attract some types of workers and others are planning to increase wages. Turning to the national economy, I have not made any material change to my modal economic growth forecast.  I see moderate growth of about 3 percent, which is somewhat above trend for the next two years.  Incoming data have been mixed but largely as expected.  Financial markets have been volatile, but I’m not taking too much signal from that yet.  I have not marked my forecast down as much as the Tealbook in response to the stronger dollar and recent variability in other financial market conditions.  The weakness in the European economy and slowdown in China are not new information.  I had already incorporated much of that into my forecast.  Still, the chance these economies may be weaker than expected has increased the downside risk to my forecast. Lower oil and commodity prices will temporarily lower headline inflation over the near term, but as these prices stabilize, I expect inflation to move back up and to continue gradually moving toward our goal.  Most models suggest that monetary policy shouldn’t respond to these relative-price shocks. My forecast that inflation will gradually return to our goal reflects anchored inflation expectations.  The Cleveland Fed’s 10-year CPI inflation expectations measure and survey-based measures of medium- to longer-run inflation expectations remain quite stable near 2 percent.  Measures of inflation expectations based on asset prices suggest some decline, but I’m wary of reading too much into these measures because during periods of heightened volatility like we’ve seen, flight-to-quality flows into Treasury securities affect the risk premiums on those assets, making it harder to draw a conclusion about inflation expectations from market prices. Nothing over the intermeeting period has changed my view that we’ve made significant progress in labor markets since the start of the asset purchase program in September of 2012, which was set as one of the important conditions for ending the program.  Recent research by Cleveland Fed staff suggests that the degree of underutilization of labor resources has been significantly reduced.  Our research has estimated the so-called longer-run, normal level of unemployment using five different conceptual approaches.  Most of the approaches were more statistical in nature.  One was consistent with the concept from a New Keynesian sticky-price model.  Over the past few years, the estimates of underutilization varied quite a bit depending on the concept being used.  However, all of the estimates indicate that underutilization has declined, and they all suggest relatively little underutilization remains today.  Of course, these estimates are subject to considerable uncertainty, and they’re based on the unemployment rate rather than on broader measures of labor market activity, but even these broader measures, as summarized in labor market condition indexes, show improvement. In thinking about the implications of the broader index of labor market conditions for policy, I took advantage of the fact that one of the creators of the Board’s index is now a Cleveland Fed economist and asked him to examine what a Taylor-type rule would look like if instead of using the unemployment rate we used the broader conditions index.  This turned out to be a more complicated exercise than I had anticipated because the conditions index is constructed to indicate a change in conditions rather than a level of activity.  One way to get around this issue is to focus on monetary policy difference rules.  What we find is that currently a policy rule based on the conditions index and a policy rule based on the unemployment rate would yield pretty similar levels of the federal funds rate and point to a federal funds rate slightly above the current level.  Now, this is work in progress, but so far the results support the view that judged by either the unemployment rate or the broader labor market conditions index we are getting nearer the liftoff.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents information about the current state of the Fourth District economy and the speaker's forecast for the national economy.


Passage number 236.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The most striking economic development of the intermeeting period was the spike in financial market volatility.  Movements in prices of stocks, bonds, and commodities as well as the foreign exchange value of the dollar seemed to largely reflect concerns about slower economic growth in Europe and China, which would, in turn, suggest the possibility of lower growth in U.S. exports.  That said, my outlook for the United States has not materially changed.  I’m still expecting GDP growth between 2 and 2½ percent over the next year or two.  I recognize the downside risks to economic growth abroad do appear to have risen and would imply at least some increase in the downside risk to U.S. growth.  But, all else equal, lower commodity prices and lower long-term interest rates should tend to bolster growth.  Moreover, the recent data flow for the United States has been positive.  The fact that U.S. equity markets have basically retraced over the past week or two seems consistent with little net change in U.S. growth prospects over that period.  The fact that Treasury yields remain lower suggests that safe-haven flows represented the more persistent shift in views about growth prospects for Europe and China. A few comments on the recent data.  Some observers have been expecting substantial acceleration in consumer spending, and they saw the September retail sales report as an unwelcome downside surprise.  But others have been projecting consumption to grow at rates in line with recent trends, and against that more modest expectation, the latest retail sales report was not so discouraging.  Similarly, some observers have been anticipating a surge in housing activity.  Against a more modest expectation, however, the recent residential investment data have not been as disappointing. On the brighter side, investment in equipment and intangibles has been reasonably strong for several years, and reports for recent months have been promising.  New orders for nondefense capital goods, excluding aircraft, are up more than 8 percent over the past year, despite a downtick in the most recent month released this morning, and equipment investment seems poised to make a strong contribution to third-quarter GDP.  New orders also look robust in the ISM indexes and in our own Fifth District indexes. Speaking of our indexes, they’ve been remarkably strong lately.  Our composite index of manufacturing activity measured as a three-month average is at its highest level in more than three years, and our index of service sector revenues is at its highest level in 17 years.  These figures are especially notable in light of the sizable dependence of our District on federal government contracts and employment, as a result of which much of the area around D.C. and southeast Virginia has been lagging the nation as a whole.  To give you a feel for these differences, over the past 12 months, employment grew by less than 1 percent each in D.C., Maryland, and Virginia.  In contrast, employment is up year over year by more than 2 percent in West Virginia and North and South Carolina.  Much of the growth in the Carolinas has been in relatively high-wage occupations.  For example, over the past year, employment in professional and business services grew by more than 7 percent in North Carolina, while it fell 1.8 percent in Virginia.  The heavy drag from federal expenditures makes the strength in our Districtwide indexes even more impressive. I should add that our surveys also show over the past few months an uptick in the reported change in current prices paid and received, as well as in expectations for price changes over the next six months.  These inflation indicators have been relatively subdued for several quarters, and so the recent moves may signal some emerging firming of inflation.  Too soon to say, of course, but worth watching.  I do expect inflation to move back toward 2 percent after this energy price move plays out.  I agree very much with the comments and perspectives of President Williams on inflation analysis.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 237.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The District economy continues to expand, and our business contacts remain generally optimistic about the future.  Consumers have accelerated the pace of spending, and businesses in the services sector are reporting stronger growth.  In addition, manufacturers’ capital spending plans remain solid.  Unemployment is 5 percent or less in most District states, and contacts continue to report difficulty in finding qualified labor, both low skilled and for skills in demand.  Still, wage pressures remain mostly limited to select occupations and to new hires.  Plans for base wage increases for 2015 remain at about 3 percent according to our contacts. Falling oil prices are a concern for the region as a whole, although the District is much less dependent on oil and gas than it was in the 1980s boom-and-bust period.  Firms responding to our quarterly energy survey reported needing an average price of $79 per barrel in active fields to make a profit.  In the most productive shale plays, the profitable price is closer to $65 per barrel with the cutoff even lower in the sweet spots.  At current prices, most firms, especially large ones, plan to continue drilling.  Although prices are generally expected to remain in the $75 to $90 band, our contacts suggested a decline to $70 to $75 per barrel that persisted beyond their hedged positions could cause activity to plummet. In the agriculture sector, weak crop prices continue to weigh on farm income and demand for farm operating loans is up substantially.  Food processing and agriculture machinery and related businesses are slowing as a result of lower farm income and a drop in exports. Recent financial volatility, renewed concerns about growth, and low inflation in Europe bear watching but have not yet fundamentally changed my view about economic growth.  Notwithstanding President Williams’s wildly optimistic World Series forecast [laughter], I continue to expect moderate growth of around 3 percent for the remainder of this year and into 2015.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information about the state of the economy and presenting their own view on future economic growth.


Passage number 238.
 MR. LACKER.  Solid Midwestern growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that there is solid Midwestern growth.


Passage number 239.
 MS. GEORGE.  While the stronger dollar and weaker foreign growth may tend to damp U.S. growth, I see the decline in both oil prices and longer-term interest rates providing a countervailing impetus to economic growth. Fundamental indicators of employment and production remain solid, and I remain encouraged, like others, by recent labor market developments.  For example, the decline in the unemployment rate this year has been almost entirely due to increases in household employment rather than declining labor force participation as in previous years, and job openings are at a 13-year high with the number of unemployed workers per job opening down to 2, its lowest level since the recession.  Looking across these and a host of other labor market indicators, the Kansas City Fed’s Labor Market Conditions Indicators registered another increase in the level of activity in September and continued strong momentum near its historical high.  The level of activity was the highest since October 2008 when the unemployment rate was 6.5 percent, and for the past six months the momentum indicator has remained at high levels relative to what can be considered normal. Finally, my staff recently looked at wage growth among jobs switchers, as reported by ADP.  This is potentially an important signal about the extent to which businesses are competing more aggressively to attract existing workers away from their current employers.  Based on the ADP data, wage growth for these workers has risen from 4 percent to 5.3 percent over the past 18 months as the quit rate has increased from 1.5 to 1.8.  As more workers voluntarily seek alternative employment and employers compete to hire them, the wages of job switchers are rising at a faster pace.  I expect this trend to continue and increasingly to put pressure on overall wage rates. Turning to inflation, I expect to see some softness in the near term due to the stronger dollar and lower oil prices.  And although the recent decline in longer-term inflation expectations as measured by the five-year, five-year forward breakeven rate bears watching, survey-based measures of inflation expectations remain well anchored.  As the unemployment rate is expected to fall to its natural rate by late 2015 and longer-term inflation expectations remain anchored, it seems reasonable to assume that inflation will move toward the 2 percent target.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. George discusses various indicators that suggest a positive outlook for economic growth, such as improvements in labor market conditions and wage growth for job switchers. She also mentions some potential challenges, such as inflation softness and the stronger dollar, but overall remains encouraged about the economic outlook.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 240.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I will focus my remarks on the evolution of the inflation outlook and market-based measures of inflation expectations. In December of 2013, when we initiated the taper, the FOMC statement made reference to watching for evidence that inflation was moving back to target over the medium term.  In the first part of this year, there were such signs, as inflation rose more rapidly than many forecasters had expected.  These signs have proven to be transitory.  At this point, the medium-term inflation outlook is no better than it was last December.  Indeed, in December 2013, the Tealbook projected that inflation would be back to target by 2018.  The Tealbook now projects that inflation will remain below target until early in the next decade.  This more subdued inflation outlook comes even though the Tealbook’s outlook for monetary policy is considerably more accommodative than it was a couple of months ago. We have a 2 percent inflation target, and that target is like any other goal.  Its credibility relies on our consistently taking clear actions to push inflation back toward that target.  I am concerned that failing to react to the ongoing subdued inflation outlook has begun to create significant downside risks to the credibility of that target.  We can see that downside risk reflected in the behavior of longer-term market-based inflation expectations.  As of last week, the five-year, five-year forward inflation breakevens—measured by spreads between TIPS and nominal Treasuries—fell to under 2.2 percent.  It is very low by historical standards, lower than all but 1 percent of the daily observations in the previous 10 years.  Now, as many have noted, the potential variation over time and the relative liquidity demand for TIPS and nominal Treasuries sort of reflect quality issues in the Treasury market.  It means we should interpret these data with care, and it’s useful to supplement this observation about Treasury inflation breakevens by looking at the recent behavior of five-year, five-year forward inflation expectations embedded in zero coupon inflation swaps.  The current reading on that measure is also unusually low, lower than all but 3 percent of the daily observations of the previous 10 years. I focused on market-based measures of inflation expectations.  As many of you have noted, survey-based measures of inflation expectations have been considerably more stable, but I do not think we should be overly sanguine about this stability.  As a January 2014 memo on the staff inflation outlook described, survey-based measures of inflation expectations remained surprisingly stable in Japan, even as the credibility of that central bank eroded. To sum up, Madam Chair, the inflation outlook remains subdued.  I see little evidence that inflation is, indeed, trending upward over the medium term.  I am concerned that our failure to respond to the subdued inflation outlook is creating a substantial downside risk to the credibility of our inflation target.  Consistent with this concern, market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are unusually low by historical standards.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Kocherlakota, disagrees with the current approach to inflation and expresses concern about the credibility of the inflation target. He argues that the inflation outlook remains subdued and that failure to respond to this creates a significant downside risk. He supports his argument by citing market-based measures of inflation expectations that are unusually low.


Passage number 241.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  My view of the economy hasn’t changed much despite the turbulence in financial markets.  We’ve marked down our forecasts for economic growth and inflation slightly, but the fundamental narrative regarding the outlook remains intact.  Fiscal restraint is ending.  Financial conditions remain very accommodative.  Banks are well capitalized and tending to ease lending standards.  Moreover, fuel for continued gains in consumer spending is evident in solid job gains and lower energy prices—lower energy prices that are likely to boost the growth rate of real income.  Moreover, we have a saving rate that still seems relatively high compared with the underlying trend in net worth to income.  A growth trajectory of just short of 3 percent still seems the most likely outcome.  In particular, I’d be very hesitant to put too much weight on recent financial market developments.  Yes, financial market conditions are slightly tighter than where we were the previous FOMC meeting, but they’re still very accommodative, and what we’ve seen could reverse quickly, and, in fact, already has reversed to a significant degree. With respect to the labor market side of our mandate, I want to just offer a couple of brief thoughts.  Now, some have argued that the large increase in job vacancy rates that we’ve seen, which are above and beyond what one would expect given the unemployment rate, indicates a significant tightening of the labor market and a potential precursor of faster wage growth.  That was brought up by President George and was part of the weekly briefing at the Board this week.  I think that’s certainly a possible explanation, but I think there is an alternative explanation worth considering.  The end of the extended unemployment compensation benefits at the end of last year essentially led to a significant expansion in the effective supply of labor, as people basically had to start really looking for work.  This meant that the ability to hire someone at a given wage increased, as there was a larger effective pool of potential employees available.  Put differently, firms had an incentive to post more job openings because the prospect of actually making a match and bringing someone on board increased. What did we see.  We saw payrolls growing rapidly relative to the underlying growth base.  It sort of fits what we actually saw in terms of the economic data.  In other words, some of the increase in job vacancies reflects an increase in demand responding to the increase in effective supply.  It would not have happened to the same degree if extended unemployment compensation benefits had not been ended.  This alternative explanation, and the fact that compensation trends haven’t accelerated, makes me less concerned that the decline in job vacancy rates is a sign of tightness in the labor market. On the inflation side, I think we need to carefully distinguish between the fall in actual inflation and developments in terms of inflation expectations.  Overall inflation has fallen and will fall considerably more next month, reflecting the recent sharp decline in gasoline prices, but it strikes me this is mostly a positive for the outlook, assuming that oil prices stabilize at or above $70 to $80 per barrel, as the drop in energy prices will boost real income and the effect on overall inflation will likely be transitory. In contrast, I would put somewhat more weight on the decline in market-based measures of inflation compensation.  However, even here there are few signs that what’s going on in the TIPS market is feeding through into survey-based measures of inflation expectations.  In fact, an analysis by our research economists in New York suggests that most of the decline in forward TIPS-based breakevens that is beyond the next year or two is due to a decline in the inflation risk premium, in other words, what investors are willing to pay for inflation protection rather than reflecting an actual decline in expected inflation. Finally, although I said it before, I think it bears repeating.  The dangers of too-low inflation are considerably less when the economy is growing and nominal incomes are rising at a decent rate.  The risk of the United States getting locked into a debt–deflation dynamic seems very low to me.  In contrast, in Europe the risks are considerably higher—lower actual inflation, much slower nominal income growth, very high debt burdens, very little deleveraging having actually taken place, and a greater decline in inflation expectations.  If I was going to worry about it, I would be much more worried about it with respect to Europe than the United States. Now, the European outlook obviously was important in provoking the risk-off trade we saw a few weeks ago, but even here I think it’s important to highlight that it isn’t all negative.  On the positive side of the ledger for Europe, the impulse toward fiscal contraction does seem to be fading.  In addition, although we didn’t discuss it, I think the early read on the asset quality review and the supervisory stress test seems, at worst, neutral and possibly even favorable because the exercises, I think, are viewed as mostly credible, and the fact is that the net capital need for the banking system appears very manageable. One more broad question, in terms of risks to the outlook, it seems like we’re going through a pretty significant regime shift in terms of what’s happening to commodity prices and what’s happening to terms of trade around the world—a regime shift that’s the first major change in this for many, many years, and I’d like to highlight it and encourage the Board staff to maybe look into this a little bit.  It strikes me that there’s going to be quite a bit of collateral damage associated with this, especially to some emerging market economies.  I think it would be very interesting to just sort of do a deeper dive into this issue to sort of see what kind of things could actually happen in terms of bad macroeconomic performance, but also financial-stability consequences, corporate failures, et cetera, because I think this shift in commodity prices is pretty noteworthy.  My own story about what’s happening is basically that we had this huge impetus to commodity demand as China was rapidly urbanizing, and commodity supply took a long time to catch up.  But commodity supply has finally caught up with demand, and so we’re actually seeing pretty much a sea change in terms of the sustainable level of commodity prices.  I think we’re just seeing the very early signs of what this means, and I’d like to delve into this a little deeper because I don’t really understand what the implications are, and I think the implications potentially could be pretty significant for the global economic outlook.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their views on the economy and offering alternative explanations for certain economic trends.


Passage number 242.
 MR. TARULLO.  But we give them dirty looks when they do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a observation without any argument or conflicting views.


Passage number 243.
 MR. ENGLISH.  That’s what your gavel is for.  [Laughter] CHAIR YELLEN.  For hitting the table, that’s right.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It only includes casual banter between Mr. English and Chair Yellen.


Passage number 244.
 MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The data on the domestic economy since September have been about as expected.  In contrast, the continued appreciation of the dollar and growing concern about growth of foreign demand in particular suggest the balance of risks for activity and inflation are somewhat more tilted to the downside.  I think the added uncertainty and that downside risk validate our strategy of remaining patient about removing accommodation, recognizing the asymmetry of our policy toolkit, and argue for caution in adjusting communication in any way that might signal otherwise. I see the news on financial stability since July as somewhat mixed.  We have seen a return to somewhat more normal levels of volatility, and I think it is notable that the market absorbed very large outflows from an asset manager with very little difficulty.  On the other hand, we saw a massive price move and huge volumes in a market that is among the most liquid in the world for reasons that we still don’t really understand, which I view as somewhat concerning. On the inflation front, as everyone has noted, we have seen a fall in inflation due to energy prices, which I think should not be a concern, and has some positive potential, particularly for lower-income consumers.  The market-based measures of inflation expectations, which have fallen, do bear careful watching.  I think it is too early, really, to be able to tell how much of that is due to a change in expectations versus the other liquidity and risk premiums that people have discussed.  But I do also think we should continue watching it in the context in which some of the other large economies in the world are exporting disinflationary pressures. Recent data on the labor market, overall, signal that conditions continue to improve, although not as rapidly as we saw earlier in the year.  The unemployment rate, as has been noted, has declined by 0.2 percentage point over the most recent three-month period, which is encouraging.  The share of employees working part time for economic reasons has moved lower since June, but the current level remains well above pre-recession norms, suggesting slack not captured in the unemployment rate.  Reinforcing the evidence of slack, the labor force participation rate edged down again in September, and it seems possible that a nontrivial part of that movement and the weakness in participation remains cyclical given continued essentially flat real wages.  Taken together, I think the moderate pace of increases in employment, together with the potential for slack to be somewhat larger than indicated by the unemployment rate, counsel continued patience in adjusting the stance of monetary policy. Although the data on aggregate spending have been about as expected, stubbornly weak data in the single-family housing market, in which starts have changed little in recent months, is worrisome.  One might think, given the low level of interest rates, some recent improvement in the availability of mortgage credit, and the large scope of increases in household formation, that this historically interest-elastic sector would be more robust.  Instead, the housing recovery remains painfully slow. I commend the staff for reevaluating its method of projecting movements in the dollar.  I found the analysis on this subject, together with the alternative simulations on a higher dollar and lower foreign growth, informative in trying to size the possible headwinds to U.S. growth and inflation from the gloomier foreign outlook.  I agree with the decision to revise up the projected path of the dollar and lower the outlook for foreign growth.  In fact, I would probably be inclined to go a little further with an emphasis on very weak growth in foreign domestic demand, which I think is the relevant concept. The recent stagnation in euro-area activity in the context of monetary policy at the zero lower bound, and both inflation and inflation expectations heading lower, calls for fiscal action as well as monetary policy action.  The staff did some interesting simulations that suggest that such a policy, in conjunction with further monetary policy stimulus, could provide a meaningful boost to demand and could alter the economic trajectory of the euro area.  Unfortunately, I think the very likely scenario is one in which monetary policy gets no help from fiscal policy.  While more accommodative monetary policy may keep the euro area out of severe recession, it is likely to operate primarily through the export channel, and it is unlikely on its own to produce robust domestic demand. Moreover, I think there are significant downside risks around even this gloomy outlook.  Given the fact that debt-to-GDP ratios remain very elevated for some important euro-area countries, the prospect of policy paralysis, stagnant growth, and deflation could reignite concerns about debt sustainability in important economies, in particular, Italy.  Most immediately, there may be some turbulence as Greece attempts to negotiate the next chapter beyond its current IMF and euro-area program.  On top of this, the prospect of ongoing stagnant growth in Japan is very real, and the support that China will be able to provide to global demand growth will diminish. Putting the risks to the U.S. economy from shocks or negative developments originating at home in this broader context of weak global demand and disinflationary pressures from abroad only reinforces the asymmetry in the risks to our economy.  If, as in the faster recovery scenario in the Tealbook, demand growth in the United States is significantly greater than the baseline, it’s very plausible that much of this added demand could be absorbed globally, with the United States kind of playing its traditional role as the residual provider of global demand.  If, by contrast, as in the increased financial turbulence scenario, domestic demand is considerably weaker than in the baseline, I think the ability of the global economy to buffer any U.S. weakness is very limited.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  What I propose is that we go have dinner.  I gather there is some baseball game or something tonight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a collection of observations and opinions about the state of the domestic and global economy.


Passage number 245.
  [Laughter] MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage includes only laughter and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 246.
 WILLIAMS.  Indeed, there is. CHAIR YELLEN.  I surely would want to do nothing to make it difficult for you to watch.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing a willingness to accommodate the listener.


Passage number 247.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot answer without the passage.


Passage number 248.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B as written.  Recent developments do not alter my expectation of an ongoing moderate expansion, with inflation gradually returning to our 2 percent objective.  Performance in the labor market has been impressive, with virtually every indicator signaling that the outlook has improved substantially since the start of our asset purchase program, and it’s fairly clear that the broader economy will make continued progress toward our maximum employment goal, implying that our asset purchase program has done its job and further purchases can be stopped. There are cautionary flags.  Perceived weakness in economic conditions overseas has contributed to recent volatility in stock markets and a rising dollar.  These unfavorable factors have to be balanced against lower oil prices, and overall they do not appear sufficient to significantly alter the path of recovery.  Now, the inflation data and outlook do raise concerns.  However, the downdraft in the inflation data is likely to be transitory, as the effects from the decline in oil prices and the rise in the dollar fade.  Alternative B provides a nice balance of recognizing recent developments while sending the signal that the medium-term outlook of progress toward our goals remains intact. I would also just mention in this context that with alternative B we still have an extremely accommodative policy stance.  We have a $4½ trillion balance sheet.  According to the Board staff analysis, it has a significant effect on longer-term yields.  We have negative short-term real rates.  In thinking about going forward, we are still very accommodative to the economy. More generally, the statement provides an excellent foundation for the required adjustment of monetary policy in the future.  It’s important for the public to understand the data dependence of our decisions, and I do think that the language that is written in alt-B gives us that flexibility for people’s market expectations to change as economic conditions change, and the two added sentences at the end of the new paragraph 4 amplify this message.  Now, in the past, I have been an advocate for shorter statements, not longer statements, and the extra two sentences do add a lot of words that describe opposite sides of the same coin.  But given the importance of this message, I do think it’s okay this time to sacrifice word count and brevity in favor of directness and emphasis.  These sentences leave no doubt that the timing of liftoff and our policy, more generally, will be determined by economic conditions.  Again, I think that’s a very important message to reiterate.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Williams, expresses support for alternative B and provides reasons for his support. He acknowledges potential cautionary factors but believes they are not sufficient to significantly alter the path of recovery. Overall, he believes that alternative B provides a good balance and sends the signal that progress toward the goals remains intact.


Passage number 249.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  A couple of general comments before I go into my prepared remarks.  Actually, I have a third comment, which is that I’m surprised President Williams didn’t downgrade his forecast in light of events last night.  [Laughter] But a quick comment on inflation breakevens and compensation.  You can think about dividing inflation breakevens and compensation, as President Williams pointed out yesterday, into three components—expected inflation, risk premiums, and liquidity premiums.  I think it’s very important for us to strip out liquidity premiums as best we can.  Those are due to market function issues that we do want to get rid of.  That’s why I think it’s useful to supplement what is going on in the Treasury market with what’s happening in zero-coupon inflation swaps as a market-based measure of expected inflation.  But I want to reiterate a point I made yesterday, which is that I would counsel against stripping out risk premiums.  Risk premiums are telling you about the co-movement of what is happening with inflation and what is happening with anticipated economic growth, and, basically, how scary things are going to be when inflation is low.  When we see the market-based measure of expected inflation go down, even though our statistical models are forecasting inflation remaining the same, that’s telling us that when growth is going to be low and times are going to be bad, inflation is more likely to be low. As Bill English pointed out yesterday, some of this is just due to people putting less weight on the outcome of high inflation with low economic growth in bad times.  But that’s still telling us that low inflation is going to be viewed as more of a problem because it’s going to be taking place with low growth.  If an event like low inflation is taking place with low growth, that’s what we should be putting more weight on.  I think we want to be including risk premiums, not stripping them out. The other comment I will quickly make is that I was very struck by Governor Fischer’s comment on thinking about liftoff as but one component of interest rate policy.  I agree with him.  We need to be thinking through liftoff to the meetings beyond.  The markets, and the public will want us to be thinking about this as a sequence of interest rate moves, but it’s important for us not to get into that.  I think it’s very important for us to be thinking about this as a strategy of how we’re adjusting interest rates to the data, especially in terms of downside risks.  Because we remain close to the zero lower bound, we’re going to have to be very sensitive to the timing of interest rate moves in response to downside shocks. With that as prelude, Madam Chair, at this meeting I favor alternative A.  At the launch of the taper in December, the FOMC statement said that the Committee would be monitoring inflation developments carefully for evidence that inflation moved back toward its objective over the medium term.  I see no such evidence.  As I described in the earlier go-round, the medium-term outlook for inflation shows no signs of improvement since last December and is, indeed, arguably worse.  The outlook has deteriorated especially markedly since July, and the staff now projects that inflation will not return to target until the next decade.  Failing to act in response to this ongoing subdued inflation outlook creates a downside risk to the credibility of our inflation target.  In my view, we see that downside risk reflected in the recent fall of market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations to unusually low levels by historical standards. Madam Chair, under your leadership and that of your predecessor, this Committee has made an explicit commitment to a 2 percent inflation target, but we cannot take the credibility of that commitment for granted.  As we have seen in Europe, as we have seen in Japan, the credibility of central banks depends on their taking actions on an ongoing basis to ensure that inflation does indeed stay at 2 percent.  In my view, the evolution of the data over the past few months means that we need to take such actions today. To summarize, in light of the continued sluggishness in the inflation outlook and the recent slide in market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations, I support alternative A.  In particular, I believe that the Committee should commit to keeping the federal funds rate target range at its current level, at least until the one- to two-year-ahead inflation outlook has returned to 2 percent, and that the Committee should continue the asset purchase program at its current level.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage shows agreement and support for alternative A, which involves keeping the federal funds rate target range at its current level and continuing the asset purchase program at its current level.


Passage number 250.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B as written.  The primary focus of the bond purchase program was to achieve substantial improvement in labor markets.  With the unemployment rate at 5.9 percent and the strong payroll employment growth over the past several quarters, labor markets are substantially improved relative to when we began the purchase program.  Thus, I think it is appropriate that we now end the purchase program.  The addition of the two sentences at the end of paragraph 4 that highlight data dependence makes it easy for me to support alternative B.  While my own personal preference would be to expunge calendar-based language at this meeting, the current language is clear that liftoff will depend on incoming data. The low current inflation rate and the disinflationary pressures we are currently experiencing indicate we may not make much progress toward our inflation goal in the near term, which is certainly consistent with the Tealbook forecast.  With inflation expected to remain below our target for some time, we are provided an opportunity to probe how tight labor markets need to be for us to achieve our inflation target in a reasonable time period.  I would not be in favor of lifting off the zero lower bound until we are clearly making progress toward our 2 percent inflation target.  This could result in liftoff occurring later than I expected at the previous meeting, although, of course, I will make that assessment in a data-dependent manner.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their support for alternative B and providing their reasons for their opinion.


Passage number 251.
 MR. FISHER.  Well, first, Madam Chair—RIP, QE3.  I am thrilled that we are ending this program, as you know, and I hope it does rest in peace.  Time will tell, depending on how we manage our exit over time.  I pray that it will rest in peace permanently. With regard to alternative B, first, I’m very pleased that in this draft we dropped what I consider to be risky references to financial conditions.  I really believe that’s wise, particularly from the standpoint of avoiding the risk of developing the notion of what I call a “Yellen put.”  The Vice Chairman and Governor Fischer referred to that yesterday.  I hope you’ll recall that Governor Stein and I long ago argued the need for volatility to resume, although obviously you don’t want to see extreme out-of-control volatility, or one-day volatility like we did.  But I think we don’t wish to look like nervous Nellies because we have seen some long-overdue volatility or because of a market correction, which I have, as you know, repeatedly warned as a distinct possibility. Although the statement, as written, is far from ideal from my personal perspective, it is, without a doubt, an improvement over September’s statement.  In particular, paragraph 1, as you point out, no longer talks of significant underutilization of labor resources, but instead acknowledges that the underutilization of labor resources is gradually diminishing.  Paragraph 4 includes what I consider still to be the objectionable calendar guidance “considerable time” phrase that has been pointed out by Bill English and others.  It emphasizes more strongly than before that the timing of liftoff will depend on incoming data.  On these grounds, because I am on record as stating that it’s my policy to move on once I have registered an objection except when new grounds for objection arise, I will support option B at this meeting, unless the wording is changed during this meeting. That said, my remaining concern is the very last sentence of the statement.  I have used in speeches, and I think in this room, an analogy to duck hunting.  That is, you want to lead your mallard rather than aim right at it when you shoot.  Otherwise, you’re not going to bag it.  I worry that if we stick with the last sentence, as written, it could result in our overshooting, and then be followed by a tightening ex post that in every instance I know about historically has resulted in recession.  This is the conclusion of the Economic Letter that Evan Koenig—as the staff would say, exhibit 1, seated behind me—and I wrote recently.  I think it’s also in keeping with the sentiment you expressed in your most recent speech in Jackson Hole.  I would urge us to reexamine that last sentence at our next meeting. Let me add just one last comment.  I am very skeptical about the Tealbook policy simulations.  Built into the inflation forecast is the assumption that long-term expectations are anchored at 1¾ percent, which holds down the trajectory of inflation over the next couple of years by approximately ¼ percentage point.  Also, the simulations don’t reflect or acknowledge the recessionary momentum that kicks in once the unemployment rate begins to rise. One last comment.  In my opinion, the Tealbook, Book B, optimal policy simulations on page 8 show yet again why calendar-based forward guidance is a bad idea.  The optimal policy rate path today—which at least the copy I have in front of me is showing in that red line in the top left-hand box—is markedly different from the one calculated in September, because the optimal policy is very sensitive to changes in economic conditions.  Given the sensitivity, I don’t want to be locked into a particular timing of liftoff or pace of subsequent rate increases.  You don’t want to give the impression that only a big change in the outlook will get you to change course, which is why I consider “considerable time” as having been, and continuing to be, a bad idea.  I believe that we need to consider this in December.  If economic conditions improve between now and then, that will certainly condition my vote then.  But for now, Madam Chair, I support alternative B. With regard to the concerns about inflation, I do note that the trimmed mean has been constant the past six months.  The trimmed mean is calculated by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas and is 1.65 percent.  Thank you very much. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 252.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support the policy prescription laid out in alternative B.  While I see scope for further improvement in labor market conditions, I agree that the cumulative improvement in labor markets so far justifies concluding the asset purchase program at this meeting, and I think the draft statement is satisfactory as written. I view the “considerable time” formulation of the forward-guidance language as consistent with my current assessment that projection of a funds rate liftoff in the third quarter of 2015 is appropriate.  Looking forward to the December statement, I anticipate wanting to keep the “considerable time” language.  However, I do not see the value of staying with the phrase “considerable time” following the end of the asset purchases in October as suggested in the staff memo.  The fixing of “considerable time” to a past date instead of the current meeting strikes me as problematic, given the intended emphasis on data dependence.  I think we should lean against the interpretation that the reference to October is intended to signal a likely change in March or the second quarter.  I think we have to drive home the point that “considerable” only means something in the context of the data and the outlook. I asked one of my colleagues to plot what we will know in data terms at each meeting next year.  In March, first-quarter tracking estimates will be firming up.  We will have January data and some key February data.  At the June meeting, we’ll probably have several key May reports, some actually received during the meeting.  The second-quarter tracking estimates going into that meeting will have only April data in reality.  As I said in the economic go-round, recent developments suggest more downside risk.  If the Tealbook forecast is right or even half right, we’ll be facing an ambiguous situation through much of the first half.  I don’t expect to be able to make a data-grounded judgment on the path of the economy with much confidence until the third quarter.  I think we should, therefore, put in place a flexible approach.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lockhart supports the policy prescription laid out in alternative B and agrees with the decision to conclude the asset purchase program at this meeting. However, he disagrees with keeping the "considerable time" language following the end of the asset purchases in October. He believes that linking it to a specific date in the past is problematic and wants to emphasize the importance of data dependence. He suggests a flexible approach instead.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 253.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Regarding alternative B, I agree that our open-ended asset purchases have served their purpose and we can end them today.  With regard to the forward-guidance language, I’m fine with that as well.  But I am worried about the language in paragraph 2 regarding inflation, and I share the low-inflation concerns expressed by President Kocherlakota. In September I talked about why I think the risks of tightening too quickly and too aggressively far exceed those of moving too late and too cautiously.  This robust control perspective still leads me to think that we should not be tightening rates for more than a considerable time.  If we stay accommodative but the economy turns out to have more strength than we think, inflation may rise somewhat above 2 percent, but we know how to fix that.  However, if we tighten early and the economy encounters further unexpected headwinds, we have much less room to maneuver.  Our unconventional monetary policy tools are likely to be less effective after an unceremonious retreat back to the zero lower bound.  As a result, we could find ourselves in a very difficult spot.  The economy could be stuck in a bad state for a very long time, with attendant damage to its future productivity. This perspective means we should be highly attentive to downside risks, which today, especially, seem to be to our price stability goal.  We’ve underrun our 2 percent inflation target ever since we announced it in January 2012, almost three years ago.  We continue to express optimism that we will fulfill our obligation, but the time by which we expect to do so keeps receding further and further into the future.  Since the September meeting, we’ve encountered some further potential impediments to meeting our policy objectives.  I don’t want to claim that they are major game changers.  I haven’t changed my forecast very much.  The downside risks are stronger today.  I think we should avoid sounding complacent.  That means acknowledging that the risks of lower-for-longer inflation have ratcheted up a notch. I also want to mention that our discussion of long-run inflation expectations has taken on perhaps greater prominence than I’m comfortable with.  I think it’s somewhat unsatisfactory that our inflation forecasting models rely so heavily on long-run inflation expectations.  Our statistical models are crafted in terms of this more stable, long-run inflation expectation as far out as 10 years, but the economic theories that we tend to write down would place much more emphasis on short-term inflation expectations, things having to do with how marginal costs are expected to change over the future horizons and wage contracts and things like that.  Yet there’s no good empirical traction that those models can gain for forecasting inflation.  That’s why we end up with the models that we have.  It’s a tough compromise, and I understand how we end up with long-run inflation expectations being there, but I think we should be uncomfortable with those models leaning so extensively on long-run expectations.  Having been below our 2 percent objective for so long should make us even more uncomfortable as the horizon is extended.  As a policymaker, I’m just not as comforted by constant and unchanging survey measures of inflation expectations at the 10-year horizon. I worry that alternative B as written is overly complacent in suggesting that inflation is heading back to our objective within an acceptable period of time.  It fails to mention additional risks of low inflation.  Specifically, the last sentence in paragraph 2 worries me.  Given developments in Europe, the rest of the world, and perhaps most importantly our own recent low inflation data, the compromise wording that the Committee adopted in September now seems problematic.  This language states “that the likelihood of inflation running persistently below 2 percent has diminished somewhat since early this year.”  It said that in September.  While it’s still possible that this is true, it now seems dated and a bit out of touch.  I think it is highly likely that inflation will underrun our 2 percent objective for at least another three years.  The best anyone has at this point is an optimistic forecast and a belief in the magical pull of long-run inflation expectations.  Indeed, with the markdown in the Tealbook, its inflation projection is still below 2 percent in 2019. I think this sentence is really only viable if it says “well below 2 percent,” but that’s not helpful today.  The issue is, when do we think we will return to target.  I prefer the language that served us in our statements from December 2013 to June 2014:  “The Committee recognizes that inflation persistently below its 2 percent objective could pose risks to economic performance, and it is monitoring inflation developments carefully for evidence that inflation will move back toward its objective over the medium term.”  This statement seems far more consistent with today’s heightened inflation risk, while the proposed alternative B sentence seems to have become overcome by events.  That’s my opinion.  I prefer changing that language.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention and disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, disagrees with the proposed language in alternative B and expresses concerns about inflation and the risks of tightening rates too early. He argues that the language in paragraph 2 regarding inflation is problematic and suggests changing it to better reflect the current inflation risks. He also expresses discomfort with relying heavily on long-run inflation expectations and suggests using language that acknowledges the risks of low inflation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 254.
 MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support the action in alternative B today.  The forecast for the economy is largely unchanged since the September meeting.  There has been substantial improvement in labor markets since the asset purchase program was announced in September 2012, so the conditions for ending the program have been met. I can also support the language in alternative B today.  Although some aspects of the statement still concern me, I welcome some of the changes in language.  In general, I believe the characterization of the economy in the statement should not be just a recitation of movements in the data since the previous meeting, but an indication of the Committee’s view of the implications of changes in the data for the economic outlook and progress toward our goals and, therefore, for policy.  I actually thought that the draft statement language circulated before the Tealbook, Book B, got us closer to this ideal.  Nevertheless, the suggested change in the characterization of labor markets in paragraph 1 seems consistent with the improvement we’ve been seeing for some time and supports ending the purchase program.  In paragraph 2, I think it is appropriate to acknowledge that near-term inflation will be held down by the drop in energy prices, but that our consensus outlook of inflation rising gradually back to target remains intact. In contrast to President Fisher, I would have preferred that we include some reference to financial market volatility in paragraph 1 along with our evaluation that overall financial market conditions remain highly supportive of economic growth.  The volatility has been front and center in the minds of the public, and I believe it would be appropriate for us to give our interpretation of what it means for the outlook.  Moreover, although we have signaled an end to the purchases, I could imagine the end of the program will still be met with some volatility, as may occur as we approach liftoff.  Giving the public some idea of how we interpreted the intermeeting volatility we have seen might help them assess our likely reaction to volatility of this type in the future. In our forward guidance on the path of interest rates, the addition of the two new sentences provides some welcome emphasis that our policy is state contingent.  I personally would still prefer that we remove the reference to “considerable time following the end of its asset purchase program.”  Leaving it in poses problems for our forward guidance at subsequent meetings, especially if the intention is to continue to use the end of the purchase program as the benchmark, even as that event recedes increasingly into the past.  This is one of the suggestions in the staff memo on forward guidance, but it would not be my preference.  On this issue, I agree with President Lockhart. I don’t believe there is any economic rationale for tying liftoff to the end of the purchase program, and doing so seems to link the timing of liftoff to that particular event rather than to economic conditions.  In addition, continuing to use the end of the purchase program as our reference state would muddy our communications.  For example, suppose, for the sake of argument, liftoff is to occur next June, which we are going to characterize as a “considerable time from the end of the purchase program.”  Such guidance would technically be correct next May, but this would be a month before liftoff, and I don’t think anyone would want to use that forward guidance in May.  It would be very misleading.  So we would need to change the benchmark at some point well before liftoff.   My hope is that in December we will find a way to omit the reference to the conclusion of the purchase program in our forward guidance, replace “considerable time” with a more generic “a time.”  And if there is concern that the public will misinterpret the change in guidance, we should include a sentence clarifying that the change in the Committee’s guidance doesn’t indicate a change in the Committee’s policy intentions.  If that is indeed the case, we should be able to point to the December SEP for confirmation of that.  There is precedent for this, as the Committee included such a sentence in March when it replaced the threshold forward guidance with the current formulation.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: There is disagreement or contention in the passage as the speaker expresses her disagreement with some aspects of the statement and suggests changes she would prefer. She also disagrees with President Fisher on the inclusion of a reference to financial market volatility. Additionally, she expresses her disagreement with President Lockhart on tying liftoff to the end of the purchase program and suggests alternative language for forward guidance.


Passage number 255.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I strongly support ending our asset purchase program at this meeting.  As for the statement, I think the modifications to the first paragraph are appropriate and useful, particularly the characterization of labor market conditions.  I believe acknowledging the decline in inflation expectations is reasonable as well, and the statement nicely balances that concern by noting the stability of survey-based measures and maintaining the language in the second paragraph expressing the Committee’s judgment that “the likelihood of inflation running persistently below 2 percent has diminished.”  I think that’s the right stance because, even though inflation expectations have fallen, they’re still within ranges we’ve seen over the past few years.  The market-based measures don’t seem to have broken out on the downside. A key choice for this meeting, of course, concerns the forward guidance.  The strategy on the table is to retain “considerable time” but backdate it, as it were, to the end of the asset purchase program, although I guess we don’t have to make a call on that until December.  The sequence sketched out in the staff memo would be to maintain that formulation until a meeting or two just before liftoff, and that approach has the advantage of sparing us—mainly the staff, I suppose—the task of finding a lengthy sequence of adjectives to employ as we count down to liftoff.  But I do find compelling the arguments of Presidents Lockhart and Mester and see some advantages in considering in December the dropping of “considerable” and moving ahead on that basis.  Either way, we’re still going to face the critical task of describing economic conditions as time goes by, and I think the way we’re going to approach forward guidance is by pulling away from these little mechanisms and using our description of the economy more.  There’s going to be more weight on the description of the economy. Overall, this statement strikes me as more positive in telling about the economy, and I think that’s a good thing.  Part of the reason for the more positive cast is that, at the beginning of paragraph 3, we call out “a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market.”  Based on the data, we could have easily made that statement at earlier meetings if it weren’t for the fact that we tied our asset purchase program to a substantial improvement in labor market conditions and we hadn’t ended our asset purchase program yet.  Ending the asset purchase program, in a sense, released us from that inhibition and let us upgrade the tone of the statement a bit, in a way we might not otherwise have done. More broadly, my sense over the course of this recovery is that our statements have been a bit on the dour side and have tended to convey a sense of dissatisfaction with the recovery—sort of a “glass half-empty” tone.  And, assuming that the data come in as most of us are expecting and we head toward raising rates sometime next year, I think it’s going to be useful to set the table by gradually shifting to a more positive characterization of the economy—more of a “glass half-full” tone.  We don’t want to go so far as to strain our credibility, obviously, but I believe we have room to work with as we describe economic conditions.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses their support for ending the asset purchase program and agrees with the modifications made to the statement. They also discuss their thoughts on forward guidance and the need for a more positive tone in describing the economy.


Passage number 256.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B.  Ending the asset purchase program is a positive step as the Committee looks ahead to policy normalization, and I support the statement as written. As the recent staff memo on the forward-guidance approach highlights, between now and the time of the first rate increase, we face some challenging communication to adjust our forward guidance.  The staff memo discussing the progression of guidance strikes me as a sensible and workable plan.  After liftoff, however, it seems to me that the special role for forward guidance at the zero lower bound argues for it to be retired and the communication returned to a focus on economic conditions, the forecast, and related risks.  In this regard, I found recent comments by the governor of the Bank of Canada instructive on forward guidance. Regarding the timing of liftoff, my preferred approach is to move in the second quarter of next year if the labor market continues to tighten and inflation makes progress in moving toward 2 percent.  Many of the policy rules already point to a tighter stance of policy.  And, while an accommodative stance of policy was certainly appropriate—on account of the constraint posed by the zero lower bound, as we were coming out of the crisis—if we lift off in June, we will have been below prescriptions advocated by the standard policy rules for more than a year.  While I don’t see events necessarily running ahead of our policy now, I do see a risk that economic conditions may warrant a more aggressive action down the line than markets are currently expecting.  Thank you.  CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. George is expressing her support for alternative B and providing her views on the timing of liftoff and the role of forward guidance. There is no indication of disagreement or differing opinions from other individuals in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 257.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support the ending of the asset purchase program at this meeting.  At the last meeting, I repeated my dissent over the forward-guidance language in alternative B.  That language is now improved.  The new wording in paragraph 1 is improved, as it accurately reflects the economic progress we’ve made and eliminates the “significant” from the description of the degree of underutilization.  While I still don’t see the need for or the desirability of clinging to this “considerable time” language, the additional language in paragraph 4 now stresses the data-dependent nature more forcefully, and I support that.  I do prefer the language in paragraph 4 of alternative C somewhat.  I would actually prefer the elimination of all references to time when we discuss our forward guidance.  It has not served us well.  It continues to create problems for us, and I think we need to strive to just eliminate it entirely.  However, I can support alternative B at this meeting as a transitional step, in my view, toward a better effort at articulating a reaction function that describes how we will respond if the data move. My view remains that our statement needs a great deal of reworking, because its effectiveness as a communication device has been diminished over time as it has become ever more complex and ever more unclear.  For example, I think our next task is paragraph 5, which needs considerable revision.  It’s unclear in paragraph 5 if we’re referring to the pace at which we are returning to a normal funds rate, or to what we consider to be level of the normal funds rate, or both.  As was alluded to earlier today by President Kocherlakota and yesterday by Governor Fischer, we need to start thinking about our post-liftoff policy, how we approach that, and how we want to describe it as we go forward.  I think we have a lot of work to do in that arena. I would actually prefer that we blow up the statement entirely and start all over again.  That’s going to be the only way we can purge ourselves of some of the legacy language that’s come to be a yoke around our necks at various times, and I would urge the subcommittee on communications to tackle this immediately.  [Laughter] From a policy perspective, I believe we are very close to our goals, and we’re moving toward them at a steady, if perhaps unremarkable, pace.  Monetary policy rules that I’ve used to benchmark my views on policy and those that are reported in the Tealbook do indicate a somewhat tighter stance of future policy than is implied by our current forward guidance in the statement, as President George just articulated.  I remind people that such rules fully acknowledge that inflation is running below our target.  They take that into account, yet they still suggest that policy may be more accommodative than it needs to be.  I remind everybody that, as President Williams said, even after we end the asset purchase program, we will still have a very accommodative policy by any standard. I become more nervous that, as these various policy rules suggest, we may be overly accommodative, and that we might find ourselves in the position later of having to raise rates rather aggressively in response to an improving economy.  That would prove somewhat at odds with the gradual adjustment that seems to be implied in paragraph 5.  Historically, when the FOMC has gotten “behind the curve,” it’s led to monetary-policy-induced recessions on occasion.  I remain somewhat concerned that our current anticipated policy rate path is steadily increasing the risk of just such an outcome. We say that we’re data dependent and that we will react to better-than-expected outcomes, yet we have not shown much affinity for doing so in the past.  Indeed, as I argued back in July and as the Chair reiterated just a little while ago, the economy has performed better than we’ve expected over the past year, the first quarter notwithstanding.  But we have yet to adjust policy in response to that improvement.  Finally, today we’re taking a positive step in that direction, I hope. Given that the Committee has more forcefully stated that, as we go forward, we will be responsive to data in a symmetric manner, I will support alternative B at this meeting as a transitional step.  However, I look forward to seeing further improvements in December that remove all references to time in our forward guidance.  I think this would usefully serve the Committee—both those who anticipate an earlier liftoff and those who anticipate that the data will drive us toward a later liftoff.  That can only be good for the Committee.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. Mr. Plosser expresses disagreement with the forward-guidance language in alternative B and suggests that it needs to be improved. He also argues that the statement as a whole needs to be reworked and criticizes its complexity and lack of clarity. Additionally, he expresses concern that the current anticipated policy rate path is increasing the risk of a monetary-policy-induced recession and argues that policy should be more responsive to better-than-expected outcomes.


Passage number 258.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B as written but would like to make a few comments on issues related to the statement.  I think we should all remember the cardinal rules of central banking.  One is, we’re supposed to look dour.  [Laughter]  The second is—and it’s the most important rule I’ve found in my experience—never say “never.”  We may have to reintroduce QE.  We’d better think about that, and we’d better not make it the greatest defeat in the history of science if we are driven to that.  I was moved to look around, hoping to see the jersey that President Williams brought yesterday and thinking about what we could raise to the ceiling in memory of QE.  But we really ought to think of it as a victory and something that we look at from time to time in case we ever need to use it again. I am concerned about low inflation.  But there are going to be policy decisions after liftoff, and I suspect that if inflation fails to react, we’ll be slower to move, with a longer gap between our decisions. I agree with President Mester about the draft text concerning what happens after this decision.  I don’t like that very much, either.  I think of it as really being somewhat of an insult to the intelligence of people—that is, saying, “It’s going to be a long time after October, but we’re not telling you anymore.”  That’s what “considerable” means—it’s sometime after October.  And it will look very odd after we get there. With regard to volatility, if we show that we’re not willing to react to bouts of volatility, which is what I believe we want to show, I think it’s 50-50 whether the best way to do it is to mention it and say we’re not changing anything on that account or to just ignore it and pretend that we didn’t notice it, which is probably not that good of an idea.  But I haven’t been able to persuade myself that one is better than the other, so I’m willing to go with what my colleagues want. We are very tied up, as President Plosser said, with the language we’ve had to develop over the past X years.  And I thought that, when we came to the discussion afterward of the consensus statement, I could just say that the subcommittee is busy at the moment trying to recast the statement for future use.  But it would be useful to have something that starts off much simpler.  It won’t stay that way, but we might want to do it. In any case, we’ve reached an important stage.  It’s important that we’re doing it more or less as we implied we would when we started the tapering.  I think it’s also useful to take out the word “significant” at this stage, and, at some point, we’re going to have to take out “considerable.”  I hope events justify that happening soon.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Fischer, supports alternative B as written and makes some comments and suggestions related to the statement. He agrees with President Mester about a draft text and also expresses concern about low inflation. He also discusses the issue of volatility and the language used in the consensus statement. Overall, Mr. Fischer's comments and suggestions seem to be in agreement with the general direction of the discussion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 259.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I want to begin, actually, by referring to something President Plosser said a minute ago when he mentioned that the “considerable time” language had not served us well and that it created problems.  I disagree with the first, but not the second, part of that statement.  I think it actually has served and did serve an important purpose at the time it was adopted, but it has caused problems, and that’s in the nature of most policy decisions.  As I said yesterday, sometimes when I listen to the discussion around the table, I hear people almost saying that their preferred policy approach has only benefits and no costs, and that’s just not the way policy decisions are going to be made.  That is where we are, I think, on ending the tapering today.  It’s pretty clear that there’s been substantial improvement in the labor market over the period of time in which we’ve had it in place.  Narayana makes a very potent point, which I don’t think was anticipated by those who wanted the language “in a context of price stability.”  I believe the people who wanted “in a context of price stability” were thinking that maybe there would be too much inflation from QE and thus would want to adjust it.  But as Narayana points out and as we’ll have occasion to discuss a little later this morning, that gets us back to our concept of what the inflation language in the longer-run goals statement actually means. Having said that, though, I think President Lacker’s point about signaling is quite important here.  To not end the QE program at this juncture, given the path we’ve been on for some time and how much has relatively changed over the past six or seven weeks, would send a signal that doesn’t actually reflect where the Committee is.  I think the Committee is at about the same place where we’ve been over the past few meetings, and to not end it now would send a more dire signal than people here, as a whole, probably believe.  Some of the issues President Kocherlakota raises are very important, but they actually reflect difficulties or problems in our practice over the past six meetings rather than today. The one thing, Madam Chair, that I miss in the statement and hope we could find a way to include is some reference to international developments.  As I listened yesterday, I think there’s a range of views on how much of a risk is posed by what’s going on in Europe, Japan, China, Asia excluding China, and elsewhere, but I didn’t hear any dissent from the proposition that whatever downside risks are out there, that’s high on the list.  I don’t think there would be an appetite for, nor would it be appropriate to include anything as strong as, the language that we had back in 2012, when we said that “strains in global financial markets continue to pose significant downside risks to the economic outlook.”  My preference would be something in paragraph 2, such as “Developments in global markets may pose some downside risks to the economic outlook.”  But I’d be content with something in paragraph 1 that was pretty neutrally stated, such as “Uncertainty around global economic prospects has increased”—something that just indicates that there is a negative potential out there.  And we can avoid the use of who thinks it’s increased, how much we think it’s increased, or how high the risks can be—but just take note of that. Finally, with respect to the forward-guidance language, as I suggested at the beginning, there are disadvantages to the approach that’s being taken here, even though I was an advocate of it.  There’s no question about it.  There’s a certain clunkiness that comes with it, and that clunkiness will be felt, if not in December, then sometime early next year.  But I think the reason why those of us who supported it did so was not because we thought it was perfect, but because, first, we thought there were greater risks associated with, for example, removal of “considerable” today and the potential effect on markets that that would have had even if we had qualitative language in there.  Second, at least from my point of view—as someone, I think, already referred to—the debate over the right adjective at each succeeding FOMC meeting seemed one that would elicit mostly frustration among a lot of people.  So, again, I don’t think it’s perfect.  Nobody thinks it’s perfect.  It’s just a question of, is there a better alternative.  And I don’t think there is, even though it’s going to, in President Plosser’s language, create some problems for us over the next few meetings.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker disagrees with President Plosser's statement that the "considerable time" language has not served the committee well. The speaker believes that it did serve an important purpose at the time it was adopted.


Passage number 260.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I do support alternative B as written.  I think it’s clear that there has been a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market.  And I can say “in a context of price stability” with a straight face because, as I said yesterday, I do believe that, given our forecast for economic growth, we will see a return to 2 percent inflation in the medium term.  I believe strongly that low inflation remains a risk, but it’s one to be addressed with our other tools.  I would also say that financial conditions remain highly accommodative. Turning to the language, on “considerable time,” my hope is that the market will see starting the clock, as Bill English put it this morning, in October as a modest downgrade of the term, which would set us up for continued opportunistic downgrading.  It may well be that in December, depending on conditions and expectations, we can take it out of the statement completely, but I would hope that we would have downgraded it somewhat at this meeting—whereas if you were to say it again in December, it would say a whole new period is set.  So if we all want to get rid of “considerable time,” the hope is that this would be a start on that. On what Governor Tarullo just raised, a reference to global economic conditions, I see that as a really close call, and it comes down to what goes in the statement versus what goes in the minutes.  I can see that the second of the two alternatives that Dan mentioned, in paragraph 1, might work.  The benefit is, we don’t look clueless for 10 days until the minutes come out.  The risk is that we send a signal of concern about the global economy, and I think you have to weigh those two.  So that’s where I would be on that.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of one person's opinions and beliefs.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 261.
 MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I think alternative B does a pretty good job of making clear that we see developments in the domestic economy proceeding much as we had anticipated while recognizing some risks.  The progress on employment is appropriately acknowledged both in paragraph 1 and in paragraph 3.  I do have some concerns about the movement in the market-based measures of inflation expectations, but it’s very early to take too much information from that.  There, too, I think it’s appropriately called out cautiously in paragraph 1, but I also want to convey that we will be carefully watching that. I see some downside risks, as I stated yesterday, of further strengthening of the dollar and weaker-than-expected growth of foreign demand, which is not currently noted.  And I recognize that putting something in there on downside risks may be too strong a signal.  But, given the uncertainty about global growth prospects, continued slack in the labor market, and the news on inflation, which is not good, I continue to favor holding our fire for a few more meetings before signaling we will initiate liftoff.  Again, because we have very limited ability to respond to risks of greater-than-expected slack and disinflationary pressures when we’re at the zero lower bound, as compared with a much greater ability to tighten faster if inflation or the elimination of slack were to accelerate, I think our strategy of vigilant patience is very appropriate.  The global environment of weak demand growth and disinflationary pressures only reinforces that asymmetry. Alternative B does an admirable job of clearly communicating that strategy of vigilant patience.  I support it as written, although I would prefer some neutral reference in paragraph 1 to the increase in uncertainty surrounding global economic prospects, which I view as both factually accurate and relevant to our outlook.  The alternative, which will be to say nothing and again have the minutes be the mechanism for communicating that, has some risks, as we saw last time around. I think the approach of anchoring “considerable time” to the end of purchases this month is the best option, while acknowledging that all options have some risks.  It corresponds to my current expectations, and I believe it holds the best prospect for providing a message of continuity and clarity to the markets and provides less risk of misinterpretation and having markets respond in ways that we don’t fully anticipate.  We will need to revisit this language if the pace of convergence to our inflation and employment goals changes materially, and that is very clearly stated in the two new sentences that amplify the data dependence of our stance.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses some concerns and disagreements in the passage. They express concern about the movement in the market-based measures of inflation expectations and the lack of acknowledgment of weaker-than-expected growth of foreign demand. They also express a preference for including a neutral reference to the increase in uncertainty surrounding global economic prospects.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 262.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I support alternative B as written.  Ending the asset purchase program is appropriate because of what we’ve seen in terms of the substantial improvement in the labor market outlook.  I certainly wouldn’t want to say “mission accomplished.”  That’s a scary proposition.  But regarding what the program was designed to do, I think we’ve been successful in that endeavor. My views about the likely timing of monetary policy haven’t changed much.  Slightly weaker growth and lower inflation would argue for more patience, which, to my mind, takes March off the table.  But economic growth still seems likely to be strong enough to generate sufficient job gains to continue to tighten the labor market as we go through 2015.  So I see June as remaining, still, the most likely date, with some risk that the date could slip later.  With that in mind, it strikes me that alternative B as written is just about right.  That said, I think the markets will receive it as somewhat hawkish in three respects, and we should be clear about that as our going-in proposition. First, the thing that will be received as hawkish is the removal of the “significant underutilization” language.  I think the surveys were split on whether that would be removed or not, and so, obviously, if you do remove it, it’ll be a change that will be noted.  It’s a change that didn’t have to be made at this meeting, because, obviously, “significant” has a vagueness to it, and we could have chosen to wait.  The fact that we’re not waiting will be noted by the markets. The second aspect that I think will be noted is the fact that there’s nothing in paragraph 1 or 2 that references the financial market turmoil or the downside risks to economic growth abroad.  That’s probably appropriate because what I was struck by yesterday in the go-round was that people’s views really hadn’t changed very much about the U.S. outlook despite those two developments.  But the fact that they’re not mentioned will be noted by markets. The third thing that I think is going to be noteworthy is that the new sentences at the end of paragraph 4 are essentially undercutting the commitment of the “considerable time” language.  They’re basically saying, “Yes, you anticipate it’s going to be a considerable time, but you’re really saying that the economic data matter.”  That, again, will be read, I think, as a little bit hawkish. This is all appropriate.  I’m not arguing with that.  But the fact that market prices have moved pretty far away, I believe, from where the Committee is means that there could be a significant reaction in the fixed-income markets. Lastly, I want to talk briefly about the issue of what happens after liftoff, because I think Governor Fischer raised this yesterday.  We really need to be careful about how we discuss what we’re going to do after liftoff, in terms of how fast we’re going to go, because it seems to me that it really depends on two things that are highly uncertain:  one, how the economy itself evolves; and, two, how financial conditions react to tightening.  As we tighten monetary policy, financial conditions are going to respond.  If they respond very mildly, like what happened over the past year in response to the asset purchase taper, then we’re probably going to have to do more.  If they respond really a large amount, like the taper tantrum, then we’re going to have to do less.  I think we really don’t want to lock ourselves in with markets in terms of how fast we’re going to go once we actually lift off, because it depends on these two things.  And I’m just totally uncertain about how these things are actually going to evolve.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that the markets will receive the alternative B proposal as "somewhat hawkish" in several respects. This indicates a difference in opinion between the speaker and the markets.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 263.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I thought Vice Chairman Dudley’s comments about post-liftoff decisionmaking were really useful.  For my taste, I don’t think we should be committing to a pace of liftoff or the sequence of interest rate moves but rather trying to communicate, as you just did, the factors that will be entering into our decisions.  I thought what you just said was very helpful.  So that’s what I think we should be doing more of.  Thanks. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thanks.  Well, thanks for a very good set of comments on the policy issues before us.  In terms of the statement, there were several things.  First of all, I did hear a good deal of support for alternative B as written, but, nevertheless, there were a number of suggestions, so let me turn to those. On inflation, President Evans suggested modifying the language in paragraph 2 to essentially suggest that the risk of inflation persistently running below 2 percent has not diminished or has arguably increased.  I did not hear, as we went around, a great deal of support for that, although I did hear a great deal of concern expressed about the inflation outlook.  I think a number of you share the concern that I have as well—that inflation may persistently run below our objective, and, if that turns out to be the case, we may need a policy response.  It could be deferring rate increases until later than we currently expect.  We may have to recognize that in the statement in the future.  The sense I have is, we’ve opened the door in the statement to telling markets we are concerned about that in two different places, particularly in paragraph 1, noting that market-based measures have gone down.  And, to me, not simply dismissing the fact that that’s a meaningless development will be interpreted as a sign.  So unless I hear a flurry of support to change the characterization of inflation in paragraph 2, as President Evans suggested, I would say, why don’t we consider that in the future and watch what happens with inflation developments but leave that as is. On whether to mention financial volatility, President Mester suggested that maybe what we should do in paragraph 1 is to include it and then basically say, “Yes, but we’re not really paying attention to that, because financial conditions are still quite accommodative.”  As Governor Fischer noted, there are two ways to go on this, both essentially saying the same thing.  We could mention it and dismiss it or not mention it at all, and the proposal here is, don’t mention it.  I think I heard several people supportive of taking the approach the statement does of not mentioning it, but, please, if there are others who would prefer to add a sentence in paragraph 1 of the type that we had and got rid of, speak now or forever hold your peace. Finally, let’s turn to the question about the global outlook.  Suggestions there came late in the round—from Governors Tarullo and Brainard—and most of you didn’t really have a chance to react to this.  So let me put on the table the suggestion that I think both of them endorsed.  I think Governor Tarullo suggested some language in paragraph 1 that would say something like “Uncertainty around foreign economic prospects has increased.”  Or we could just say something like “The foreign economic outlook has become somewhat more uncertain.”  It would be a way of acknowledging what many of you mentioned, but, again, I’d be interested in your reactions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage regarding the mention of financial volatility in paragraph 1. Some members suggest including it and dismissing it, while others suggest not mentioning it at all.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 264.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  One thing I would think about is, if I were sitting in one of those foreign places, would I be pleased by having this in the statement or displeased.  And I think I’d be slightly displeased, frankly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The author expresses that they would be slightly displeased if they were in a foreign place and had this statement.


Passage number 265.
 MR. FISCHER.  Well, you could always say it was in the other countries.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting an alternative option.


Passage number 266.
  [Laughter] VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I’m serious.  I think we’d be pointing to other people’s problems and highlighting them, in a way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "[Laughter] I'm serious." suggests a lighthearted tone and implies that the speaker is making a serious statement despite the potential for humor. The following sentence indicates a personal opinion rather than a disagreement with someone else.


Passage number 267.
 MR. TARULLO.  But wait a second, Bill.  We did that for a year and a half.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not express contention or disagreement. It seems to be a factual statement or observation.


Passage number 268.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I know.  But the question is whether what has happened has risen to a similar level of concern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 269.
 MR. TARULLO.  Well, I think that’s a different question, though, than whether a foreign country is pleased with the fact that we say something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Tarullo expressing his opinion on a different question. There is no indication of a conflicting viewpoint or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 270.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No, no, no.  If you look at the outlook for global economic growth, my understanding is that, basically, we were expecting a slight acceleration and now we’re expecting it to be flat.  That’s really what’s changed since the September meeting—is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply confirming their understanding of the change in the outlook for global economic growth.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 271.
 MR. KAMIN.  Yes.  Since the September meeting, we’ve marked down our forecast around ¼ percentage point in the second half of this year and a little bit less after that.  So it has not been a large markdown over the intermeeting period, but a somewhat larger markdown going back earlier in the year.  And, while the uncertainties about the outlook have not increased demonstrably over the past six weeks, if you looked at our position earlier in the year—before the euro economy slumped back, before the Japanese economy started running into its problems, and before property prices in China started to move down—I think you could make the argument, looking over a longer period than just the intermeeting period, that, yes, our uncertainties have increased somewhat.  Then what we’ve observed is the markets, as they often do, catching up to that all at once. CHAIR YELLEN.  Comments.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Kamin, acknowledges that there has been a small markdown in their forecast, but then suggests that uncertainties about the outlook have increased somewhat over a longer period of time. This implies a potential disagreement or difference in opinion about the level of uncertainty in the economy.


Passage number 272.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I guess my inclination is, these two are actually tied together, the financial-stability and international developments, because they’re both recent events.  They both were clearly discussed within the Committee, and I, frankly, am of the opinion that we ought to treat them the same way in the following sense.  If we’re going to leave them out, I think it’s certainly appropriate to talk about both of these conditions in the minutes—to convey that the Committee talked about them.  Particularly on the financial-stability issues and volatility issues, as President Mester said, it was important that we talked about them.  We also can explain that we are not reacting to them.  It’s important to get both sides of that.  By the same token, while we changed the forecast ever so slightly because of the international events, I don’t think we’re reacting a lot to them.  Perhaps from that perspective, making sure that both are discussed in the minutes and leaving the statement as it is might be a path forward. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Plosser and Chair Yellen express similar views about discussing both the financial-stability and international developments in the minutes, while also acknowledging that the Federal Reserve is not reacting significantly to these events.


Passage number 273.
 MS. MESTER.  I was going to say that my preference would be to have it in the minutes.  But then in December, we’re going to have new SEPs, and I think everyone will be sitting around assessing how big a change they want to make to their own forecast because of the foreign economy.  So my preference would be not to put it in today but to leave it on the table as something to think about when we meet again in December. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Mester is expressing her preference to have something included in the minutes, but acknowledges that it may be more appropriate to discuss it in the future. Chair Yellen does not challenge or disagree with Ms. Mester's statement.


Passage number 274.
 MR. LACKER.  I’m in the same place because I believe it hasn’t crossed the threshold of being a change of sufficient magnitude, and I’d suggest we think about how it evolves.  If this is elevated uncertainty, what’s it going to take for us to decide that we’re willing to drop it and indicate that uncertainty has gone down.  It’s likely to be there for quite a while.  And I’m afraid it’s going to be one of these statement carbuncles [laughter]—hard to scrape off. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. Both Mr. Lacker and Chair Yellen are expressing their opinions and discussing the topic of uncertainty.


Passage number 275.
 MR. FISHER.  I agree with Governor Powell’s initial suggestion.  It’s a thoughtful idea.  I think it should be in the minutes.  If we started to write out how we do it, we’d have to make an exception for Mexico and Canada—the NAFTA countries—because they aren’t experiencing the kind of turbulence that we’re seeing elsewhere.  It’s very Eurocentric or, perhaps, Asiacentric.  So it should be reflected in the minutes, but I don’t think it’s appropriate for this statement, and I would not support it. CHAIR YELLEN.  Does anybody else want to weigh in on this topic.  [No response]  Okay.  I guess, having listened to the set of comments, my proposal would be to leave alternative B as it stands.  Obviously, there will be a discussion in the minutes about the concerns that everyone has expressed about Europe, in particular; China; and the global economic outlook.  When the minutes had such a discussion last time they certainly received a good deal of attention, and there was a market reaction to them.  I’d like to propose that we just vote on alternative B as written, without changes.  Matt, do you want to call the role.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speakers are discussing different opinions and suggestions, but there is no confrontation or opposition. They are ultimately agreeing to leave alternative B as it stands.


Passage number 276.
 MR. LUECKE.  Yes.  The vote will be on alternative B, as shown on pages 6 and 7 of Bill English’s handout and in the directive on page 12. Chair Yellen   Yes Vice Chairman Dudley  Yes Governor Brainard   Yes Governor Fischer   Yes President Fisher   Yes President Kocherlakota  No President Mester   Yes President Plosser   Yes Governor Powell   Yes Governor Tarullo   Yes  CHAIR YELLEN.  Great.  Do we want to take a break.  Okay.  I think we’ve done a good slog of work so far, and we have more to do, but let’s reward ourselves with a 15-minute break. [Meeting break] CHAIR YELLEN.  Let’s shape up and get on with it.  [Laughter]  Thank you.  I would like to call on Governor Fischer to introduce our next topic, which is longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is simply a record of the voting and a suggestion to take a break.


Passage number 277.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thanks very much, Madam Chair.  I’d like to begin by thanking the members of the communications subcommittee—Loretta Mester, Jay Powell, and John Williams—for their good work and collegiality in leading me through the graveyard of buried bodies and buried ideas, as I understand are there.  [Laughter]  I also want to thank the staff who supported our efforts:  Bob Tetlow, who you’ll hear in a while; Todd Clark from the FRB of Cleveland; and Stacey Tevlin.  And there was helpful participation from a changing cast of several people.  I’m never quite sure on what basis people show up to meetings, but I was very glad to have them there. At Ben’s last meeting, I think it must have been, he referred to the need to revise the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, so there seemed to be an extra need to get it done this year.  But it’s also been three years since the first consensus statement was issued.  It is a very important component of the transparency of Federal Reserve policy.  I know that because I read it from a long distance, and it actually clarified enormously relative to my understanding of what the FOMC was doing before I saw this statement.  I even managed to identify what “a balanced approach” means—or at least I thought I did—and I think it’s the interpretation we’re going to hear in a while. Now, Loretta sent me a note at the end of it saying that, in essence, we may not be able to change anything, but that that would just show how good a statement the original statement was.  There’s something to that—it is a very good statement.  And there are, no doubt, reasons for some formulations that are less than totally transparent on first reading. You received a list of questions that we chose to take up in this first attempt to change, or at least to review, the original consensus statement, and we were guided by discussions with several of you—especially with the Chair, who had chaired this subcommittee previously—about the issues to take up.  The three, which Bob Tetlow will introduce in greater detail soon, were the symmetry of the 2 percent inflation goal, what the “balanced approach” characterization of policy strategy means, and the relationship between the objective of financial stability and the dual-mandate goals of price stability and maximum employment.  We do not have legislation that puts financial stability on an equal footing with the dual-mandate goals, but it’s being talked about more and more in many central banks, and we thought it was worth taking that up. This is not a meeting to decide on the statement.  This is a meeting to decide on the work that we will do before January.  If there is sufficient support for at least looking at these views or others that people may suggest, we’ll take them up and come back with a formulation in January. We have in mind an approach that is similar to the one that was used on the normalization principles.  If the discussion at this meeting indicates that there’s some common ground, the subcommittee will prepare and circulate a memo before the December meeting outlining some possible revisions to the consensus statement, with a request for feedback via the SDS comment system.  Taking these comments into consideration, the subcommittee will then provide a draft revised consensus statement for consideration at the December meeting, and that’ll give us time for discussion of and comfort with any proposed changes before the scheduled renewal, which is at the January 2015 meeting.  Any suggestions you might want to make for us to examine additional issues connected with the Federal Reserve’s communications and communications policy would be welcome, but we’d expect to begin to deal with them after the January FOMC meeting. You have all received the staff background paper, and Bob Tetlow will now introduce the topic and the considerations relating to these three issues that we’ve begun to consider.  Bob—thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 278.
 MR. BULLARD.  Bob, I thought you said that economic models come out with roughly equal weights, and my comments are different from that.  So I’m wondering what you meant by that statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Bullard, is questioning Bob's earlier statement about economic models having equal weights, stating that his own comments are different from that. This suggests a disagreement or discrepancy between their viewpoints.


Passage number 279.
 MR. TETLOW.  There’s a reference in the full memo to a paper by Debortoli, Kim, Lindé, and Nunes.  They took the Smets-Wouters model and looked at what the optimal Ramsey policy was in there.  Then they said, what would the loss-function weight on the output gap be for the kind of loss functions that, for example, we use to carry out optimal control scenarios for the Committee.  It turns out that the coefficient in that case would be a coefficient of unity, which would actually be much higher in unemployment space.  This is one of these cases in which, once the model starts to get sufficiently complex, there are some more channels through which monetary policy works, and, more important, there are more shocks that break the “divine coincidence.”  Then you get the result in which a higher weight on resource utilization becomes appropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply explaining the findings of the Debortoli, Kim, Lindé, and Nunes paper. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 280.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  So you would agree that, in the broader literature, it would be maybe more coincidental that you would come out with exactly equal weights, because these models have preferences and all kinds of assumptions in them, and then you have to figure out what the optimal weights are.  They might come out one way, or they might come out another way, but they wouldn’t come out exactly equal.  Is that fair.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is contention or disagreement. This can be seen in the phrase "Is that fair," which indicates that Mr. Bullard is questioning the previous statement and seeking confirmation or clarification.


Passage number 281.
 MR. TETLOW.  Yes, that’s certainly fair.  And I think that’s what we said. CHAIR YELLEN.  Are there other questions.  [No response]  Okay.  Then let’s begin our go-round.  Governor Tarullo is first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The participants in the conversation seem to be in agreement and there is no indication of any conflicting opinions or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 282.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  As someone who was deeply involved in trying to craft the earlier statement in the subcommittee on communications, I know, as does Chair Yellen, how difficult that was to get to where we ended up.  I think that, for those reasons and some other reasons, I’d prefer that we not attempt changes at this time.  I’m concerned that, in doing so, we might inadvertently signal a shift in policy.  Should this occur, it would be particularly disruptive at this stage of the normalization process.  I’m actually not opposed to considering changes, in principle, to the statement, but I think doing so at a time when policy is more nearly under normal circumstances would be a more fruitful way to proceed.  I’m just concerned that attempts to change it could lead to an unraveling of the delicate consensus and the vagueness of what we’ve achieved. That said, I do have some reactions to the memo, and I’ll try to share those a little bit.  I’m not averse to specifying the symmetry of our objectives.  I always thought that that symmetry was implicit in what we had said.  We could even go further by stating a target range that is symmetric around 2 percent.  Again, I wouldn’t have any real, serious objections to that.  In fact, the subcommittee did consider such language at one point.  I do have some trepidation as to what that might imply regarding how we might then go about discussing the symmetry of the employment mandate in a similar way, if we really wanted symmetry.  And what that might devolve into could be quite complicated and very confusing.  So I would approach that with a bit of caution. I also suggest we leave “balanced approach” as is.  Trying to parse out or agree on a loss or objective function would be extremely difficult in a Committee this big.  The economic viewpoints on the Committee are very diverse at this point, and trying to get it to a common loss function or weights on the objective function could be quite difficult.  It would be like opening Pandora’s box.  In particular, trying to do so in such a short time frame would be very difficult.  To approach this, we would need many careful discussions and thoughtful alternatives and approaches, because if we did it on short notice, we would undoubtedly regret it at some point down the road. I do regard the diversity of views on this Committee as a strength.  And, while I understand and appreciate that “balanced approach” is a bit vague, it does indicate that the Committee weighs both nominal and real factors as an important part of its policy deliberations.  As Governor Tarullo just mentioned, both our former Chairman and our current Chair have articulated that message quite clearly.  So I think it does have some content.  All told, the language of the current document was carefully and painfully crafted.  Upsetting that balance at a time when policy is in flux would not be a very wise approach. With regard to financial stability, I oppose elevating financial conditions to the same level as our fundamental goals of maximum employment and stable prices.  I think they should be used primarily as an indicator of economic conditions that we would respond to when activities in financial markets are worrisome and when monetary policy can perhaps have a direct effect on that behavior or perhaps is precipitating that behavior.  At a minimum, different financial developments will likely entail differential monetary responses of various kinds.  Reacting to a bank panic might be one response, whereas reacting to a stock market crash or a currency crisis in some part of the world could be very different responses.  We have no systematic way of thinking about that.  How the Committee would act in such circumstances is best left to particular episodes and to the FOMC statement, which would presumably describe or explain why policy was being set, perhaps, in an unusually tight or unusually loose stance or maybe not reacting at all.  Determining appropriate monetary policy in response to financial market conditions is a more complex undertaking, and I would rather that we not get engaged in that in our statement of longer-term strategies. Finally, I don’t think the material in the memo devoted to how the Committee would act in a precise way in some hypothetical examples really belongs in a statement of longer-run goals and objectives.  Those tend to be tactics, and we should avoid those.  Thus, at this juncture, I believe it would be wise to avoid upsetting the apple cart.  We should simply leave the statement as is for the time being.  Thank you, Madam Chair.   CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. This can be seen in the speaker's statement that they do not believe changes to the statement should be made at this time. They express concern that making changes could inadvertently signal a shift in policy, disrupt the normalization process, and lead to an unraveling of the consensus that has been achieved. They also express trepidation about specifying the symmetry of objectives and the potential complications and confusion that could arise from discussing the symmetry of the employment mandate. Additionally, they oppose elevating financial conditions to the same level as the goals of maximum employment and stable prices and suggest that determining appropriate monetary policy in response to financial market conditions is a complex undertaking that should not be included in the statement of longer-term goals and objectives.


Passage number 283.
 MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  First, let me also thank Todd Clark, from my staff in Cleveland, and Bob Tetlow and Stacey Tevlin, from the Board, for the useful background memo and helpful advice and counsel.  I’d also like to thank my fellow subcommittee members. In my own view, the consensus statement has served the Committee well, and I commend the earlier communications subcommittee on their careful crafting of the statement.  January marked the third year in which a statement was issued, and, as indicated in the January meeting, the Committee decided that this year would be an appropriate time to consider whether the statement could be enhanced in any way.  So I view the discussion today as following through on that decision.  However, I want to reiterate that a decision to make no changes to the statement should not be viewed as a failure to complete that mission.  We should be open to considering changes, but I think we should set a high bar for making changes to the statement.  For one thing, the consensus around the current statement is valuable and worth preserving.  I agree with President Lacker’s view that the statement is meant as a set of principles, and I think it means it should be fairly static.  If it’s changed too often, it could lose its effect.  Finally, as President Plosser pointed out, depending on the nature of the changes, it might be better to delay any changes to a time when we are closer to our goals and normalization is well under way, lest we be accused of changing the rules of the game midstream and confusing matters rather than clarifying them.  So I personally don’t see a compelling reason to change the language of the consensus statement, but I do see value in having the discussion on longer-run goals and strategy. Regarding the inflation goal, I believe the public perceives our inflation goal as a symmetric target.  A number of Committee participants have said in speeches that persistent inflation above our goal and persistent inflation below our goal are both undesirable.  But I want to note that a shared view on the symmetry of the 2 percent inflation target does not necessarily mean that there’s agreement on the policy to achieve it.  I don’t think there’s that much to be gained by changing the language on this.  But should there be a consensus to do so, I would not object to an appropriate revision acknowledging symmetry and clarifying that inflation can be expected to vary in the short to medium run, but that, over the longer run, we aim for 2 percent inflation. Regarding financial stability, before making changes to the consensus statement, I would prefer the Committee to have a fuller discussion of its approach to financial stability, the tools that it will use and their efficacy in addressing financial-stability issues as they arise, and the nexus between monetary policy and financial stability.  I think we’d benefit from further work on these issues by Governor Fischer’s Committee on Financial Stability and others at the Board and in the System.  The FOMC might then discuss its preferred approach and, in light of that discussion, consider potential revisions to the consensus statement later next year or further in the future. I am perhaps most trepidatious about making changes to the “balanced approach” language.  I admit that it is ambiguous, and, in the abstract, it perhaps would be desirable to clear up some of that ambiguity.  On the other hand, it is not clear to me that the language could be clarified in a satisfactory way to encompass the nuances of various interpretations, economic models, and approaches to monetary policy around the table.  So before making such a change, we might do well to have a fuller discussion of loss functions.  Before we can even ask about the weights in the loss function, we need to first agree on the form of the loss function and its components.  Do we agree that the loss function is quadratic.  How do we think about the treatment of financial stability in the loss function.  Unless we have such a discussion, it would be premature to change the “balanced approach” language, which, in the end, seems to have done a very good job of balancing many considerations. The last question on the agenda was about the SEPs.  I do think the SEPs are valuable.  I could see that they could be improved with further enhancements.  And perhaps we should think about a consensus forecast again.  We took this up in 2012.  We were not successful.  As we approach normalization, we have fewer tools on the table.  Now that policy is getting to a more normal footing, maybe we can take this up again.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses their own view and preferences, but there is no indication of disagreement among the committee members.


Passage number 284.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The longer-run policy statement is a consensus document that is intended to capture broad agreement by the Committee.  Because it’s a longer-run statement, I would have a high threshold for making any changes to the statement.  While I agree that more precise language is possible that makes even clearer that our inflation target is symmetric and not a ceiling, I think the previous Chairman made that quite clear in his press conference.  Similarly, his press conference made clear that there was a balanced approach to the dual mandate, a position I strongly endorse.  Given the broad acceptance of the previous Chairman’s comments in the markets, I see little advantage in relitigating these issues.  The risk is that, rather than simply clarifying what I see as critical elements of the framework—symmetric attention to inflation deviations and balanced responses to both pillars of the dual mandate—we could raise a question in the markets as to whether we are now or continuously reconsidering one or both of these elements.  In my view, any uncertainty about symmetry and balance would be counterproductive. In terms of financial stability, I think this is a good area in which to seek a broader consensus on how we define financial stability, as well as the appropriate responses of the central bank to incipient or full-blown instability.  I am not optimistic that a consensus can be reached by January.  However, I do think it would be productive to have a special session in which we can have a structured discussion on the role that financial stability should play in our monetary policy deliberations. I also believe that it might be useful to consider whether there is a consensus that there are times when we would make monetary policy to address financial-stability concerns even though it might move us away from our inflation and employment targets.  Once we have a clearer, common understanding of what financial stability means and when it would affect monetary policy decisions, we could then discuss how it might be incorporated into the longer-run policy statement.  Also, there might be some advantage to thinking about a consensus forecast over time as well. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Rosengren, is expressing agreement and endorsing previous statements made by the previous Chairman. He also suggests seeking a broader consensus on financial stability and discussing its role in monetary policy deliberations.


Passage number 285.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  My comments are going to strongly echo what’s already been said here, so I’ll be brief.   The consensus statement established an inflation target for the United States.  Therefore, it’s quite an important document for this Committee.  Previous to that, the FOMC did not have an official inflation target.  I think that establishing an inflation target has been quite valuable to the Committee during this era of very low inflation.  It could have gone very differently if there had been some doubt that maybe a large fraction of the Committee thought 1 percent inflation or 0 percent inflation was okay.  That could have led to very different dynamics for the U.S. economy.  So it’s actually been quite helpful to adopt the inflation target, as former Chairman Bernanke predicted at the time. My general feeling, echoing many of the previous comments, is that the statement does not require modification.  The statement is written in a way to garner widespread consensus around the table—I would not want to disturb that consensus.  I think that trying to change the consensus statement before we return to a more normalized policy environment—that is, this coming January—carries substantial risk of muddling our near-term policy intentions in the minds of financial market participants and the general public.  So I recommend no change. I have a few comments on specific issues that also echo the previous comments.  I regard the inflation target as symmetric, and I’ve said so publicly on many occasions.  Hitting the inflation target, on average, is closer to price-level targeting.  In this sense, it’s closer to optimal policy in many leading theories. I think the “balanced approach” language is brilliant and should not be altered.  It may seem fair to say that the weights on inflation and unemployment are equal or should be equal, but research on the topic suggests otherwise.  If you read the literature, the actual weights on the two objectives are going to depend on details of modeling assumptions, preferences, technology, and frictions that are in the model.  Those parameters are all going to come together in a way to determine what the right weights are on the two objectives from the point of view of household utility, as President Lacker was saying.  So it’s just not clear that it always comes out to be exactly equal.  That is something that seems as though it would be the right thing, but it’s not. As an example, I’ll point out a favorite paper I like to quote to all of you here—Ravenna and Walsh.  That’s a New Keynesian model with explicit search-theoretic unemployment in it.  You have the unemployment friction in there.  You have the sticky price friction in there.  You might have thought you were going to get roughly equal weights to balance the two frictions.  That isn’t what they got.  They got pretty heavy optimal weight on inflation.  That’s just the outcome of one piece of research, but I think the nature of research shows you that it’s not going to come out to be equal and it could go the other way.  It could be that other types of models with other types of assumptions would put heavy weight on the unemployment side and less weight on the price-stability side.  So it’s just not something that naturally falls out of models, at least in my experience.  Another example, one from the older research literature, is Rotemberg and Woodford, who calculated optimal weights in their model that certainly were not equal. On financial stability, I agree with the previous comments that this would be very difficult.  Anything beyond what’s in the existing consensus statement would be very difficult.  There’s a clear lack of consensus on models or even approach on this issue around the table.  It’s an issue of our time.  It’s a macroeconomic issue of first-order importance.  But I don’t think we have anything like the right approach or language to be able to put it into a statement of this kind.  How the Committee should react to asset price bubbles remains a vexing issue, as it has been for this Committee since the 1990s, and I don’t believe we’re likely to resolve it anytime soon.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Bullard, agrees with the previous comments and supports the consensus statement.


Passage number 286.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I tend to agree with those who’ve already argued to leave the statement unchanged at this juncture.  I think the benefit versus the cost of changing the statement at this time doesn’t add up for me.  But should the Committee—and it doesn’t appear to be the trend—decide to consider adjustments, here are my views. Our preferences should be symmetric around the 2 percent inflation objective.  I’d object to any change that suggests an asymmetric preference.  I think there is some risk in fiddling with the language that is already interpreted in a way consistent with the Committee’s intentions. I’m satisfied with the current “balanced approach” language.  It adequately captures the general principle that the Committee gives due consideration to both elements of the dual mandate.  I don’t think more explicit language is likely to do justice to the diversity of views about how that principle would be applied tactically by various members of the Committee across a wide range of circumstances.  In my view, tactical flexibility—in which more emphasis is put on one element or the other, depending on circumstances—should be preserved.  I don’t think risk-management nuances, for instance, are easily captured by a more narrowly constructed explanation of “balanced approach.”  Also, in reaction to a deviation of inflation from our objective, my emphasis on the inflation side would depend on my reading of how solidly inflation expectations are anchored. As regards further clarification of how financial-stability considerations relate to the dual-mandate goals, I am comfortable with the current language.  In my view, financial-stability concerns should be given consideration in monetary policy, as opposed to macroprudential policy, to the extent that there’s a threat to the attainment of our price-stability and employment objectives.  I think the current language is flexible enough to accommodate incorporating financial-stability considerations into policy decisions if, in the Committee’s judgment, the threat to our statutory objectives is sufficient and we believe monetary policy tools can be effective. Regarding SEPs, I’ve already said in earlier meetings that I favor a review of this element of our communication tool set.  I’d like to see another try at a consensus forecast.  In a conversation with President Rosengren—and correct me if I misinterpret what you said—he noted that the Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee actually votes on whether the forecast is the consensus, as opposed to agreement with the forecast.  That’s a distinction that struck me as providing some potential for us to take another look at this and possibly succeed.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 287.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I think Governor Tarullo summarized this adequately and appropriately.  The better argument is the Hippocratic argument, which is to do no harm in the end.  And I would suggest that we worked very hard, as was mentioned earlier, to achieve a very delicate balance here.  I’m worried that if we open this up, centrifugal force might just tear it apart at a very delicate time as we approach liftoff. Having said that, I want to make a couple of comments very quickly.  With regard to the first question and the 2 percent longer-run objective, just to clarify in my antepenultimate meeting, I have no problem with a strategy that has policy respond symmetrically to above-target or below-target inflation, as long as inflation is appropriately measured.  I think we want to be very careful not to give the impression, though, that deviations of inflation from target are always undesirable.  Supply-driven inflation deviations can actually improve resource allocation and the distribution of risk in the economy.  Accordingly, I don’t think we should deduct price-stability penalty points from the grade we assign policy just because realized inflation is off target over a period.  To me, genuine signs of poor policy are significant fluctuations in medium-term average inflation that are not linked to real activity and any indication that, as President Lockhart just said, expected average inflation at medium-term horizons and even longer is not firmly anchored.  That’s what I worry about.  But I have no problem with having a symmetrical approach to inflation. With regard to the case for changing the use of “balanced approach,” the memo—I thank you and the subcommittee for putting it together—appropriately says that the primary reason the Committee might determine that it would like to change the “balanced approach” sentence is that it is vague.  However, I view specificity as also having a downside.  It can take us to a stated plan of action, and, if we deviate from said stated plan, it could undermine our credibility.  I’ve argued many times at this table, as any businessperson would, that certainty clearly helps decisionmaking, uncertainty undermines decisionmaking, and false certainty is a destructive force.  And, for what it’s worth, I view central banking and economics to be a judgmental art form and definitely not a science.  I think the mathematization and quantification of economics have helped but are no substitute in the end for judgment, and I would not argue for anything more specific than what’s already in the consensus statement as written. Lastly, with regard to the issue of financial stability, there is some wiggle room for doing this, in that the act calls for us to maintain moderate interest rates, but I’d be very careful here.  First of all, financial stability is not exogenous to monetary policy.  In fact, it’s implicit in it.  I would suggest that we not tamper with the way the statement currently reads. Here’s the bottom line, Madam Chair:  My approach is, do no harm—leave it as it is.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their agreement with Governor Tarullo's summary and their support for maintaining the current approach. They also provide their opinion on specific issues, such as inflation and financial stability, but there is no clear disagreement with other viewpoints.


Passage number 288.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I appreciate the work of the subcommittee and staff to give us a head start on considering whether changes to the statement are needed.  My own conclusion is that the statement has done a pretty good job of representing a consensus at this table and has held up well in the public eye over the past few years.  Given that, I would not revise the statement, particularly at a time of heightened interest in and attention to policy normalization and related communications. Quickly, in terms of the questions, I view the Committee’s goal of longer-run inflation at 2 percent as a symmetric target.  If inflation moves above 2 percent, as it did throughout most of 2011, it warrants the same level of concern and monitoring as when it’s running below 2 percent. Regarding the balanced approach, my view is that paragraph 3 of the consensus statement offers the necessary context because it rightly notes that firmly anchored inflation expectations are key to meeting our objectives.  Determining the relevant monetary policy stance by ascribing weights to either inflation or employment could be misleading and oversimplifies the policymakers’ considerations. Finally, I am comfortable with the current statement’s treatment of financial stability.  While I firmly believe the setting of interest rate policy should avoid promotingconditions of undue risk-taking and potential financial imbalances, I would question whether we can credibly elevate financial stability as a primary objective of monetary policy rather than a necessary condition for achieving our longer-run goals.  However, to the extent that we rely on macroprudential and supervisory tools as the first line of defense, I do think we should have a clear understanding and confidence that these mechanisms can effectively perform, even if it is imprudent to assume that they can be consistently relied on. In terms of other areas for improved communication, I’m open to considering again the value of a consensus forecast, but I think the Committee already made a serious effort in that direction and encountered substantial obstacles.  So I’m mindful that, with policy normalization and its attendant communication challenges, we might be ahead to maintain some consistency and defer further adjustments to the SEP or a consideration of a consensus forecast until after we deliver a successful exit and return to more normal policy stances.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. MS. GEORGE's statement does not contain any contention or disagreement. She expresses her support for the current statement and provides her views on various aspects of it. She is not debating or opposing any ideas presented in the passage.


Passage number 289.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  There doesn’t seem to be a lot of disagreement, but I prepared these comments, so let me go ahead. Turning to the specific questions we were asked to address, on the first, regarding symmetry, I’d always thought our original Committee agreement was that the inflation objective is symmetric.  I don’t recall anyone disagreeing during our subsequent FOMC deliberations when we have discussed that longer-run inflation expectations are supposed to be 2 percent, according to our monetary policy strategy.  Symmetry and “balanced approach” clearly support this expectation for the public.  Chairman Bernanke publicly stated that our 2 percent was not a ceiling—it was symmetric.  Many of us around the table have said the same. Any hint that the Committee is unsure about the symmetry of our inflation objective would make its achievement vastly more difficult now.  To date, the only sustainable achievement of our 2 percent objective has been in our years-ahead forecasts.  So I can see a case for further clarifying our current commitment to symmetry.  Although I recognize there’s not much taste for this, I think it would be a positive step for expanding transparency.  One way to accomplish this would be to add a new third sentence in paragraph 3:  “The inflation goal is symmetric, and the Committee expects inflation to average 2 percent over sufficiently long time periods.”  The public can easily understand that success with respect to our inflation objective will lead to 2 percent inflation, on average. On the second question, I currently see no reasonable path for the Committee to elaborate on the “balanced approach” language in paragraph 5.  It was a difficult task to get to this very general language in 2012.  This language encompasses the range of views on the Committee in a workable fashion.  On the issues of weights on our dual-mandate objectives, I believe our current “balanced approach” language captures well the equal footing of maximum employment and price stability as codified in the Federal Reserve Act.  Stating numerical weights would give an illusory precision for our policy strategy, especially as details such as changes in the Okun’s law relationship could modestly alter the numerical mapping between output and employment and unemployment over time. Now, on financial stability, I do not think we’re intellectually close to a point at which we can go beyond what is currently in the consensus statement .  But let me talk about that at greater length for the benefit of the newer FOMC members, who weren’t here for our March 2013 discussions, which I think are pretty informative on the range of policy considerations.  Financial instability risk is an important concern for public policymakers, but I’ve not heard a convincing argument for why it should be another separate objective for the FOMC.  Yes, I strongly support the use of our supervisory and macroprudential tools.  This approach falls under the category of using financial instruments to address financial-stability objectives and reserving monetary instruments to address our dual-mandate monetary policy goals. Although it sounds important to at least acknowledge the possibility that, at some time, the FOMC might have to make a difficult financial-stability call to tighten monetary conditions at a time of low inflation and low employment, I cannot yet imagine supporting even hinting about this unless we had a much better analysis of the likely effectiveness of such actions.  Recent efforts to use modestly higher interest rates in Norway and Sweden were ineffective for addressing the stated financial risks, and, in Sweden, inflation has been well below its target.  Chairman Greenspan spoke of this type of action back in 2002, I believe, at the annual Jackson Hole symposium.  He essentially concluded that the kind of rate increases needed to rein in excessive financial market risks would require cracking the economy.  That’s my paraphrasing of what he said.  He said it would engender a bad economic outcome.  Both of these comments are simply reminders that, if monetary policy tools are called on, being effective at rooting out financial instability risks will almost certainly require substantial increases in short-term policy rates.  That means higher unemployment, and lower inflation, than our objectives. Using the blunt tool of monetary policy to address financial instability risks reminds me of treating a sick patient.  After discovering a growing malignancy in a relatively already unhealthy patient, doctors are considering two tools—surgery to remove the malignancy or chemotherapy.  Chemotherapy is a blunt tool and will damage the overall health of the already sick patient, but the hope is to rid their body of the malignancy.  Surgery is a more direct tool, and you can imagine that that’s preferred.  But the malignancy may be inoperable, and surgery is not feasible.  In situations like this, blunt tools may be the only hope anyone has.  If the FOMC faced an analogous extreme situation and contemplated raising short-term policy rates against the best interest of our employment and inflation objectives, I would expect we would also state very loudly that, first, a malignancy on the financial system had made this imperative; and, second, there was no choice but to remove the root causes of those malignancies as soon as possible.  I can’t imagine taking this action without stating how dangerous the financial market structure was for the U.S. economy that we had had to take such action. To sum up, we just aren’t anywhere close to the point of being able to describe the conditions for tightening monetary policy to address financial-instability concerns that would result in a better path for unemployment and inflation relative to our mandated goals.  Until we are sure of that, we shouldn’t change the reference to financial stability in the consensus statement. Finally, although I’d like to see the subcommittee explore enhancements to the SEP, I’m not optimistic that we’d be able to get to a consensus forecast.  But it’s a worthy objective, if somebody has the time to try to pursue that.  Thank you, Madam Chair.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While the speaker does mention different viewpoints and considerations, there is no direct contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is mainly discussing their own thoughts and suggestions on certain topics.


Passage number 290.
 MR. FISCHER.  Can we mobilize him for the subcommittee. CHAIR YELLEN.  He served on the subcommittee that drafted the statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fischer is being discussed as a potential candidate for the subcommittee and Chair Yellen confirms that he has previously served on a similar subcommittee.


Passage number 291.
 MR. EVANS.  Oh, and I agreed with President Plosser’s comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with President Plosser's comments.


Passage number 292.
 MR. FISCHER.  I was just wondering whether we could get you onto the subcommittee as an additional member.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question or request about someone joining a subcommittee.


Passage number 293.
 MR. EVANS.  I’m happy to do whatever you’d like. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Evans and Chair Yellen seem to be expressing a willingness to accommodate each other's preferences.


Passage number 294.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I want to thank the communications subcommittee as well as the authors of the accompanying memo—Bob, Stacey, and Todd—for their hard work in setting up this discussion.  Even though we may end up not making changes—and it seems as though we’re heading that way—I think it’s important for us to have this conversation to understand where we stand.  In thinking about the statement, the value of the statement is not simply that it is a consensus, but that it actually provides a description of our longer-run goals and strategies.  And it’s helpful for us to talk about what that means to us on a not infrequent basis. With all of that said, as many have noted, there’s a very high bar for changing the document.  It’s a quasi-constitutional document.  We should treat it with that kind of respect.  I will make a couple of recommendations for changes—one that I feel very strongly about and one that I feel less strongly about—but those recommendations are made with the idea that this is a quasi-constitutional document. Let me turn to the issues raised by the subcommittee.  In terms of symmetry, I’m very glad to hear the enthusiastic endorsement of symmetry that I’ve heard around the table, and I think it would be helpful for the minutes to reflect that strong endorsement.  I’m very comfortable with where we stand on that.  As Governor Tarullo hinted, sometimes it’s hard to see that strong endorsement of symmetry in all of the communications that are coming out of the Committee.  But I think that having the minutes reflect that is going to be very helpful. In terms of “balanced approach,” I’m sympathetic to Governor Tarullo’s view that the language in paragraph 5 is vague.  But as I’ve talked about on other occasions, I actually have found this language very helpful in providing valuable structure to my decisionmaking.  I think it emphasizes a key point that’s often forgotten—that our mandates are typically complementary.  It recognizes that tradeoffs can exist in our mandates.  It informs the public that we will not favor one exclusively over the other.  And, finally, it appropriately emphasizes that monetary policy is based on a forward-looking evaluation of mandate-relevant macroeconomic variables—one based on projections—not on a backward look at the economy.  I think all of these are very valuable. I do have a small word change that would be helpful.  In the first sentence of paragraph 5, there are two uses of the word “from.”  I would recommend changing the second “from” to the word “below.”  I think this would clarify that we are concerned about employment being too low and not too high.  As it is, people could read the statement as saying that the FOMC is working toward not having economic activity be too high.  So that would be my suggestion.  Is it clear what I’m trying to describe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing appreciation for the work done by the communications subcommittee and discussing their own perspective on the document. They also make a small recommendation for a word change, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 295.
 MR. FISCHER.  It’s absolutely clear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 296.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as "MR" does not provide enough context to determine any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 297.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The consensus statement has served the Committee well over the past three years.  It facilitates clear communication by providing a publicly agreed-upon, shared language to describe the overarching principles that guide our decisionmaking.  And, importantly, it has helped clarify the terms of our debates and disagreements.  When we disagree, it’s not about the longer-run goals or strategies but how they apply to a specific situation.  As a concrete example, if inflation is 1½ percent, it’s not just my personal view that inflation is too low.  It’s the Committee’s clearly articulated view that inflation is too low. Now, because of this shared language, the consensus statement is a foundational document for all of our communications—including our statements, press conferences, speeches, and interviews—so it’s important that we review the consensus statement regularly.  I’m echoing comments by President Kocherlakota.  We want to make sure that it’s well aligned with our decisionmaking and with our other communications.  Even though I am hearing a lot of comments about there being no need for a change, I still think this process is a healthy one, and I’ve learned a lot from the comments I’ve already heard so far today. With those comments in mind, I’ll now say a few words about the three questions.  First, I personally view the 2 percent goal as symmetric in that inflation should, on average, over time, be close to 2 percent.  And then our desire to return to 2 percent inflation does not depend at all on whether inflation is running above or below the target.  I think this message is sharp, clean, and clear.  When clearly communicated, symmetry provides a consistent anchor for inflation whether we’re above or below our objective.  In contrast, a lack of a clear statement of symmetry can be confusing, and here I’ll give the example of the ECB.  It has articulated in the past an inflation target of below, but close to, 2 percent over the medium term.  This opaque formulation has led to various interpretations.  Is this a ceiling or a target.  So we want to avoid that. Second, the “balanced approach” language respects the principle that both of our mandates are important for our decisionmaking, and that neither is subordinate to the other—that is, they’re on equal footing, and, importantly, we don’t have a hierarchical mandate.  Now, I don’t see a great deal of benefit, even if it were possible, in getting more precise about whether the weights in the loss function are literally equal.  After all, even with somewhat different weights, we can still reach broad agreement on policy decisions most of the time. In thinking about both symmetry and “balanced approach,” I find it hard to think through concrete examples of this language because, in doing so, you start realizing we are not truly symmetric in our preferences over different outcomes.  For example, zero percent inflation carries with it a lot of different costs and potential risks, compared with 4 percent inflation.  So the “balanced approach” language actually does serve us well—it’s accurate. Third, concerns about financial stability are best viewed as part of the broader category of longer-term probabilistic risks to achieving our dual mandate.  Financial excess is often built slowly, but, when bubbles pop or systemically important banks fail, it can be challenging, if not impossible, to achieve either maximum employment or price stability.  For this reason, risks to financial stability need to be part of our ongoing policy discussion.  Importantly, though, financial stability is not the only source of longer-term probabilistic risks to our goals that we regularly discuss here and that influence our policy decisions.  Other examples we’ve discussed in recent years include concerns about deflation, the zero lower bound, and the loss of anchored inflation expectations.  Each of these, I think, is under the same general rubric of concerns about tail risks or, more generally, probabilistic risks to the outlook. Issues like these are already part of our ongoing discussions under the broader risk-management rubric.  Therefore, it could be useful—and I’m picking up a theme that President Kocherlakota raised—to include some reference to risk management, broadly defined, in paragraph 5 of the consensus statement describing how we navigate tradeoffs between our goals.  This would echo the “balance of risks” reference at the end of paragraph 2, which I actually think is really well worded.  Such an approach would be preferable to adding explicit reference only to financial stability in paragraph 5, for a couple of reasons.  One is, I do think that suddenly adding a clause about financial stability explicitly to paragraph 5 might be misinterpreted as a statement of a change in our conduct of our policy rather than a clarification of our existing strategy. Also, just as a matter of factual content, financial-stability concerns are a subset of many of these probabilistic risks that we do think about under risk management.  The sentence in paragraph 2 really captures this right:  “The Committee’s policy decisions reflect its longer-run goals, its medium-term outlook, and its assessments of the balance of risks, including risks to the financial system that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals.”  That sentence nailed it, and I think finding a way, potentially, whether over the next few months or next year, of echoing those comments in paragraph 5 would be useful.  But, again, I agree with many people in the room that we don’t really know the answer to how we bring financial stability specifically into monetary policy decisionmaking.  But it would be helpful to include some notion of risks to the outlook being an important part of our decisionmaking, because they are.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker, Williams, is expressing his agreement and support for the consensus statement and is providing suggestions for improvement.


Passage number 298.
 MR. FISCHER.  Well, it’ll have a great effect on the public when we say, “Well, we’ve suspended the consensus forecast for a few months because we can’t agree on policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 299.
” VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But, again, all you have to do is to agree that the Committee agrees that this is the midpoint of where the Committee is on the monetary policy assumption, so I still think it’s possible you can get there.  Anyway, this would be worthwhile to pursue.  I’d be curious about what other people around the table think. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion and curiosity about what others think.


Passage number 300.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I would join many others around the table in saying the consensus statement has provided real value.  It’s constitutional in nature, and so, to me, it’s natural that there would be differences that need to be papered over—I’m okay with that.  I’ll also join the Hippocratic brigade of doing no harm. Turning to the three changes, I do see the 2 percent medium-term inflation objective as symmetrical, and I would view modest deviations from that objective symmetrically.  I think the word “modest” is important here.  I’m echoing what Vice Chairman Dudley said earlier, in a sense.  I just don’t think we should be contemplating more than modest deviations.  Once you get outside of that band, it’s not at all clear to me how to think about symmetry.  I’d be prepared to say publicly that the objective is symmetrical.  Indeed, the former Chairman did that, as Bob mentioned, at the April 2012 press conference.  He said that the medium-term objective, 2 percent, is “not a ceiling, it’s a symmetric objective.”  And I do think it could undermine the Committee’s credibility if the markets were to conclude that 2 percent is, in effect, a ceiling. On the balanced approach, I like the existing formulation, and I take the statute to mean that the Committee sees the two sides of the dual mandate as of equal weight.  In fact, I don’t really see a plausible way to read the statute as suggesting different weights.  It’s an interesting thought to me that we can have models that, for example, might conclude that we should focus on one and ignore the other.  I don’t know how that would work in connection with a statute that tells us to address the two of them.  It doesn’t say, “All of you make up your mind about which of these is more important than the other.” I’ll move on to financial stability.  Like others, I would leave the language as is here.  There really isn’t a consensus about the role of financial stability in monetary policy decisionmaking or about the efficacy of regulation.  This sentence at the end of paragraph 2 really captures it very nicely, and I wouldn’t want to see any changes. To wrap up, there seems to be pretty broad agreement around the table—not unanimous, but pretty broad agreement—to do basically nothing about the statement, and that will leave our subcommittee with, perhaps, some bandwidth, although there are some things to consider, clearly, in the wake of this.  My own view would be that I was very hopeful we were going to get there on the consensus forecast the last time we looked at it, and I was left with a feeling that it would have been really useful to get there.  I was disappointed that we didn’t and would love to take another shot at that.  In addition, there are clearly some things that could be improved with the SEP.  So I look forward to that work.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the consensus statement and expresses their own views and preferences on various aspects, but they do not express disagreement or debate with any other individual or position.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 301.
 MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you very much.  I found this conversation very illuminating.  I do also view this document as somewhat constitutional.  And, as somebody who was not involved in crafting it, it is very helpful to hear about the thinking that went into it on the part of the drafters. Let me focus a bit on the third question, because I do see the statement as a relatively clear and robust explanation of how the Committee views the two individual parts of the dual mandate and possible tradeoffs between them.  However, to my mind, it does not adequately address financial stability, which I consider to be an implicit third leg of our responsibilities in this area.  I also would not want to see financial-stability risks called out as a pressing consideration in our current monetary policy deliberations, but it is important that our longer-run goals framework clearly acknowledges the reality that we do take into account, and should take into account, financial-stability risks in the formulation of monetary policy. I don’t think we can be too precise or prescriptive at this juncture.  Neither the Committee’s practice nor the research is sufficiently settled to clearly state, for instance, the prioritization of macroprudential tools and monetary policy in combating financial-stability risks under different circumstances or to specify the circumstances under which we might be willing to tolerate some deviation from either leg of the dual mandate.  But I do think we want to acknowledge that the Federal Reserve’s mandate encompasses financial stability, and that it is central to our deliberations. In my view, financial stability has been central to the Federal Reserve’s mission and mandate since its inception, although it has been, for the most part, implicit and not clearly called out in the statutory language until we saw the provisions on the Federal Reserve’s prudential responsibilities in Dodd-Frank.  Nonetheless, if you think about the creation of the Federal Reserve and the major changes to it over its history, they’ve, in most cases, been in response to major events of financial instability. It would also be a mistake to confine the use of monetary policy to being a last resort, for a variety of reasons.  First and most obvious is because there have been instances of extreme financial stress in which monetary policy has been the tool of first resort, and we should remember that.  Moreover, we may need to rely more heavily on monetary policy relative to macroprudential tools, compared with some other central banks, for several reasons.  First of all, we operate in a highly fragmented regulatory environment and in a system in which the capital markets play a bigger role in the financial markets than they do in many other systems.  And, second, we have somewhat limited macroprudential tools relative to some other central banks. We’re making huge strides in building structural resilience.  But I think we’re likely to find, as we continue on in this work, that we’re somewhat hampered in our macroprudential toolkit—possibly on constructing time-varying tools that address time-varying sectoral risks and, certainly, on tools that address the borrower side, such as loan-to-value ratios and debt-to-income ratios, which have been proven to be among the most powerful tools in combating the most damaging kinds of financial-stability risks.  If you think about what we are capable of commanding—in contrast, for instance, to the Bank of England—we have a much more fragmented regulatory structure, with a number of regulatory entities that don’t view their mandate as pertaining to financial stability.  They are instead focused, for instance, on investor protections or consumer protections.  And I’d say the FSOC is, so far, a highly imperfect answer to that problem. In that context, monetary policy really is the only tool that works across the financial system to address periods of very rapid growth in private credit creation, and we may not want to take that off the table.  Nonetheless, I think it’s absolutely right, as many here have stated, that we want to be very modest at this juncture in terms of what we could say about how we’re likely to address and view financial stability relative to the other two legs of the mandate.  I don’t agree that it’s one risk in a list of risks.  It is a risk for which we have more primary responsibility, and one that is endogenous, to a larger degree, with respect to the tools we have at our disposal.  So, in that sense, I think we should call it out separately.  And I like the proposal that President Kocherlakota put on the table.  It does have an appropriate degree of modestness but also identifies this as an area in which we are going to intensify our work, which is, I believe, the case. With regard to the other pieces, I don’t think I can really add to the remarks that have been put on the table.  The statement, as drafted, is actually quite good—very carefully crafted language on both the balance and the issue of symmetry.  I think it would be difficult for anyone who has observed the Committee’s actions over the past several years not to conclude that the Committee is prepared to act to counter inflation falling persistently below the 2 percent target. With regard to the consensus forecast proposal, I wasn’t part of the earlier effort.  I can see the virtues of having such a forecast.  I believe that, in the case of the Bank of England Monetary Policy Committee, that process is made considerably easier by the fact that they use market expectations of rates, which means that committee doesn’t actually have to agree on a monetary policy course in order to get to a consensus forecast.  That’s something you should take into account in deliberations over whether this is feasible for this Committee.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Let me return to Governor Fischer for a few comments as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Ms. Brainard disagrees with the document on the grounds that it does not adequately address financial stability, which she considers to be an implicit third leg of the Committee's responsibilities. She argues that monetary policy should not be limited to being a last resort and that it should also be used to address periods of rapid growth in private credit creation. She also highlights the limitations of the Committee's macroprudential toolkit compared to other central banks.


Passage number 302.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thanks, Madam Chair.  I’d like to say a few things about the discussion before you sum up, so I thank you for giving me the time. There is widespread agreement on the view that the inflation target should be symmetric, leaving aside questions of what happens in extreme circumstances.  Incidentally, it doesn’t say that the function is “symmetric and linear.”  It says “symmetric.”  So you can say that 0 inflation is as bad, not as 4 but as 10, if you want—or 20 or something like that.  You can have a function like that. Let me go to the symmetry.  It’s nice that Ben Bernanke made statements in press conferences.  I didn’t know that, and I just read this report.  I think a lot of people who didn’t follow the press conferences with the attention that maybe they should have don’t know that that’s what the view of this Committee is.  Everybody agrees on symmetry in the sense that the 2 percent is not an upper limit.  So I don’t see why you don’t think we should try, without changing almost anything, to get the word “symmetric” into here.  It seems to me it’s a worthwhile statement. On the balanced approach—Charlie, correct me if I’m wrong, but I think I wrote a paper trying to quantify the costs of inflation for the Carnegie-Rochester conference that you were organizing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and providing supporting statements to emphasize their point.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 303.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: The presence of "Yes" indicates that there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 304.
 MR. FISCHER.  It was about 1980.  You can try to estimate the costs of inflation, and you can try to estimate the costs of unemployment.  You can actually develop, if we really wanted to work at it, attempts to see what those costs are.  We’re not going to do it, probably, because it’s too much work.  But there has been a common index in wide use in the profession, which is the misery index that Art Okun introduced—the sum of the unemployment rate and the inflation rate.  That’s not bad.  That’s symmetric—not around zero, I guess.  Well, it depends on whether it’s the absolute value of the index.  After listening to the discussion, I’m inclined to think we would spend so much time trying to figure out what we meant by the current balanced approach that I suspect it’s not worth working on a whole lot more, other than saying we take both of them into account.  But that’s my guess. On financial stability, that’s a very tough one indeed.  The current constitutional document is based in the legal system, in laws relating to our mandate.  I don’t think financial stability is equally based.  There’s a slight problem there.  Nonetheless, I liked a lot of what I heard around the table.  I think that the key issue here is not how the Fed deals with financial stability but how the FOMC deals with financial stability.  And that means we control the interest rate, and do we ever use the interest rate to deal with financial-stability issues.  Now, President Evans used the Greenspan line:  “Well, if you were just going to use the interest rate when the situation becomes untenable, you’d have to do so much to raise the interest rate that you’d destroy the economy.”  That prejudged the answer.  We can’t do it.  We wait for the bubble to pop, and then we mop it up.  The issue is, do we take financial-stability considerations into account in our interest rate decisions.  We sometimes do, and then Lael pointed out that sometimes we do it right at the beginning and not right at the end.  I think we ought to work a little bit more on that, but we cannot develop the statement that implies it’s on the same level as inflation and unemployment.  It’s got to be an instrument, an indicator, or something like that, but I would ask you to let me try to come up with something by December for you to look at. On the consensus forecast, I can’t imagine myself agreeing to a consensus forecast that I think is off significantly.  When it comes to words, there are many different ways of describing a situation, and you’re occasionally willing to trade this word for that word.  But if we’re forecasting a growth rate of 3 percent and I think it should be 1 percent, I’d have a hard time saying, “Well, I’m joining the consensus.” Most central banks that I know use the staff forecast as their forecast.  They talk around that rather than around the committee forecast, and then the committee members are free to say whatever they want.  Now, I’ve spoken to members of our staff.  Their enthusiasm for this venture is limited.  [Laughter]  So my guess is, we’re not going to get there.  But it’s, in fact, what we do today, and it’s, in fact, what underlies the SEP, because the staff gives us the forecast, and you all—at least, I—decide, which side do I want to be on for each variable.  And you go from there.  We’re, in fact, driving the Committee into commenting on the staff forecast.  That’s the outcome of the way the thing is done, and that’s a very useful way of doing it, because we do get people saying what they think.  A lot of things were said.  I’m not sure we’re going to get to a consensus forecast—that is, the Committee’s consensus forecast.  But we can take a look at what others do and at least provide information on how many purport to have a committee forecast and how many purport to have a staff forecast. Dan raised a lot of issues, and his concern was that we don’t mean what we say on inflation.  But I don’t think we’d all be talking about 2 percent if we didn’t have 2 percent here.  Without the 2 percent, you probably wouldn’t have a basis for complaining about the way we behave, because the complaint is, we’re diverging from what we say our goal is.  That’s a valid concern, which this statement allows us to say. I also think it’s a very impressive document.  If it’s a constitutional document, then I think Jefferson is sitting with us, and we’re very lucky.  What would we be doing—amendments to the constitution.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It consists mostly of the speaker expressing their thoughts, opinions, and observations on various topics.


Passage number 305.
 MR. POWELL.  A bill of rights.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Powell is discussing a bill of rights.


Passage number 306.
 MR. FISCHER.  Yes, a bill of rights.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 307.
 MR. TARULLO.  Governor Fischer, I’m not quite seeing the parallel, but that’s okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 308.
  [Laughter] MR. FISCHER.  In any case, my guess is that there will be very small changes, if any, but I think you could make a little progress on symmetry.  You could make a little progress on financial stability but you couldn’t make much because you don’t want to say very much.  My guess is that, on “balanced approach,” we could use some of the language, because you give a lot of alternatives for what “balanced approach” might mean.  So if I would make a recommendation, it is that there is enough to work on, but don’t expect to get too much that we can agree on by December.  Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you for the discussion. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Let me conclude briefly by thanking everybody for an interesting discussion.  Thanks to the subcommittee for your hard work in organizing this, and thanks to the staff for an excellent background paper. I’m not going to weigh in on all of the questions.  I just want to say that I do think it’s helpful for us to exchange views periodically about the statement on our fundamental strategy and about the best way to communicate that strategy.  Today’s discussion, for me, at least, clarified that, from the time when we adopted this statement to this day, we all have essentially seen the 2 percent as a symmetric objective, and nobody really had in mind that 2 percent was a ceiling. We’ve had some debate about the usefulness of the consensus statement.  From my standpoint, I really think it’s been an important advance.  Like President Kocherlakota and others of you, I consider it an indispensable tool.  In my own communications, it’s always at the center of the way I talk about monetary policy—our 2 percent objective, the fact that we place equal weight on both dual-mandate objectives, and “balanced approach.”  It was good for me to hear that most of you share this view. I guess I’ve served on this Committee longer than anyone else around the table, and I can still remember 1996, which is, I believe, when the first discussion occurred—although when I researched this topic, I found out that, in the Volcker years, there actually was a discussion about adopting a numerical inflation objective.  But we’ve been discussing this since 1996.  It’s taken well more than a decade to formulate a document that was capable of achieving broad support.  To my mind, it is constitutional, and its value derives very importantly from the fact that it does command an overwhelming degree of support in the Committee. I am all in with those who’ve cited the Hippocratic oath.  We should be very careful to do no harm.  I would not want to see anything happen here that erodes the support that we have in this room for this statement.  But if your subcommittee can review this discussion and come up with some changes, whether it’s about “symmetric” or ways to characterize the role of financial stability in our decisionmaking, and if you think there are changes that could receive broad support in the Committee either in December or at a later time, I urge you to bring those back to us.  But I really think we have, to my mind, a very good statement, and I’ve heard a lot of positive things about it around the table. There are other things to do.  I heard, as I listened to your discussions, the potential to either look for revisions to the SEP or return to the idea of some form of a consensus forecast.  There was support for that.  And it would be helpful for us to have some Committee vehicle other than just the SEP to try to provide a more concrete discussion of what the Committee thinks about the outlook and the likely trajectory for future policy.  It would be helpful in achieving what I think many of you have said you want, which is forward guidance that is not calendar based and does evolve with the data but would be a Committee-wide statement.  I know this is challenging, but if the Committee, after reviewing what other central banks have done and our own past history with this, can find a way to make some progress, that would be very useful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It consists mostly of statements expressing opinions and suggestions for potential changes, but there is no clear disagreement between the speakers.


