Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeAugust 24, 1982A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in theoffices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, August 24, 1982, at 9:45 a.m.Mr. Volcker,Mr. Solomon,Mr. BallesMr. BlackMr. FordMrs. HornMr. MartinMr. ParteeMr. RiceMrs. TeetersMr. WallichChairmanVice ChairmanMessrs. Keehn, Morris, and Roos, Alternate Members of the FederalOpen Market CommitteeMessrs. Boykin and Corrigan, Presidents of the Federal ReserveBanks of Dallas and Minneapolis, respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff DirectorMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, 1/ General CounselMr. Oltman, 1/ Deputy General CounselMr. Mannion, Assistant General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMessrs. J. Davis, Keran, Koch, Parthemos, Prell, Truman,and Zeisel, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account1/ Entered the meeting following the action to ratify System open markettransactions in foreign currencies.PRESENT:8/24/82Messrs. Czerwinski and Smoot, First Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of Kansas City and Philadelphia,respectivelyMr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Associate Director, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMr. Kohn, Senior Deputy Associate Director, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Promisel, Senior Deputy Associate Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Lindsey, Assistant Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Secretary, Open Market Secretariat,Board of GovernorsMessrs. Eisenmenger, Fousek, Scheld, and Stern,Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banksof Boston, New York, Chicago, and Minneapolis,respectivelyMessrs. Burger, Cacy, and Soss, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City,and New York, respectivelyMr. Pearce, Assistant Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of DallasMr. Lang, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank ofPhiladelphiaMs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a list of participants in a meeting.


Passage number 2.
 Lovett, Securities Trading Officer, Federal ReserveBank of New York-2 -Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofAugust 24, 1982CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would someone like to propose approval ofthe minutes.SPEAKER(.). So moved.SPEAKER(.). Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The proposal to approve the minutes is made and seconded without any opposition or argument.


Passage number 3.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Foreign currencyoperations, Mr. Cross.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that foreign currency operations are being carried out by Mr. Cross without objection.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 4.
MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Cross, is making a statement which indicates that there will be disagreement or opposition from other parties.


Passage number 5.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's ratify the exchange markettransactions first and then we will discuss Mexico.SPEAKER(.). So moved.SPEAKER(.). Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The first speaker suggests ratifying the exchange market transactions before discussing Mexico, and the second speaker agrees by saying "so moved" and "second."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 6.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's ratified. I didn't mean to shutoff any questions, but let's discuss Mexico. Who is going to presenta proposal here--Mr. Cross or Mr. Truman or me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing disagreement with someone's assertion that something has been ratified, and they are also questioning who will be presenting a proposal.


Passage number 7.
MR. CROSS. We defer to you on the assumption that you wouldwant to make a proposal, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply states that they are deferring to the chairman because they assume he would want to make a proposal.


Passage number 8.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we discussed this late last week.What has happened since then is first of all the bank rollover and thebank discussions about putting up additional money, which I'm surewill be continuing [for] some time. The calculations are a littleslippery at this point, but the presumption is that our present swap[loan to Mexico] of $700 million has a priority claim on any Funddrawing, assuming there is a Fund drawing in the next couple ofmonths. And, therefore, Mexico would get no net money--or verylittle, depending upon how that worked out--from the Fund during thisperiod. And without any net money from the Fund, even with someadditional official assistance during the course of the next two orthree months, they're going to need more money. That proposition--that the banks would have to put up some additional net new money inaddition to the rollover--was put to the banks and they have studiedit. That was presented to a degree as a--well, "requirement" may betoo strong a word--but an expectation of what would lie behindofficial assistance, so that to some degree these things work inparallel. In fact, I don't think the banks will make up their mindsabout this for some days or maybe a week or two, and some additionalofficial assistance will be needed before then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It mainly describes the unfolding events and the need for additional assistance and money.


Passage number 9.
 I might mention thatat a meeting in New York where there were maybe 200 people and about90 banks or whatever represented--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. 115 banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply provides information about a meeting attended by 115 banks.


Passage number 10.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It got up to 115 banks. Mr. Solomon madea little introductory statement describing the nature of the officialprogram and indicating that there was some expectation of some privatebank new money as part of this. I don't remember anything else that8/24/82was of particular significance, Tony, but my memory may fail me andyou might want to comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and stating that they do not remember anything else significant. There is no disagreement or conflicting point of view expressed.


Passage number 11.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I just outlined the package, whichyou're probably all familiar with from the press. And basically theMexican presentation boiled down to their saying that the Fed would berepaid first on the $700 million swap; they told the banks that theonly net new money between August and December would be approximately$1.4 to $1.5 billion--basically the extent of the BIS package tocomplete an extra additional [unintelligible]. They said they hadneed of $1.9 billion, assuming everybody rolled over [their existingloans] and they had to build some reserves. Therefore, this justifiedsomething close to a billion dollars in new money as being essential.About 25 bankers spoke up. Quite a few of them said they wouldcooperate, implying they'd cooperate on the rollover; some impliedthey would cooperate as well in sharing in the new money. Nobody gotup and said no. Based on that, the Mexicans felt justified, and Ithink correctly so--though they put it a little more strongly than Ithink we would have said it--in stating that there was an agreement inprinciple on the rollover. We might have said instead that there wasa consensus in principle on the rollover; they said there was"agreement." But then they followed that up with telexes on Fridaynight and Saturday morning to the individual banks to get a legal,formal agreement on the 90-day rollover. The advisory group said theyhad put together fourteen banks. The two co-chairmen, from the Bankof America and Citibank, are working on the question of new money andwhether they can get part of that from the other banks, not just fromthe fourteen. As Paul said earlier, one of their conditions on thenew money is basically to see the Fund program. That doesn't meanthey would want to wait until it is written up and every "i" is dottedand every "t" is crossed, but they have to have a basic understandingof the Fund program before they will come up with any money. I thinkthat's it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting information and explaining the actions taken by the Mexican presentation and the responses from the bankers. There is no conflict or disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 12.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just to clarify, we're looking at this inseveral stages. When we talk about the Fund program, that in itselfwill be in two stages, hopefully. There was talk that sometime inearly September--how soon it actually will take place, I don't know,but I suspect it will be later than they were indicating a couple ofweeks ago--agreement in principle on a Fund program could be reportedto the public and the outline of the program would be known, but itwould take another month beyond that to go through the process ofactually getting the Fund agreement locked up, executive boardapproval [obtained], and the money ready to be disbursed. So, we'retalking about Fund money not being disbursed before the middle ofOctober at the earliest. But the hope is that there would be anunderstanding on the terms as early in September as possible. Andthis bank money that is being talked about presumably would wait forthat first phase of the Fund program, not the second phase. Butthat's temporary money; I don't know what the terms would be. It'sclear that Mexico is going to need more money next year--not just theFund money, which will largely go to repay the short-term officialassistance, but money on which to survive for a period of time nextyear. And that will take another negotiation after this initial $1billion that is being mentioned here or whatever it is. Thatpresumably would be a negotiation that would proceed during Octoberand November and maybe December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the stages and timeline of a potential agreement and the need for additional funds in the future.


Passage number 13.
8/24/82MR. MARTIN. The $1 billion assumes all the banks hold still.No small banks have to be paid off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 14.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you say no small banks. I thinkthat's an obscurity. The banks don't want many [current bank lenders]to be paid off, that's for sure. When there are a thousand plus banksout there, the problem is: How do you control them all. But if verymany of them wanted to get out, the whole [deal] might blow up.That brings me back to the swap line. I forget just where wewere when we talked on the telephone but there was an agreement inprinciple in Basle early last week for [official loans totalling] $1.5billion, meaning $750 million from the United States and $750 millionfrom the other countries. Those countries are insistent upon abasically equal sharing that does not take account of the $700 millionof new money we already have in there. The $750 million consisted ofamounts as high as million for Canada and Japan, million forthe United Kingdom and million for Germany. Then the amountpretty quickly drops down to million for essentially allthe rest of the G-10 countries. I think they're all in, aren't they.Well, with an exception of one or so, that was tentatively agreed on.The reason it was $1.5 billion was that that was all the Mexicansasked for, even though they think they need more. Mr. Silva Herzog,the Finance Minister, sort of clinched that by saying in histelevision address in Mexico that he was discussing $1.5 billionbecause he wanted to put a figure in his speech and he didn't want toask for more than he knew he could get. That was the explanation, Iguess. But once the Europeans heard that, they said no more than $1.5billion but with some understanding, at least among some of them thatI've talked to, that the Mexicans might have to come back for more.Now, subsequent to that and subsequent to our conversation,the Bank of Spain, or the Spanish authorities anyway, who did notattend this meeting in Basle have volunteered million as agesture of good will to their Spanish-speaking brethren in the NewWorld. That is the biggest single amount that any country has come upwith. They have had a swap agreement with Mexico, and apparently thatswap is more meaningful than I might have thought, or so they haveinterpreted it. So that would bring the European amount up to $925million and they want us to match it. I have, of course, discussedthis with the Treasury and they have agreed to put up $600 million.That leaves us with $325 million if we fully match [the othercountries]. The idea here is that we will all go in together. TheEuropean side will be done through the BIS, and the BIS is technicallyputting up the money with various kinds of support from the centralbanks or the governments. We will not be in that technicalarrangement, but the understanding is that we will provide the moneyin parallel to their providing the money. They don't have the samedegree of flexibility that we do in timing because they have to raisethe money in the market, and they like to go by a schedule and havesome warning as to when they're going to put up the money. They justcan't sit there and say "How much do you need this morning." and putit up the way we can. But the understanding at this stage is thatthey will put it up in three tranches, and this is deliberate so thatat no time are we providing much more money than the Mexicans need.And we will put it up with a mutual understanding, which will bewritten into our swap agreement and into the Treasury's swap agreementand reflected in some way in their agreement, that this money will be8/24/82provided over the coming weeks as they need it but with an option onour part to evaluate the wisdom of putting up any amount of money inthe light of progress on negotiations with the Fund, with languageabout looking toward an agreement with the Fund by the middle ofSeptember. You may have some exact language there that you canprovide, Ted, but that's the general concept. We may not put up ourmoney dollar for dollar with theirs, because theirs will come inlumps. We will put it up as it is needed from day to day and theEuropeans won't come in with a second tranche until we catch up withthem on the first tranche or maybe exceed them by a few milliondollars. And then they will come in with a second tranche and we'llcatch up with that and proceed in that manner so that Mexico at notime will have any very great amount of money in the bank while we areobserving progress with the Fund. What is that language you have orthe nearest approximation you've arrived at now, anyway, Ted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: There is contention or disagreement in this passage because there are different opinions and perspectives being expressed. One person thinks that having no small banks is an obscurity, while another person believes that having many small banks would be difficult to control. Additionally, there is disagreement about the amount of official loans and the need for more funding for Mexico.


Passage number 15.
MR. TRUMAN. It says: "It is understood that the Governmentof Mexico is seeking to reach agreement on the program from the IMF bySeptember 15 and it is further understood that it is the mutualexpectation of the Bank of Mexico and the System that the last one-third of the funds available on the swap arrangement would not bedrawn until the Bank and the management of the Fund have reachedagreement on Mexico's economic stabilization program." So, the lastone-third of the whole package and the timing of the BIS third trancheis linked to their essentially having reached agreement in principlewith the Fund.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating that the last one-third of the funds and the timing of the BIS third tranche are contingent upon reaching an agreement with the IMF.


Passage number 16.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And the date mentioned is September 15.Also, we do look forward to some private money here but, in myjudgment, that's probably not going to be before the middle ofSeptember. It likely will be triggered by the same agreement with theFund. That's probably desirable at this stage because it's nice toget private money in there in one sense; on the other hand, I thinkthey need all the encouragement they can get to reach agreementexpeditiously with the Fund, and that is one way of putting morepressure in that direction. Any questions or comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion on the timing and desirability of private money being involved in an agreement with the Fund. They also mention their belief that putting pressure on reaching an agreement with the Fund is important.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 17.
MR. PARTEE. Paul, I just want to raise a difficult issue andthat is the question of quality of credit. The Federal Reserve istraditionally concerned about the quality of the credit that itextends. At the discount window we require collateral and we takehaircuts on bonds and that kind of thing to be sure that we havecollateral. We have sometimes said that we would not lend to aninstitution that was no longer solvent, although that's a very iffymatter and I'm not sure that that has much point. But I do make thepoint that we have been very careful in the administration of thediscount window as a traditional matter to see that we were wellsecured. In cases where we were approached for lending in specialcircumstances, such as in the case of Lockheed or New York City, we'vebeen reluctant and we have said that it had to be bridge financing.In the case of New York City in particular, I recall that we said wecouldn't see the other end of the bridge, but it was bridge financingwithout much, really, in the way of meaningful collateral that NewYork City could ever put up. In the case of the other swaps in whichwe were engaging, I guess we have always felt--although we neverreally tested it--that the countries were solvent. In the case ofMexico, one of the things that disturbed the Committee when itconsidered [establishing] the Mexican swap was the question of whether8/24/82at some time or other Mexico would get to be in financial difficultyand there would be some question about the quality of the swap.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. This can be seen in the statement "although we never really tested it" which suggests some members of the Committee have doubts about the solvency of the countries involved in the swaps.


Passage number 18.
 Weseem to be in exactly the same--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are precisely there. They're infinancial difficulty; there's no question about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrases "we seem to be in exactly the same" and "we are precisely there" indicate agreement or alignment. The statement about their financial difficulty is presented as a fact without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 19.
MR. PARTEE. That's right. We are precisely in the situationthe Committee was somewhat concerned we might be in when that swap wasfirst approved some 15 years ago. So, from my point of view in tryingto sort through all this, the parallel becomes the bridge. I wouldfeel as strongly as a private banker that I'd want to be convincedthat something would be worked out to make the country okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 20.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I forgot to describe the collateralside. I think the fundamental point is the one you just made: Noneof this is going to work unless there is a good [economic] adjustmentprogram. And it's going to have to be a very draconian adjustmentprogram. I think we have to recognize the full extent of thelimitations on that program, which I'm not in a position to judge,certainly at this stage. I'm not sure that anybody can judge how muchthe country can take. A country can have a fine-looking draconianadjustment program but if the country goes up in revolution, it willbe unsuccessful. And I'm not sure the Mexican citizenry is fullyaware yet of what has hit them, to say the least. But that has to bethe fundamental backstop of any credit. We have labored long over thecollateral issue and there aren't any terribly satisfactory answersbecause Mexico doesn't have that much collateral. But there areanswers, satisfactory or not. The idea of this is that our presentswap will remain secured, if that's the word, by a Fund agreement thatdoesn't exist yet. But if it does come into existence, our swap willhave first claim on it. This second loan--and the proposal is thatthis would be a separate swap--will be secured along side the BISarrangement with the remainder of the Fund drawings as they areavailable over time. I guess we have the gold [collateral] byimplication. They are willing to pledge $250 million in gold, whichdoesn't go very far, but there it is. And by some assignment yet tobe worked out, oil revenues are an ultimate backstop if nothing elseworks. Ted, maybe you're more up-to-date on that negotiation than Iam. The BIS people are in Mexico City discussing that now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains contention or disagreement. The speaker mentions that there is a lack of collateral in Mexico and suggests that the country may not be fully aware of the situation. They also mention that they are not sure about the negotiations regarding oil revenues, indicating possible disagreement or uncertainty.


Passage number 21.
MR. TRUMAN. Mike was just on the phone with them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 22.
MR. BRADFIELD. The arrangement that has now been worked outbetween the Bank of Mexico and the BIS as far as a direct assignmentby debtors, that is to say oil companies, is that Exxon and other oilcompanies in the G-10 countries [will assign] to the BIS an amount inexcess of what would now be $1825 million of the total amount of thecredit extended. The assignment would be substantially in excess ofthat amount, somewhere around $2.5 billion in total.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The disagreement lies in the fact that the assignment would be substantially in excess of $1825 million, but the exact amount is not agreed upon, with an estimate of around $2.5 billion given.


Passage number 23.
MR. PARTEE. This is on future oil deliveries.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 24.
MR. BRADFIELD. These are future oil deliveries. Theassignments would be made now and would begin to flow into the BISsometime, maturing one year from now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement of fact regarding future oil deliveries and the timeline for their maturation.


Passage number 25.
8/24/82VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Does this reflect the oil that waspreviously in hock to the private banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not reflect any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a date and discusses the oil that was previously in hock to private banks.


Passage number 26.
MR. BRADFIELD. No, the arrangements will clearly providethat they would have to assign oil that has not been previouslyassigned. It would be oil revenues under contracts that exist now andthat would be free from other encumbrances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining that the arrangements will require the assignment of oil that has not been previously assigned, specifically referring to oil revenues under existing contracts.


Passage number 27.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 28.
 It's assigned to the BIS but we get ashare of that to the extent that our--MR. BRADFIELD. The BIS is our agent for the collection ofthese revenues.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that the BIS is assigned to collect the revenues and that they receive a share of those revenues.


Passage number 29.
MR. PARTEE. We are fully covered.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only states that "we are fully covered" without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 30.
MR. ROOS. If their picture became more dismal and there werea political reaction down there, obviously these types of agreementswould be rather meaningless, wouldn't they.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement asking for clarification or agreement.


Passage number 31.
 There is no way--unlesswe build oil tanks in all of our new Fed buildings--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think there's any way of gettingabsolute protection against that kind of eventuality. Let me alsorecognize another bit of reality. Whatever arrangements we make forcollateral, including our own swap, we may get to the point whereMexico has no money to pay, in effect. They may have some oilrevenues, let's say, but whether we demand the oil revenues underthose circumstances is going to have to be a decision made at thetime. If we're going to bankrupt them by demanding the oil revenues,we may want to roll over the swap and make a new oil revenue deallater. That's not the intention, but I think that's inherent in thesituation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It discusses potential challenges and uncertainties regarding the protection against a specific eventuality and the possibility of Mexico not having enough money to pay in the future.


Passage number 32.
 When a country or a borrower doesn't have any money, hedoesn't have any money no matter what kind of--MR. BRADFIELD. I would agree with the Chairman that thelatter problem is the more serious one. There are problems with thetechnical aspects of the assignment, but I would like you tounderstand that the assignment is an assignment of revenues bycompanies that operate outside of Mexico. So, there would be no waythat those companies could get out of the assignment, theoretically.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the Chairman's statement and then provides additional information to support their point.


Passage number 33.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If the oil showed up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is neutral and does not express any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 34.
MR. PARTEE. If the oil was delivered.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement appears to be a neutral statement of fact or a question.


Passage number 35.
MR. BRADFIELD. But I assume that Mexico has to deliver theoil; they have to sell oil.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "But I assume that Mexico has to deliver the oil; they have to sell oil" is a statement of assumption or belief, without any contradictory or opposing viewpoints presented.


Passage number 36.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There's a lot of oil that is alreadyassigned. I don't know if you have the numbers, Michael, on what isalready assigned to private banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating that there is a lot of oil that is already assigned and the speaker does not know if Michael has specific numbers on what is already assigned to private banks.


Passage number 37.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure anybody does.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about whether anyone knows the answer to a question.


Passage number 38.
MR. BRADFIELD. We are trying. Mr. Patrikis [of the New YorkFederal Reserve Bank] is in Mexico City, and one of the things we haveasked him to do is to collect all of the appendices and agreements forassignment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they have asked Mr. Patrikis to collect certain documents in Mexico City.


Passage number 39.
8/24/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They have done a lot of these deals--increasingly in recent months--but they told us that a relativelysmall fraction has been placed. Now, whether that's true or not, Idon't know; but that's the story they gave.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage presents information about a situation without stating any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 40.
MS. TEETERS. What is the annual or monthly flow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only presents a question asked by Ms. Teeters and does not introduce any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 41.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They get $15 billion dollars a year,roughly, from oil at current levels of production and current prices.So there's quite a lot of flow there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the amount of money generated from oil revenue.


Passage number 42.
 The monthly flow is--MR. TRUMAN. A billion and a quarter dollars.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 43.
MR. RICE. Is that total production or exports.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply a question posed by Mr. Rice to clarify whether the mentioned quantity refers to total production or exports.


Passage number 44.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's exports.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "That's exports" alone does not provide any clear indication of contention or disagreement as it is a fragmented statement without context. Further information or context is needed to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 45.
MR. WALLICH. We want to bear in mind that Mexico a few yearsago was a reasonably viable country without oil. At the same timethere is a basic economy that can function; the oil is an addition.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about Mexico's economy and the role of oil in it.


Passage number 46.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I'm not clear on one thing. Is itanticipated that we would use the funds from the IMF to settle that$700 million drawing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Black is stating that he is not clear on something and seeking clarification.


Passage number 47.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's anticipated now, but I can alsoanticipate a problem. If that money comes through on November 1 orOctober 15, say, and they have no other source of money and don't havethe money to pay us, we may be faced with a decision on a rollover.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing a potential problem that may arise if a specific condition is met.


Passage number 48.
MR. BLACK. But in setting our share, they made thatassumption I gather, didn't they.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification or confirmation regarding a previous assumption.


Passage number 49.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Everybody understands that we have a priorclaim on IMF money from the earlier swap. Whether we can cash in onthat claim or not remains to be seen. But legally that's theposition. I also want to mention the rate. I don't know whether wefinally settled on this, but ordinarily we lend essentially at theTreasury bill rate on these things; the BIS is going to lend at LIBORplus which raises the question of whether they should begetting more than we would be getting; right in today's market it'sseveral percentage points. More normally it would be a significantmargin but not quite as big as it is at the moment. So, we havediscussed a possibility--this is the BIS agreement and I presume ourswould be parallel--that the second swap would have a 3-month maturityand could be rolled over 3 times, which makes it a 1-year loanpotentially. And thus there might be some logic in using the one-yearbill rate and marking it up point or something, which comes muchcloser on average to where LIBOR has been in the past. Nobody knowswhat it will be in the future. But it is natural to do the same thingas the Treasury: I don't know whether we've resolved this with theTreasury yet or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information about the possibility of cashing in on a claim and discussing the potential lending rate. There is no explicit disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 50.
MR. TRUMAN. They accepted that proposition--using the one-year Treasury bill rate on the yield basis off the constant maturityseries that we publish.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is presenting a statement or fact without any indication of disagreement or contention. It is about the acceptance of a proposition related to the use of the one-year Treasury bill rate.


Passage number 51.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only mentions the name "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" but does not provide any context or information that would suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 52.
 Plus8/24/82MR. TRUMAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 53.
 PlusCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It probably will come out cheaper thanLIBOR, but that depends upon the shape of the yield curve. If we hada steeply rising yield curve, it would not; if we had a relativelyflat yield curve, it would be less than LIBOR. But it's someplace inthe ballpark. So, that's the interest rate that we are talking about.Let me ask whether there are any other questions or commentsabout this in general. If there aren't, we're only left with thedecision of whether to do $300 million, which makes [the total] a niceround billion dollars, which is what I was thinking of when I talkedwith you before. I guess the Europeans will live with that. So, theU.S. share would be $900 million and the European share would be $925million. Or we may want to make a grand gesture and throw in another$25 million and make our share equal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply provides information about the interest rate and the potential costs compared to LIBOR. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 54.
MR. PARTEE. Would this be classified just as an addition tothe swap or is it a special--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contentious or disagreeing statements. It is a simple question about classifying something.


Passage number 55.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, it's a new swap.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It states that it is a new swap without providing any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 56.
MR. PARTEE. It's a special thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "It's a special thing" seems to express a positive sentiment or agreement.


Passage number 57.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is a different swap as we have itstructured now so that it can be parallel with the BIS lending and the[original] $700 million swap will be held where it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that there is a different swap being structured to be parallel with the BIS lending, and that the original $700 million swap will be held where it is.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 58.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm not so much worried about theMexicans, but the Europeans will not really understand why we were sochintzy if we come in $25 million short of the 50-50 match. Ipersonally would put in for it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses concern about the Europeans not understanding their situation and suggests personally applying for something.


Passage number 59.
MR. FORD. Are we going to offend the French, Tony.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Ford is simply asking a question about potentially offending the French, there is no indication of disagreement or conflicting views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 60.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only consideration I can see on theother side is that we will be discussing this with the Europeans inToronto, I'm sure, and I can see how things go. If they have reallyshut off the principal payments on their loans, this should be enough,particularly if we want private banks to come in. But there's alwaysa possibility that there will be a need for a few hundred million morealong the line here someplace, so I want to warn you about that. Butthis should be enough as I now see it. Well, I'll put itconservatively: The calculations now assume that they get a prettyfull rollover from the private banks; assuming that the private banksdo come in once there is a Fund agreement, this should last themthrough the Fund agreement if that's successful. And after the Fundagreement in principle, at that point if the banks come in for somemore, I do not see that we're going to have to put up any more.That's my judgment at the moment, but I would not promise you that theMexicans are not going to run out [of dollars] during the next two tothree months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement or contention in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that there may be a need for additional funds in the future, but states that based on their current calculations, the existing funds should be enough. However, they also acknowledge the possibility that the Mexicans may run out of dollars in the next two to three months. This implies a possible disagreement or uncertainty about the sufficiency of the current funds.


Passage number 61.
MR. ROOS. Are there other problem situations in that part ofthe world that conceivably are likely to follow or fall into the same[difficulties].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any specific problem situations or difficulties. It only asks a hypothetical question about the possibility of other situations facing similar difficulties. Therefore, there is no contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 62.
MR. MARTIN. Argentina, Brazil, and Venezuela for example.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only mentions three countries (Argentina, Brazil, and Venezuela) without providing any information or context about them. It does not indicate any contentions or disagreements among them.


Passage number 63.
8/24/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Argentina is the most imminent of those, Ithink. It's a different situation in many respects, but just in termsof our own posture--and it's worth discussing briefly--we have no swapagreement with Argentina. We have always refused to extend [the swapnetwork]; this [swap line] with Mexico is somewhat of a special dealwith a neighbor. The Mexican currency was convertible. That is nottrue generally of Latin America in the same sense. I think we havereason to hold the line as the Federal Reserve. What the U.S.government would want to do in the case of Argentina is something elseagain. I imagine that if Argentina gets into this kind of jam, thequestion is going to be raised. But we do have a distinction in whatwe have done in the past and in our general attitude between Mexicoand Argentina, just to take the next most imminent [problem economy].Brazil, Venezuela, and others could be involved, too, but I thinkArgentina is the most imminent. Now, their debt is a lot smaller, ofcourse. It's very sizable, but it is less than half the size ofMexico's. It's not all that much less than half, I guess. What isit--about $30-odd billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and discussing their stance on potential financial issues in Argentina.


Passage number 64.
MR. TRUMAN. $35 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage appears to be a standalone statement without any additional context or information provided. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 65.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. $35 billion; it has gotten big, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In this passage, there is no mention or indication of any disagreement or contention. The statement is simply stating a monetary value ($35 billion) and then mentioning that it has become big. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 66.
MR. TRUMAN. [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 67.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Our banks are heavily involved, but not asheavily as in the case of Mexico; I presume about half as much. The$325 million proposition is on the table; it may even have beenseconded. To make it a little more formal than was expressed, itmakes some sense to me, so long as we have these understandings, thatwe don't appear to be chintzy for $25 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting views or arguments. It simply states some facts and opinions without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 68.
MR. PARTEE. Is the $600 million from the Treasury solid.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 69.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What do you mean by solid. They've agreedto it right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is seeking clarification about the meaning of the term "solid," and states that someone else has agreed to it, suggesting consensus or agreement.


Passage number 70.
 I don't know if the paper is signed yet, but I--MR. PARTEE. It just occurs to me that they have not donethis; they have not had the benefit of a Congressional appropriationand they must be trying to get the money in some other place.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about a situation without expressing any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 71.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They don't do it. It's the ESF.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating that "they" don't do something and that it is the "ESF." There is no conflicting information or contrasting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 72.
MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 73.
 PARTEE and MS. TEETERS. They have some money.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 74.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is yes because the passage describes a situation where there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 75.
MR. PARTEE. I didn't think they had any money left.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their belief or opinion about a certain topic without any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 76.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They have put up $1 billion for this for aweek or so to bridge the Department of Energy's payment. So, theyhave a billion dollar swap right today. Now, that will be repaidtoday or tomorrow. Did they reach agreement on that oil thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states the amount of money that has been put up for a specific purpose and mentions that it will be repaid soon. There is no indication of any disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 77.
MR. TRUMAN. No, not yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 78.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They are still negotiating the details ofthis oil thing. But presumably that will be settled in a day or two.8/24/82Their billion dollar swap will be repaid and then they will come backin proportionately.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Both sentences express a similar idea and suggest that the negotiations and repayment will be resolved soon without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 79.
MR. PARTEE. That August 24 date that Sam mentioned--Ibelieve that's today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is simply acknowledging and confirming the date mentioned by Sam.


Passage number 80.
MR. CROSS. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply acknowledges that the statement being made is correct.


Passage number 81.
MR. PARTEE. August 24 is today, isn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by Mr. Partee is a simple question confirming the date.


Passage number 82.
MR. TRUMAN. Yes. We just confirmed that [date].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Truman confirmed something on a specific date.


Passage number 83.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was supposed to be agreed to yesterday,but I know it was put over until today. It sounds as if it's beingput over until tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that an agreement was supposed to be reached yesterday but was postponed until today. Then, they speculate that it might be further postponed until tomorrow based on how it sounds. However, there is no explicit disagreement or conflict between different parties.


Passage number 84.
MR. CROSS. It matured today but it may be extended a day ortwo if they don't work out that problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
This is a statement made by Mr. Cross regarding a possible extension of a deadline, there is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 85.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The ESF is in a much healthiercondition than when I was there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a subjective opinion about the current condition of the ESF compared to the speaker's past experience, so there is no clear contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 86.
MR. PARTEE. Are they really. I just have not kept track ofit, Tony.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee admits that he has not kept track of something, which suggests lack of knowledge or information on his part.


Passage number 87.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's the combination of all thosedrawings that we did from the IMF when we did the November 1 package,which we don't have to repay, so it only appears on the asset side ofthe ESF. But all these high interest rates that the Federal Reserveis giving these countries has put the ESF in a very healthy condition.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention in the passage. The statement is providing information about the assets and condition of the ESF.


Passage number 88.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, under the law under which the ESFcurrently operates, if [the loan] is outstanding for more than sixmonths, they have to get a Presidential determination that this is aspecial situation that justifies lending for more than six months. Ithink they intend to get that Presidential determination right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 89.
MR. TRUMAN. Yes, they do intend to do that. As a matter offact we saw the draft last night. They would have it as part of thepackage.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a fact about seeing the draft the previous night.


Passage number 90.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would say that there would be verystrong support from the Congress. The thought of economic chaos inMexico, with all those millions of people trying to pour in over theborder, is just so upsetting to members of the Congress that I thinkthere would be widespread support.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses their belief that there would be strong support from Congress regarding the issue mentioned.


Passage number 91.
MR. MARTIN. The month after they pass the first big changein the immigration statute in 30 years or whatever it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about contention or disagreement. It simply refers to the timing of a change in the immigration statute.


Passage number 92.
MR. PARTEE. Well, of course, there's likely to be enougheconomic hardship in Mexico that there will be flight across theborder anyhow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In this passage, there is no clear statement of disagreement or contention. Mr. Partee is stating that economic hardship in Mexico may lead to people crossing the border, which does not appear to provoke disagreement or contention.


Passage number 93.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, we're going to get it anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing a straightforward intention or agreement to obtain something.


Passage number 94.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But there is a perceptible differencebetween austerity programs and actual collapse.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presenting a comparison between austerity programs and actual collapse, indicating that they are different things.


Passage number 95.
-10-8/24/82MR. MARTIN. For 70 million people, you know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement regarding the number of people mentioned.


Passage number 96.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have a motion for $325 million.The exact [terms] I'm going to say are available to you; I'm not surethe language is all worked out to the last comma. The main elementshave been touched upon: the rate, the collateral, the term of 3months, and the rollovers for a year. The implication is that wewould be repaid during the course of the year, as the Fund moneybecomes available, but that's not promised.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that there is a motion for $325 million and providing some details about the terms and repayment.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 97.
MS. TEETERS. Do we get paid back equally with the BIS. Isthat the idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents a question, implying a potential disagreement or uncertainty about whether the BIS will pay back equally.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 98.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, out of the same pool equally.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, out of the same pool equally

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. It presents a simple and neutral statement without indicating any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 99.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think we can all get out in ayear because they can only draw a maximum of about $1-1/4 billion fromthe Fund in the first year, or maybe $1-1/2 billion if they frontload.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents a statement or opinion without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 100.
 So, if you take--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It would be a little more than that ifthey front load.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply discussing the possibility of something being "a little more than that" if a certain condition is met.


Passage number 101.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 102.
 We have our $700 million and we willget a part of the BIS--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we don't know; it depends uponwhether they get a compensatory financing facility [drawing from theIMF] and how much is front loaded. But with $1.8 billion and $700million you have $2.5 billion. That is more than front loading alonewould provide out of the Fund agreement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement provides factual information about the amount of money available and how it would be used. There is no indication of differing opinions or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 103.
MR. PARTEE. And their own circumstances could improve.There could be an increase in oil prices, for example.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is simply stating a hypothetical situation where an increase in oil prices could potentially improve the circumstances of individuals.


Passage number 104.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if it really worked out well, wewould get paid out of private financing. The banks would put up moreloans and Mexico would repay us; but we may be dreaming, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is expressing a hypothetical scenario and acknowledging that it may be unrealistic or overly optimistic.


Passage number 105.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 106.
 Of course, if oil prices decline--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have gotten 9 different stories in thecourse of this negotiation about whether they can, among other things,increase their oil production or not. Two weeks ago they were goingto increase it way up; this week, no. It's going to be a difficultnegotiation. Do I take silence as assent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

There is contention or disagreement in the passage because the speaker mentions receiving contradictory information regarding whether "they" can increase their oil production or not. This suggests that there is disagreement or inconsistency in the positions being presented during the negotiation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 107.
MS. TEETERS. Do you want a formal vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The use of the word "formal" implies that there may be disagreement or differing opinions on how the vote should be conducted.


Passage number 108.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'll have a formal vote if anybodywants to object. Not hearing any objections I think the Secretary canrecord it as unanimous.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker suggests having a formal vote and then states that if there are no objections, the secretary can record it as unanimous.


Passage number 109.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, we do want it recorded.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee simply states that he wants something recorded, without any opposition or contradiction.


Passage number 110.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I think we need it recorded. Okay,we will turn to domestic open market operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the suggestion of having something recorded and proceeds with the plan described.


Passage number 111.
-11-8/24/82MR. TRUMAN. You might just want to confirm that the payoutdoesn't require a formal vote; the payout would be under this scheduleand over a period of time in parallel with the others. You don't wantto have to act every time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting confirming a detail and making a recommendation to streamline the process.


Passage number 112.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm assuming we won't have any otheraction and that it's understood that this will be paid out over thenext few weeks if all goes well--if, in the combined judgment of theBIS, the Treasury, and ourselves there is suitable good faith in theFund negotiations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It is discussing a potential course of action and the conditions under which it would be implemented, involving the shared judgment of multiple parties.


Passage number 113.
 Now, if we reach the point of mid-September andthose things have not been completed, then we will have a realdecision to make; we'll have a decision before that but a morecertain--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We'll have a decision with nooptions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is suggesting that if certain things have not been completed by mid-September, a decision will need to be made. The speaker also emphasizes that there will be no options or alternatives for the decision.


Passage number 114.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A more precise checkpoint--that's all onecan say. Okay. Mr. Sternlight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply acknowledges that a more precise checkpoint is all that can be said.


Passage number 115.
MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 116.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think you mentioned the tax bill.How did you think that--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a direct question asking for the speaker's thoughts about the tax bill. There is no mention of any opposing views or disagreement.


Passage number 117.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I did [refer to it] as a plus factor,although I said that when it finally came it was somewhat overshadowedby other events.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion that the referred factor was overshadowed by other events.


Passage number 118.
MR. BLACK. Peter, what is the borrowing level so far thisweek through Tuesday in relation to our target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or indication of contention or disagreement. It is asking for a factual update on the borrowing level.


Passage number 119.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, it has been undergoing some day-to-daychanges. Through the end of the week, just taking Thursday andFriday, it was running on the low side and averaging about $175million. Yesterday there was a considerable increase because of onelarge bank borrowing a sizable amount, and that brought the weeklyaverage to $350 million. And it's fairly possible that that bank willbe in again today; we don't know if they are or for how much. I wasjust gauging that if they were in for a similar amount today and thennot in on Wednesday, and the other banks stayed in to the extent theyhad been in the early part of the week, we could wind up withborrowing averaging around $400 to $420 million or something on thatorder for this week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and expressing possibilities based on that information.


Passage number 120.
MS. TEETERS. But the pattern has been continuing, hasn't it,Peter, of very low borrowing until Wednesday and then a very largeincrease on Wednesday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is a statement of fact about a pattern of borrowing. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 121.
MR. STERNLIGHT. That had been the pattern for a number ofweeks, although there could be a change this week because of an effortby some banks particularly to avoid a Wednesday borrowing. If theysensed a need to be in, they tried to get in before Wednesday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a fact about the borrowing pattern of banks. It does not express any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 122.
MR. RICE. Are all the borrowings coming from banks that arehaving trouble borrowing in the funds market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a question being asked by Mr. Rice.


Passage number 123.
-12-8/24/82MR. STERNLIGHT. I wouldn't say all, Governor Rice. Some ofit has been the seasonal borrowing, of course, and that is partly ratesensitive. But even with the seasonal borrowers there is apparentlysome desire to stay within the line and not disrupt that even though10-1/2 percent is above the funds rate of 9 percent. There was aconference call of the discount officers yesterday and it looked asthough in some areas some of the borrowings were being done by banksthat, while not in the severe problem category, did apparently havesome limitations on their access to the funds market. And that seemedto be a factor in their turning to the discount window rather than tothe funds market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing information and observations without expressing disagreement or arguing against any particular viewpoint.


Passage number 124.
MR. CORRIGAN. Peter, where does the market think the fundsrate should be. Or does it have any idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The question about where the market thinks the funds rate should be is a request for information or clarification, rather than expressing disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 125.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think there has been some surprise,just as we have been surprised, at funds trading below the discountrate. Also in the market thinking, I believe they have factored in anexpectation of a further discount rate cut of 1/2 point anyway in thenear term. And with that factored in, they tend to think of fundsprobably settling in around the 9 or 9-1/2 percent area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 126.
MR. CORRIGAN. Assuming a further--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It starts with "assuming a further" which indicates that the speaker is building upon a previous point and does not express disagreement or contention.


Passage number 127.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Assuming a further discount rate cut,frankly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Sternlight assuming a further discount rate cut.


Passage number 128.
MR. PARTEE. Peter, the classification of borrowings gets alittle tricky when it's a large bank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the classification of borrowings can be tricky for large banks.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 129.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the use of the word "Yes" by Mr. Sternlight, indicating that he holds a differing opinion or perspective from what was previously stated.


Passage number 130.
MR. PARTEE. The way we do it by convention is that weconsider it borrowings if it's adjustment and we consider it theequivalent of nonborrowed reserves if it's extended. I presumeborrowing by a big bank would be adjustment borrowing for a long timeeven if it were borrowing a billion dollars or two. [Total]borrowings would shoot up. Would [the large bank portion in thattotal] be classified as adjustment borrowings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It appears to be a statement of how things are conventionally done and the speaker is expressing a presumption and seeking clarification.


Passage number 131.
MR. STERNLIGHT. If it were there for a day or two, thatwould be the tendency. I think if it were there in some size for evenas long as a week, that would probably call for some revamping of howwe looked at that level of borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In the passage, Mr. Sternlight is speculating about the potential consequences of something being present for a certain amount of time. There is no clear contention or disagreement presented in this passage.


Passage number 132.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, that's the question I was raising, becauseI inferred that while there was a [large] bank that was borrowing--Idon't know whether it was strictly technical overnight financingproblems--it was something that could be of longer duration.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is simply raising a question and expressing uncertainty about the nature and duration of the bank's borrowing issues.


Passage number 133.
MR. AXILROD. Well, Governor Partee, when Continentalborrowed a couple of weeks ago on Wednesday, that was well within theaverage that we were expecting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MR. AXILROD is simply stating a fact about Continental's borrowing which was in line with their expectations.


Passage number 134.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, that's right; it was only for one day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of agreement, there is no disagreement or contention.


Passage number 135.
MR. AXILROD. And as Peter was mentioning, if they borrowtoday as well as yesterday, it might raise the average for the week-13-8/24/82some. But it would be in the context of having to borrow; they wereat the tail of the queue and got caught. It isn't as if they haverushed in to borrow because they didn't have real access. They haveaccess but they are at the tail of the cue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply agreeing with Peter's point and providing additional information to support it.


Passage number 136.
MR. PARTEE. I guess I was asking the question of how youwould regard your path for nonborrowed reserves if you were to have asignificantly higher average borrowing level than you expected becauseof identified problem cases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is simply asking a question about how someone would view their path for nonborrowed reserves in a specific scenario.


Passage number 137.
MR. STERNLIGHT. If it were significantly higher, I thinkwe'd have to make allowance for it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Sternlight is expressing a hypothetical situation and discussing a potential course of action.


Passage number 138.
 If it's for just a couple of daysin this week, I think it will--MR. PARTEE. Significant is, say, several hundred milliondollars on a weekly average basis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making a statement about a specific amount of money. MR. PARTEE's response does not indicate disagreement, but rather reiterates the significance of the stated amount.


Passage number 139.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 140.
 Correct me if I'm wrong, but if youmade allowance for it, then wouldn't you have to categorize thatborrowing by that big bank formally as emergency borrowing because themarket would see a discrepancy between adjustment borrowing--MR. PARTEE. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Correct me if I'm wrong" indicates that the speaker believes they may be mistaken. Additionally, the response "That's right" by Mr. PARTEE suggests disagreement or a differing viewpoint.


Passage number 141.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't know. There is nothing publishedabout our reserve paths that would call for necessarily classifying itas emergency borrowings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they are unsure and there is no published information that would classify the reserve paths as emergency borrowings.


Passage number 142.
MS. TEETERS. Well, but we publish the borrowings, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is seeking clarification or affirmation about publishing borrowings.


Passage number 143.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Oh, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Sternlight is simply expressing agreement.


Passage number 144.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage involving Mr. Party. Please provide more information or the specific passage for a more accurate analysis.


Passage number 145.
 But market people looking at this rise inborrowings--MR. STERNLIGHT. It's seen as adjustment borrowing in thepublic figures; but I think we could still regard it more likenonborrowed reserves if that looked appropriate to us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting an alternative perspective or interpretation but does not explicitly oppose or contradict the previous statement.


Passage number 146.
MR. BLACK. Well, Peter, your handling of the $61 millionthat you transferred over [to extended credit and hence treated likenonborrowed reserves and] took out of [adjustment] borrowing is asituation like the one Chuck is describing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating an observation or comparison.


Passage number 147.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes. Well, that was a smaller scalesituation where the adjustment borrowing had built up and then after amerger situation that borrowing was considered extended credit and wasformally moved out into the nonborrowed category.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Sternlight, is simply providing information about a specific situation without expressing any conflicting opinions or ideas.


Passage number 148.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The Chicago Fed publishes its weeklyborrowings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 149.
MR. KEEHN. Wednesday [levels] only.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that "Wednesday [levels] only."


Passage number 150.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Only what takes place on Wednesdays.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions what takes place on Wednesdays without presenting any conflicting or contradictory information.


Passage number 151.
MR. KEEHN. Yes, [the level] at the end of that day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. MR. KEEHN is simply affirming the level at the end of the day. There is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 152.
8/24/82VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You don't publish what takes placeduring the rest of the week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement simply states that something is not published, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 153.
MR. KEEHN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "MR. KEEHN" on its own does not indicate any disagreement.


Passage number 154.
 So, if they are [not borrowing] on Wednesday,there will be no way in which one could--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They won't catch on so quickly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that if they do not borrow on Wednesday, it will not be possible for someone to catch on quickly.


Passage number 155.
MR. PARTEE. But the average would be up, of course, for theSystem. Well, there is some ambiguity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is stating a fact (the average would be up), but acknowledges that there is some ambiguity in the situation.


Passage number 156.
MR. RICE. The question is whether we would want to tell themarket why there was a big bulge in such borrowings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply presents a question about whether or not the market should be informed about the reasons behind a significant increase in borrowings.


Passage number 157.
MR. CORRIGAN. We'd get a bigger bulge.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. It is a straightforward observation or suggestion.


Passage number 158.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This will have to be handled with acertain degree of flexibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The statement is a statement of fact or opinion rather than a statement that provokes disagreement or contention.


Passage number 159.
MR. MARTIN. Long live ambiguity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Long live ambiguity" is not expressing any disagreement or contention, but rather embracing or celebrating ambiguity.


Passage number 160.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to ratify the transactions ifthere are no further questions. Do I hear a motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing a need for ratifying transactions and then asks for a motion if there are no further questions.


Passage number 161.
MR. MARTIN. Moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that Mr. Martin moved, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 162.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without having access to the specific text. Please provide the passage for a more accurate analysis.


Passage number 163.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. We'll have the staffreport on the economic situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "Without objection" indicates that there is agreement among the parties involved, establishing a consensus.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 164.
MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. 

Explanation: The use of brackets around "Statement--see Appendix" suggests that there is a disagreement or dispute between the speaker, Mr. Kichline, and the content in the Appendix. The brackets could indicate that Mr. Kichline is questioning or challenging the accuracy or validity of the statement in the Appendix.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 165.
]MR. ROOS. Jim, this follows the gist of your comments on[output]. I noticed that in the Greenbook you have reduced yourestimate for real output growth in the third quarter from about 2-1/2percent to 1 percent. In your analysis, was the slow rate of M1growth over the past months--I think this has an effect on thedecision we make later--a factor that led to your conclusion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in this passage. Mr. Roos is questioning Jim's analysis and suggesting that the slow rate of M1 growth may have influenced his conclusion.


Passage number 166.
MR. KICHLINE. Not directly. Indirectly, yes, in the sensethat we think it has been a factor in the interest rate outlook.Obviously, rates of growth of money, interest rate levels, and GNP areall related. I think in the short run, though, in terms of looking atwhat we had forecast for the last meeting of the Committee on June30th-July 1st and the information available in the six or seven weekssince then, the forecast for the third quarter really reflects twomajor things. One is a different look at the inventory side;inventories just have not been declining as rapidly as we hadexpected. And, frankly, the key element is that final sales have beenweaker. We reduced expected personal consumption expenditures in thethird quarter by more than a percentage point, and that's a keyelement. So, in the very short run, I wouldn't associate [the changein our forecast] with M1 behavior. I would do that over a longer-runcontext. But in the very short run it's really that consumer spendinghas turned out weaker than we had anticipated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an explanation and giving their perspective on the factors that have influenced the interest rate outlook.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 167.
-15-8/24/82VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We wouldn't have any difficulty withthe direction of your analysis, but we are assuming an essentiallyflat third quarter, not as strong as 1 percent. We also are assuminga lower average federal funds rate in the fourth quarter. You'reassuming 10-1/2 percent; we're assuming 8-1/2 to 9 percent. If wedon't get something in that 8-1/2 to 9 percent region--if there is asignificant back-up in rates in the fourth quarter--then we think thefourth quarter, instead of showing 2 to 3 percent real growth, mayvery well be negative. So, I think the difference is possibly in theassumptions. With your assumption [of the funds rate] at 10-1/2percent, you still assume roughly 2 percent real growth in the fourthquarter, whereas our analysis would be that if rates back up to 10-1/2percent, that is likely to result in a negative fourth quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they are assuming a lower average federal funds rate in the fourth quarter (8-1/2 to 9 percent) compared to the assumption made by the other person (10-1/2 percent). This difference in assumptions leads to a disagreement about the potential outcome of the fourth quarter.


Passage number 168.
MR. KICHLINE. The only comment I would make is that I wouldagree implicitly with the view you've expressed in that the underlyingdeterminants of economic activity in the short run, and rate behaviorin particular, suggest that the economy is on the edge of a weakerperformance than implied in the staff forecast. I would not bicker atall with a forecast that puts down a zero for the third quarter orminus 1 or plus 1 percent. The important point is that the way thingsare shaping up now, it is a small number around zero or a slightpositive. It isn't a 4 or 5 percent rate of real growth; it's aweaker situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the view and forecast mentioned and providing further explanation and clarification.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 169.
MS. TEETERS. Jim, did you really factor in the sharp drop inrates that has occurred in the last six weeks..
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement or contention in the passage. Ms. Teeters questions Jim's consideration of the sharp drop in rates, implying that there may be a difference of opinion or conflicting perspectives on the matter.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 170.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, we tried to and we have put down ourassumptions. The interest rate assumptions appear in the Bluebookand, as you know, they are trending up later this year and into 1983.One of the questions one has to ask is: To what extent does part ofthe rate behavior reflect concerns that wouldn't track into spendingin the economy but rather a flight-to-quality, looking at bill yields,for example. That seems to me almost a sign of weakness, notsomething that says those low rates are going to translate intosignificant gains in spending later on. The one area where it israther important--and it's an open question--is in the mortgage area.That FHA rate, as of today, is down to the 14 percent level. I thinkthat's encouraging. But in our forecast we don't have privatemortgage rates coming down that low; in fact we have them stuck in the14-1/2 to 15 percent area, which we think is still an area that wouldnot generate substantial levels of housing activity. So, the outcomein the staff forecast is one in which we don't believe the currentlevels of rates would likely be sustained, given our assumptions onmonetary policy and our outlook for the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Kichline, is questioning the assumptions and beliefs in the staff forecast regarding interest rates and their impact on spending and housing activity. He suggests that the low rates may not result in significant gains in spending and that the staff's forecast of mortgage rates may not generate substantial levels of housing activity.


Passage number 171.
MR. RICE. Could I just ask, Tony, if your forecast wouldn'texpect an increase in consumption expenditures in the fourth quartereven in the face of a higher funds rate in the range of 10 to 10-1/2percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question about a forecast expectation.


Passage number 172.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I think it's likely to beoffset. First of all, we have seen that we didn't get the increase inconsumer spending that we all expected.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 173.
MR. RICE. That's right. It might be lagged.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Rice simply agrees with the statement or information mentioned before.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 174.
8/24/82VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That was partially because there wasa higher increase in savings than we expected and partially because itwas offset by greater weakness in the rest of the economy than weexpected. I personally feel that the more pessimistic scenario--inother words, continued weakness--is quite likely if there's a back-upin rates. And even though there will be some modest increase inconsumer spending, I don't think it will be enough. Whereas if theaverage federal funds rate stays in the 8-1/2 to 9 percent area, Ithink we're likely to get the kind of real growth of 2 or 3 percentthat we're talking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker presents two different scenarios - one more pessimistic and one more optimistic - regarding the future of the economy based on different interest rate outcomes. They express their personal belief that a back-up in rates would lead to continued weakness in the economy, while a consistent federal funds rate would result in the desired growth.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 175.
MR. PARTEE. One terribly important question is how weak iscapital spending. The staff has reduced its estimates quite a bit,but the forecast is for equipment spending still to be rising by themiddle of next year I believe and for the decline in nonresidentialconstruction to be moderating by the second half of next year. Thequestion is, if there's a major cycle there, whether it will go deeperor whether it will turn around that rapidly. And the Redbook seemsvery pessimistic on capital spending to me. I don't know if thatrepresents your views or not. In Atlanta you are looking at one setof exceptions; you saw a little strength recently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, mentions that the Redbook seems very pessimistic on capital spending, suggesting a difference in views or opinions.


Passage number 176.
MR. FORD. Yes, just in a few industries. But in real terms,taking out price changes, our regional economy is flat, which isbetter than in the rest of the nation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that in a few industries, the regional economy is flat but overall, it is better than the rest of the nation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 177.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Anecdotally, what I hear in New Yorkis very pessimistic on capital spending. Just last week a fewbusinessmen told me they had made further cutbacks in their plannedcapital spending, and those plans had already been quite low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage mentions that there is disagreement on capital spending in New York. The anecdotal evidence presented indicates that some businessmen have made further cutbacks in their planned capital spending, suggesting disagreement or contention on the topic.


Passage number 178.
MS. HORN. In the Fourth District, where we have a lot ofcapital goods industries, the outlook for capital spending has gottenworse in the last couple of months, I would say. A couple of monthsago when you asked inventory questions of these people, they would saythat they had really reduced inventories to bare bones and were notsure how they could continue operating with these inventory levels.Now they are evaluating those same inventory levels differently,saying that they can do business for the foreseeable future with thoseinventories.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a change in outlook for capital spending in the Fourth District.


Passage number 179.
MR. BLACK. I wonder if a lot of the difference we see isn'tthat the businessmen we're talking to are not assuming as low a rateof inflation as Jim and his associates have assumed here. If theywere assuming that, I think we'd see a much stronger capital picture.And if we do obtain that, I would think long-term rates would have tocome down some, and that ought to have a salutary effect on capitalspending. My guess would be that next year might be a littlestronger, but heaven knows it could be a lot weaker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Black, is expressing his own opinion and speculation about the assumptions and potential outcomes regarding inflation and capital spending. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 180.
MR. KEEHN. Chuck, in the Midwest, most of the companies areoperating at such a low level of capacity that there is just verylittle enthusiasm for any capital expenditures. Until that begins topick up in some material way, we will not see an improvement on thecapital expenditure side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact about the lack of enthusiasm for capital expenditures in the Midwest due to low levels of capacity. There is no conflicting viewpoint or opposing argument presented.


Passage number 181.
MR. PARTEE. I get the impression that orders are falling inChicago. I don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses their impression of orders falling in Chicago, without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements.


Passage number 182.
8/24/82MR. KEEHN. Yes. Many of the industries are continuing toexperience a decline. I think, certainly, the rate of decline hasslowed but there is still for some industries a perceptible continuingdecline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that many industries are experiencing a decline, and while the rate of decline may have slowed, there is still a noticeable decrease for some industries.


Passage number 183.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Axilrod, why don't you give us yourblessing and we'll go not to lunch but to a donut break.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting a change in plans, suggesting a donut break instead of going to lunch. The use of the word "we" suggests that they are asking for approval or agreement.


Passage number 184.
MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 185.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we'll go for a little recess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 186.
[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know what I can add to Mr.Axilrod's astute dancing around the issues. We're in a very sensitiveperiod, not just economically, but in terms of the markets andinterpretations and in fact concern--and I'm afraid to some degreejustified concern--about the stability of the banking system. I amsure that this is a time to be delicate and sensitive. How we expressthat and how we approach it is what is at issue. Very technically, asSteve mentioned, we're in one of these phases when it's hard to set areserve path with great certainty because we're on the margin oflosing touch with rates in the market. This problem occurs if we getextraordinary borrowing from some particular banks that have their ownproblems, and that can't be considered borrowing in the ordinary waywe usually consider it. Just how it should be considered is a littlehard to tell in advance, I think, before we see it and before we seethe timing and the amounts. But it's another complication in [the wayof our] being mechanical in this process at the moment. I don't thinkwe can afford to be overly mechanical.I would just make one further comment with regard to thegrowth in the money supply in particular. Considering that we're inthe middle-of-the-quarter meeting, my own bias, which I've expressedbefore, is not to change these numbers unless there's a strong reasonfor changing them. If there's a clear-cut reason for changing them,we should change them, but fiddling around with a half percent or soon the growth rates is hardly worthwhile. With that muchintroduction, who would like to make some astute comments as opposedto ordinary comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing sensitive economic issues and expresses the need for a delicate and sensitive approach. They also mention the challenges of setting a reserve path and the complications of extraordinary borrowing. The speaker also expresses their own bias towards not changing the growth rates unless there is a strong reason to do so. Overall, there is no disagreement or contention expressed.


Passage number 187.
MR. PARTEE. That's going to create total silence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply stating that something will create total silence.


Passage number 188.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'd like to make a straightforwardcomment; it's not very astute. I think we ought to go for alternativeA, with maybe a $300 million initial borrowing assumption instead ofthe $250 million. And we ought to be quite sensitive to the fed fundsrate in the next few months. I don't think I have to go into myreasons why. We're in a very delicate stage not simply because offinancial fragility, but with regard to the question of whether therewill be some recovery at all. I think we ought to take advantage ofyour Humphrey-Hawkins testimony where you said we want to M1 growth tocome in around the 5-1/2 percent [upper end of the range] and willeven tolerate something over that under certain conditions.Alternative A still puts M1 around the top of the range. And eventhough I realize that, obviously, if the money supply bulges in thefourth quarter, we will then have less room than if we adopted-18-8/24/82alternative B now, I still think the next couple of months are quitecritical. And maybe we'll be lucky on the money supply in the fourthquarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 189.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just make a couple of technicalcomments, so we don't have to keep repeating it or raising questionsabout it. The present [short-run] targets are about 5 percent [forM1] and about 9 percent [for M2]. Steve, under alternative A, had putin 10 percent for M2. At this moment in time [M1] is running belowthe 5 percent, but that target is for the quarter as a whole and it'snot clear it is going to run below 5 percent for the quarter as awhole. That depends upon what we think is going to happen. IfSeptember continued more or less the way August is going so far, Isuspect growth would be up to 5 percent. But we are clearly above the9 percent so far on M2. It's a matter of choice here. We have adirective now that says immediately in the next sentence that somewhatmore rapid growth would be acceptable [depending upon certaindevelopments]. So, I think one could interpret this M2 running a bithigh as basically being in line with the existing directive given thatsecond sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting viewpoints or arguments. It is simply discussing the current targets for M1 and M2 and the possibility of adjusting those targets based on certain developments. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 190.
MR. MORRIS. I think M2 is being distorted by the fact thatwhen interest rates go down, it pays the wealthy investor to move outof market instruments into money market funds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement expressing a personal opinion about a financial phenomenon.


Passage number 191.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It might be, to some extent; and nobodyknows just how much. But that may just be some special case of a moregeneral interest in liquidity and for locking in some of these rateswhile they last. All I'm saying is that I'm not sure we have to raisethe 9 percent to 10 percent in the light of that next sentence that isalready in the directive. I'm just making a technical point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing uncertainty and stating their opinion in a technical manner.


Passage number 192.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I agree with Frank that there probably issome money moving from the market into M2 forms, although it may ceasebecause, after all, these stocks that have been bought recently haveto be paid for. But in addition, of course, the staff makes the pointthat consumption is weak relative to income. And that is going toshow up somewhere. Is it more likely to show up in M2 forms thananywhere else, given the fact that we're talking about a broad base ofthe consuming public and so forth. I agree with Tony that the factthat we hold to 5 percent as the M1 target doesn't mean we are goingto get it. Indeed, we really thought last time that it would be hardto keep M1 growth down to 5 percent. Now we think it might be hard tohave it up to 5 percent. We don't know what is going to happen.Let's face it. But it would seem very strange, given the economiccircumstances in the past six or seven weeks since the last meeting,to cut our target growth rate for the third quarter because theeconomy appears weaker than it was perceived as having been sevenweeks ago. I think that was said by everyone who spoke and certainlywas the thrust of the Redbook and also the Greenbook and your comment,Tony, on the New York projection. Why in the world would we cut thegrowth rate in those circumstances. So, I agree with you. I thinkit's best to hold [to our current targets].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with Frank and Tony and is questioning the logic of cutting the growth rate in the given economic circumstances.


Passage number 193.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The additional point I'd like tomake, which I've touched on briefly, is that I'm really concernedabout a lot of movement in the fed funds rate. We don't want to seetoo much, if any, back-up. Also, on the other side, it would be quite8/24/82damaging psychologically if we let the rate go too low and then had tobe forced to see some back-up in the fourth quarter. I don't know howto handle that. All I'm saying is that we ought to be very sensitivethis time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply expresses concerns and uncertainty about movements in the fed funds rate.


Passage number 194.
MS. TEETERS. Well, there is a way of handling it, and Ithink Steve mentioned it. And that is to keep our eye on the excessreserves. If excess reserves begin to pile up, we could deviate fromthe path even though [that would mean] not putting all the reservesthat we intended into [the banking system]. We would operate fairlyflexibly to keep the rate either from backing up or from droppingprecipitously. That's really the key to this, Tony.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing a method suggested by Steve and expressing agreement with it.


Passage number 195.
MR. PARTEE. You're not proposing that we narrow this [fedfunds rate] band.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply asking if the proposal includes narrowing the fedfunds rate band.


Passage number 196.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't know what I'm proposing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage states that the speaker does not know what they are proposing. There is no contention or disagreement conveyed in this statement.


Passage number 197.
 I'mjust saying that--MR. RICE. No, he's just saying these [unintelligible] words.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is clarifying that they are only expressing their opinion or point of view.


Passage number 198.
MR. PARTEE. We used the whole 5 point range last time, bythe way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This statement is a simple factual statement. It does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 199.
MR. MORRIS. I'd like to suggest that we have a consultationif it appears that in following this directive the Manager would haveto move the funds rate above 10 percent. I'd preserve the form andkeep [a fed funds band], but as we have done in the past when weplanned to utilize the band or if there was such a possibility, wewould have a consultation. I think to move the rate above 10 percentin the near term could be very destabilizing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a suggestion made by Mr. Morris to have a consultation if the manager needs to move the funds rate above 10 percent. There is no indication of conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 200.
MS. TEETERS. But we don't want it to drop out of bed either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage. It is a statement made by Ms. Teeters expressing a preference or desire.


Passage number 201.
MR. MORRIS. No, that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris simply agrees with a statement or point being made in the conversation.


Passage number 202.
MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not contain any disagreements or contentions. It simply includes the name "Mr. Roos" followed by the addresser "Mr. Chairman."


Passage number 203.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but you haven't provided the passage for analysis. Could you please provide the passage so that I can assess whether there is contention or disagreement?


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 204.
MR. ROOS. I find myself in the pleasant posture of agreeingwith Tony and the others in terms of the ultimate objective. I thinkwe should avoid a continuation of slow money growth. But I'm a littleconcerned about the thought of our attempting to lean against afurther drop in interest rates because I think that would imply afurther slowing of money growth. Money has grown exceptionally slowlyover the last five months and, at the risk of analyzing something in alittle different manner than some of you do, our experience prior toevery recession that we've had since World War II is that when moneyhas grown below its trend rate for two or more quarters it inevitablyleads to a softening in the economy and to a recession. Even a ratherunsophisticated set of eyes such as mine can see that this has beenthe experience. And although none of us knows what the future holds,I have a great fear that if money is permitted to grow slowly forseveral more months, we could have a serious weakening in the economyat the end of this year and into the early part of next year. If thatwere to happen, we could have a revitalization of the criticism thatwe have been too tight. So, I would certainly favor alternative A,-20-8/24/82but I would not be quite as concerned as one or two others haveindicated about acting to prevent a further drop in the fed fundsrate. I think doing so would exacerbate the undershoot of growth inthe narrow aggregate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Roos, expresses concerns about attempting to lean against a further drop in interest rates, while others may have indicated their support for such action.


Passage number 205.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage provided, "Governor Rice," does not contain enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 206.
MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I don't want to risk disagreeingwith anything that has been said up to now. I certainly want to seeinterest rates low, and for that reason I'm inclined towardalternative A. But at the same time I want interest rates to staylow. And I worry that if we follow alternative A in the face of theGNP forecast that we have, the implication is that interest rates areprobably going to go back up in the very near future. There are goingto be upward pressures. In order to keep interest rates down, we'rereally going to have to increase money growth substantially above thetarget range. Now, I wonder if we want to do that. If we increasemoney growth for the year to above, say, 6 percent, I just wonder ifwe are willing to accept such an outcome. If we are, then fine,alternative A is a good way to go. If not, then it seems to me thatwe're going to have a fairly strong back-up in rates. And the effectof this I do not welcome. Since the difference between "A" and "B"seems to me to be unusually narrow this time, I could go just aseasily for alternative B. But I am prepared to go along withalternative A. It's rare that I'm in such a happy position as tochoices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: The passage shows that Mr. Rice has some contention or disagreement with the idea of following alternative A. He is worried that if they choose alternative A, interest rates might go back up in the near future, and to keep them down, they would have to increase money growth above the target range. He questions whether they are willing to accept such an outcome. He also mentions that the difference between alternative A and B is narrow, and he could go for either option. Overall, Mr. Rice's words indicate some disagreement or contention in his decision-making process.


Passage number 207.
 But, I really want--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Emmett, alternative B gives you theback-up immediately.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their desire for alternative B, emphasizing that it provides immediate back-up.


Passage number 208.
MR. RICE. Well, I'm not so sure about that at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Rice is uncertain or unsure about something, without presenting any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 209.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it depends upon how we play it.Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests that the outcome depends on the strategy or approach employed.


Passage number 210.
MR. BALLES. Well, on this interest rate matter, I guess it'stime for a little school of contrary thinking. I don't look on it astrying to explain why interest rates have come down so precipitouslyand dramatically since early July. I think the mystery is why theydidn't come down a heck of a lot earlier. If one looks back overdecades at the relationship in this country between the inflation rateand interest rates, particularly short-term rates, there has alwaysbeen a close correlation with only a short lag up until this recentepisode. So, I look on this recent decline as being a long overduedecline because we have had dramatic success in getting the inflationrate down and interest rates, particularly short rates, just didn'tcome down along with it. The relief that we are now getting on theinterest rate front is desperately needed from the standpoint of allkinds of businesses and depository institutions. I guess I wouldworry later on if, as, and when interest rates begin to go up again.And I would certainly want to take advantage of opportunities to nudgethem down and to keep them down right now because of what I considerto be the growing cumulative damage being done to all kinds ofbusinesses and depository institutions by this high level of rates.But I'm not at all convinced personally that interest rates arenecessarily going to go up just because business may strengthen a bit.That would be a normal cyclical pattern. But we've had such anunusual relationship between the depressed level of economic activity8/24/82on one hand and a very high level of real rates on the other that Idon't think a rise in interest rates is foreordained by any means.That may be wrong, but that's the way I feel about it right now.We do have in the short run a perplexing problem of monetarycontrol with the discount rate clearly out of touch with open marketrates. Often in the past when that has happened, we've had somewhatof a loss of monetary control; it can lead either to overshoots orundershoots, depending on which historic episode one looks at. If wetried arbitrarily to peg the federal funds rate in some narrow band,there would be a couple of alternatives for dealing with this. Onewould be just to lower the discount rate dramatically, but that hasannouncement effects that might be quite unfortunate if the publicfelt that was a signal that the Fed was caving in and that we weregoing to start monetizing these big government deficits and have asustained period of monetary acceleration. Another alternative,instead of bringing the discount rate down too sharply, is to bring itdown in a series of gentle 1/2 point moves; I'd be inclined to do itthat way myself. But I would also accompany that by a widening of thefederal funds band. This is where I guess I'm going to be ratherradical now: As long as we have the problem that we have right now, Iwould like to see the funds range widened from the present 5 points toabout 8 points. Specifically, in this current situation, while I'm infavor of the monetary specs of alternative A, I would like to proposethat we consider widening the funds rate band to 4 to 12 percentinstead of the 7 to 12 percent proposed in the Bluebook. That wouldadmittedly get us into a situation where the funds rate moves over amuch wider area than the market is used to. We'd have to try toeducate the market and explain to them why we're letting that happen.But by bringing down the discount rate gradually as well as wideningthe funds rate band, we can keep money under control and preventeither sustained overshoots or sustained undershoots.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their own perspective and suggestions for addressing the current interest rate situation. They express their belief that interest rates should have decreased earlier and that the recent decline is necessary for businesses and depository institutions. They also discuss possible approaches to monetary control. Overall, the passage presents the speaker's viewpoint and proposals without any conflicting opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 211.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The presence of the word "but" suggests that the passage presents opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 212.
MR. MARTIN. I think the arguments for alternative A arecompelling. I note that the staff in its discussion of itsprojections, particularly for the third quarter, indicated that thereis some uneasiness attached to the 7-1/2 percent nominal GNP number.We have question marks on the domestic investment projection, on theresidential structures projection, and on auto sales on the down side.That has implications as to which of the two alternatives [to choose].I would agree that the two alternatives are rather narrow in theirband. The weaknesses that we have been noting both in the Redbook andin our own discussions here today affect expectations and, therefore,I believe the actions taken by us and noted in the markets will have adifferent interpretation from what they would have had a short timeago. I think market participants are, as we are, much more aware ofthe illiquidity of major corporations and of the question marks overthe banking system, as well as the general weakness structurally ofthe world economy for that matter. Therefore, I believe we have alittle more action space, perhaps, than we've had before. Plus, Iwill reiterate the comment I made at the last FOMC meeting. It isthat we have a responsibility for the stability of the banking system,which we are meeting. Admittedly, there has been a comment or twofrom the political side with regard to the way to do that. But giventhis narrow set of alternatives, I would go toward "A" rather than"B," in part to preserve the climate in the markets that has provided-22-8/24/82a little more action space. Therefore, for the borrowings I wouldlean toward a $350 million number, a rather larger number with apretty large standard deviation around that. We need flexibility inthis particular six-week or eight-week period as we seldom need it.And I think it's important to have the ability to alter many of thesevariables in our targeting over this period. So, I would stronglyurge "A" with a $350 million borrowing number, plus or minus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It consists of one speaker expressing their opinion and rationale for choosing alternative A.


Passage number 213.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The provided passage does not contain enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. Additional context is needed to make a conclusive determination.


Passage number 214.
MR. WALLICH. Well, I certainly agree that we need to do allwe can to help the economy and to help the markets. At the same time,we have to look ahead. What we do now will affect the economy with alag anyway. I don't think we've seen the end of the effects of thetax cut. I don't see any reason to change the basic projection eventhough things are coming in more slowly than one would have thought.I think we are in some danger of doing what we have done very often atthe depth of a recession, at the trough, which is to stimulate morestrongly than turns out in the course of time to have been wise. Now,we ought to avoid a rise in short-term rates or reversing the presentlow level. To me that suggests not pushing for a lower level at thistime. I'm not too concerned about lowering the M1 path for the three-month period that we're in from 5 percent to 4 percent because eventhat still leaves us almost exactly at the upper end of the 5-1/2percent M1 range [for the year]. And M2 and M3 are very high [intheir ranges] anyway, although they have particular reasons for beingthat way. I also want to remind you that, historically, a period ofrelatively low interest rates leads to an increase in money growthsome months later, which is the last thing we need to have happen atthe end of this year or early next year.I am troubled by the gap between the funds rate and thediscount rate. A funds rate below the discount rate is always takenas a signal that there ought to be a cut in the discount rate. Butall that happens is that the funds rate falls some more and the signalremains in existence. I would, therefore, prefer a higher borrowinglevel to reduce that gap or eliminate it. One could offset theconsequences of that, in order not to get tightening effects, bylowering the discount rate. There must be some drop in the discountrate that would offset a moderately higher borrowing level. I'm notthinking of anything sensational, say, $400 million perhaps.Finally, as to the longer-term rate of money growth, I wouldlike to point out that if you look at the projections in the Greenbookthroughout 1983 there is hardly a quarter over 8 percent for nominalGNP; it runs from 6 to about 8 percent. In other words, with [growth]at the upper end of our existing targets and really very moderateincreases in velocity, we'll be able to accommodate that rate of [GNP]growth. Now, this may be optimistic with regard to the inflationforecast implicit in these very low nominal GNP growth projections,but that seems to be at least a possibility. So, I would vote forsomething like "B" and particularly a $400 million borrowing level.But I would predicate that on the possibility of reducing the discountrate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and opinions, but they are not arguing against or contradicting any other viewpoints.


Passage number 215.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 216.
-23-8/24/82MR. CORRIGAN. I'd start off with the point that if we findthat some of these financial things we're worrying about begin to comea little more unglued, obviously, a lot of this somewhat technicaldiscussion about borrowing levels and all the rest will have to go bythe boards. But abstracting from that, it seems to me that one of thekey questions implicit in what has been said already is whether or notinterest rates are at sustainable levels for, say, a few months orquarters. I have some concern that they may not be. And it seems tome, in view of all the financial strains and concerns, that one of thethings we have to be particularly sensitive to is the possibility ofanother whipsaw effect in the markets where, despite our actions, wefind interest rates rising again. I'm not sure how to do that. Myown view on the economy, which I think is relevant, is that with thegeneral range of rates that we're talking about I would still look toa modest recovery in the fourth quarter out into 1983, and maybe evena recovery that is a bit stronger than what the staff has in theGreenbook. But, certainly, I'm a little more cautious in thatstatement than I would have been even a month ago.As to the money supply numbers. I must say, like GovernorRice, I don't have a strong preference one way or another between "A"and "B." And, Steve, if I'm reading that table on page 13 in theBluebook right, I think it suggests that building off eitheralternative we're looking at a growth rate of, say, 5 or 6 percent inthe fourth quarter, which still would get us to around the top of therange for this year. Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their concerns and opinions, but there is no direct disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 217.
MR. AXILROD. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. The speaker simply acknowledges that "That's right," without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 218.
MR. CORRIGAN. Well, that just reinforces my view. I don'thave a strong view; I could go with "A" just as easily as "B." I dothink that a critical question in the short run is where the fundsrate is and where the borrowings are. Again, just because I amperhaps a little more sensitive to the sustainability of the currentgeneral pattern of interest rates, I would probably lean toward aborrowings level in the $350 million area. I don't want to sound tooprecise here, but I'd probably be more comfortable with the funds ratein the 9-1/2 percent area right now than I would seeing it below 9percent. But, unless we're very lucky and the money supply behavesexactly the way the Bluebook suggests so that the nonborrowed reservepath behaves exactly the way it suggests--neither of which willhappen--we have a Catch-22. If money is stronger, interest ratepressures will build; and if it's weaker, the tendency will be for usto adjust the nonborrowed path at some point, and that would aggravatethe problem that Governor Wallich spoke about in terms of the discountrate and the funds rate. The only way I can see out of that is tolower the discount rate and try to nudge up the federal funds rate atthe same time. I'm not sure how to produce that result, but it seemsto me that that's the result we want.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own views and preferences but does not mention any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 219.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, then, would you go to $400million on the initial borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It appears to be a question seeking clarification or consent.


Passage number 220.
MR. CORRIGAN. I might shade it up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It appears to be a statement or remark made by Mr. Corrigan without any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints expressed.


Passage number 221.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But then what happens if you get abulge in the money supply in the next couple of weeks and the Boardfeels inhibited about doing a discount rate cut.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply posing a hypothetical question and expressing uncertainty about the response of the Board.


Passage number 222.
8/24/82MR. CORRIGAN. That's my Catch-22. At the moment, I amsuggesting that I think the probabilities are that we are going to beon the other side of the Catch-22.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their personal opinion or prediction about the situation.


Passage number 223.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Teeters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 224.
MS. TEETERS. Well, I would go for alternative A. I'm reallyvery reluctant to see rates go back up because I think people need therelief all of us have been talking about. I'm basically moreconcerned about the technical operation of the Desk. It seems to me,as I mentioned earlier, that we have to be extremely flexible and lookat all of our indicators to make sure that we don't bounce the fundsrate down to zero or accidentally bounce it back up to 15 percent.So, I would pay much more attention to where the rate is rather thanmechanically supplying nonborrowed reserves or trying to hit a targetof money supply growth. That doesn't mean that I would suggest eitherincreasing or decreasing the band on the federal funds range, but itseems to me our focus should be on that rate. Obviously, I would liketo have a somewhat lower rate, but I don't want to see rates drop asprecipitously as they have in the past six weeks. So, a little changein our focus from reserve provision and money supply growth [to a]smooth constant rate on federal funds seems to me more important atthe present time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own perspective and opinion on the matter, but there is no explicit disagreement or contradiction with other views.


Passage number 225.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 226.
MR. BLACK. Well, Mr. Chairman, now that we're back insidethe target range for M1, I think we ought to concentrate a little ontrying to keep it there. I recognize, as everyone does around thetable, that there are severe risks inherent in the situation and thatwe need to reverse the declines that we have had in the money supplyin May, June, and July. You can go back even further than that infact to February when we had pretty weak performance. But we alsoought to take account of the possibility that this very rapid declinethat we have had in the federal funds rate in recent weeks could wellgive us more growth in M1 than we would like to see. Alternatives Aand B don't differ a lot numerically, as several have pointed out, butI would much prefer "B" simply because it states that we have in mindstaying within the target range, and I would hate for the record toshow that we were aiming at something above the range. I'd muchrather go above the range than for us to say that we are trying to dothat. I'm as anxious as anyone here to see a permanent decline ininterest rates, but I have to confess that the sharp drop in thefederal funds rate in the last six weeks does cause me some concern.If you look back at the post-October '79 period, there have been threedistinct periods where we had a pretty rapid drop. One was inconnection with the credit control program and is probably an invalid[comparison]. But in the other cases we had a pretty rapidacceleration in money growth after that. So, I think it's possiblethat we have set in motion forces that may be adequate to give us "B."or for that matter "A," and maybe even something more than that. So,on these grounds, I'd feel a little better if the federal funds rateheld or maybe even backed up a bit until we get a better idea of howthe impact of what we have done will show itself. So, like EmmettRice and Steve Axilrod, I would say that a small back-up now probablywould be preferable to risking the possibility of a larger back-uplater on. I think $350 to $400 million might be the proper borrowingrange on the assumption that the discount rate remains unchanged. But-25-8/24/82if there is a strong likelihood that the discount rate will be reducedin the immediate future, then I think we ought to have a little higherborrowed reserve target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply presents the speaker's thoughts and preferences regarding the money supply, interest rates, and borrowing targets. The speaker acknowledges risks and expresses concern about the rapid drop in the federal funds rate, but there is no disagreement among the participants.


Passage number 227.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee, you already have had onebite at the apple.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement addressed to Governor Partee, acknowledging that they have already had a chance or opportunity to do something.


Passage number 228.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I didn't say anything much about rates andI do think this rate question is very fundamental and important.Certainly, one could be sympathetic with the view that Bob justexpressed, or Tony, in light of the fact that the staff projection isthat rates are going to be quite high over the next year. Therefore,if one really believes that the funds rate is going to be well above10 percent throughout 1983, the farther it drops now, the more it isgoing to have to snap back later. But the question is: Is thatright. I don't know if it is or not. The fact of the matter is thatlong rates are still plenty high in terms of having a restraint on theeconomy and, indeed, if they dropped another point or two, they wouldstill be high relative to projected rates of inflation. And shortrates are behaving very unusually because liquidity preference is sostrong. Now, if we try to keep those short rates from declining byholding the funds rate up and liquidity preference is there, we canonly do it by destroying reserves and having a larger reduction in themoney supply than would otherwise occur. And it seems to me thatthat's the wrong policy to follow. I also don't know about thesimilarities with past experiences, Bob. I sense right now that therehas been one really big change in the behavioral characteristics ofthe economy, namely, that banks aren't lending. They are veryreluctant to lend at any rate to a great many customers. And ifthat's so, I'm not so sure that we'll get a surge in loans and thereliquification that would occur with the surge in loans, givenbankers' attitudes and concern about their own balance sheetpositions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a discussion of different perspectives and uncertainties regarding interest rates and monetary policy.


Passage number 229.
 So, I wouldn't go--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not so sure about that observation.I'm not sure about that change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they wouldn't go, and then expresses their uncertainty about the observation and change mentioned. However, no opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements are present.


Passage number 230.
MR. PARTEE. I feel that way. I feel that the banks arepretty scared.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a personal feeling of the speaker.


Passage number 231.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think they're scared, but whether thatis translated into not making loans, I'm not so sure.SPEAKER(.). I've heard that too, Chuck, from businessmen inour area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states their opinion and later says that they have heard similar thoughts from others.


Passage number 232.
MR. PARTEE. I wouldn't go as far as John Balles hassuggested to a really major shift. I have some sympathy with hisview, but I wouldn't go that far. I do believe that we ought to beprepared to see rates go lower because we can't see what the future isgoing to hold. And we ought to see to it that we continue to havesome money supply growth; in that respect I agree totally with LarryRoos. To have very weak money supply growth or a decline at this timewould risk a second decline in the economy and we wouldn't survivethat as an institution.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses some sympathy with John Balles' view but ultimately states their own perspective on the matter. They also agree with Larry Roos on the importance of money supply growth. The passage does not indicate any conflicting opinions or disputes.


Passage number 233.
MR. BLACK. I'm very much opposed to that happening, Chuck.I just was suggesting to Paul [that we wait] to see what was going to-26-8/24/82happen. If what you think will happen [does occur], I think we oughtto let rates come down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses their opposition to a certain action but suggests waiting to see what will happen instead. There is no explicit disagreement or contention evident in the passage.


Passage number 234.
MR. PARTEE. So, I think we ought to have a range and weought to be sensitive to changes, but we ought to use the range if weneed it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about the need for a range in a relatively neutral manner.


Passage number 235.
MR. BLACK. Well, I don't really disagree with that. I justthink we ought to wait a while to see what is really coming.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Black states that he does not disagree with something, suggesting he is in agreement.


Passage number 236.
MS. TEETERS. Are you talking about the interest rate range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a question and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 237.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, the 7 to 12 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 238.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage simply mentions "Mr. Keehn" without providing any additional context or information to indicate any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 239.
MR. KEEHN. Between the two alternatives, I certainly amemotionally pushed toward alternative A because, given thecircumstances in the Midwest, I think we want to do everythingpossible to encourage and sustain lower interest rates and to try toimprove the outlook for the recovery. I have to admit that I am fargloomier than the staff forecast with regard to the outlook for boththis year and on into next year. Having said that, I find the shiftin the implied growth rate for M1 between now and the end of Septemberunder alternative A just a little abrupt. And if we run into a periodduring which M1 begins to grow, I wonder whether we won't have toreact in a way that would cause rates to back up. So, though [thedifference between] the two alternatives is fairly narrow, I mightcome down about in the middle between the two, just to split a finehair even finer. I'd suggest that M1 growth of maybe 6-1/2 to 6-3/4percent would be appropriate so that we can see how it goes betweennow and the end of September. With that a fed funds range of 7 to 12percent and a borrowing range of $300 to $350 million would beappropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses emotional push towards alternative A but also expresses concerns about the abrupt shift in the implied growth rate for M1 and the potential reaction that might cause rates to back up. The speaker suggests a compromise between the two alternatives.


Passage number 240.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 241.
MS. HORN. I come out somewhere toward alternative B myself.It seems to me that the basic underlying economic problems ofinflation and the budget and crowding out and so forth are still withus, though some of them perhaps have moderated a bit. We do face aweak economy--and those of us from the Midwest face a particularlyweak one--for which lower interest rates are necessary. But we haveto have low interest rates for the right reason if we're going to stayin the range and stay in it for the length of time that would behelpful to our economy. I am also concerned that we as an institutionneed to have a steady measured response to the weak economic growth,and I am concerned about leaving ourselves enough room that we don'thave to take extreme actions in the future in response to a surpriseor an unpredictable increase in the money supply. So, I would comedown on the side of those who are for alternative B or something moretoward it, although at this moment the difference between "A" and "B,"as a number of people have said, is not so significant that I wouldhave to go as far as alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and concerns but does not directly disagree with anyone else.


Passage number 242.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there anybody else who wants to sayanything. Mr. Ford.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking if anyone else wishes to speak.


Passage number 243.
8/24/82MR. FORD. Yes, I come out leaning toward "B," too. While Isympathize with the notion that we have had three months of weak M1growth and that we certainly don't want to let it fall out of bed foranother whole quarter, the trend seems to be toward its moving backup. And just for the pure cosmetics of it, as one other speakermentioned, since there is so little difference between the twoalternatives why not let the market know when they get the news onthis--whenever that is--that we're shooting to come in within our[monetary growth] target at the end of the year. There is so littledifference between these that I think our credibility is worth goingfor the "B" alternative because it does show us allowing money to growby a reasonably respectable rate over the rest of the year should wemaintain this policy, which is a point Larry and others have expressedconcern about. It would still leave room for interest rates tomoderate, I think; I certainly wouldn't expect voting for "B" toresult in a huge jump in rates from their present levels because in mymind, as John Balles mentioned, this great decline is long overdue.And I'm always for widening the [fed funds rate] band so that we dofocus on trying to steady our performance and make ourselves morebelievable and predictable. So, I come out for "B" with a borrowingrange around $350 to $400 million. I'd like to see the fed fundsrange widened and I'd like to see the [Board of] Governors vote tolower the discount rate before we leave the room.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Ford, agrees with the notion of option "B" and provides reasons for his stance. He also mentions points made by other speakers that align with his position.


Passage number 244.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's unlikely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "That's unlikely" expresses a statement or opinion that does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 245.
MR. RICE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage as the name "Mr. Rice" does not provide any context or information to suggest any form of conflict.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 246.
 I was going to ask you how you reconcile this--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anybody else want to say anything. It'sup to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "I was going to ask you how you reconcile this" implies that the speaker has a disagreement or conflict with someone about a particular issue. Additionally, the phrase "Anybody else want to say anything" suggests that there may be differing opinions or perspectives among the individuals involved. The statement "It's up to me" further indicates that there is a decision or resolution to be made, which may involve conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 247.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions the presence of Vice Chairman Solomon, but does not provide any information about contention or disagreement.


Passage number 248.
 Some people haven't--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we have a problem that is not veryamenable to a Committee decision that lasts for six weeks. I'll saythat first of all. On these monetary growth targets, in substance, Idon't care. I think either of these two sets of numbers will make nodifference, virtually, in what we actually do. On balance I'd justprefer to leave the directive as it is, which I guess is a compromisebetween "A" and "B," with the next sentence which allows us to goabove [the target] on M2. If we were publishing this tomorrow, Iwould be a little hard pressed to explain why we put in a lower moneysupply target this month than we had last month. We are notpublishing it tomorrow, so maybe that's not totally persuasive, but weare within the limits of the growth targets anyway. I don't thinkthis argument depends upon how much we're in, but a 5 percent M1leaves us within the target in this quarter, doesn't it, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their preference to leave the directive as it is and is questioning the significance of the different monetary growth targets. They also mention that they would be hard pressed to explain a lower money supply target, but acknowledge that it may not be persuasive since it is not being published immediately. Overall, the passage does not indicate any strong disagreement or contention.


Passage number 249.
MR. AXILROD. Well, by September M1 growth would be maybe atenth above, at 5.6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a fact or prediction about M1 growth in September. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 250.
MR. RICE. The chart shows it a little above.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the chart.


Passage number 251.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I didn't even look at the chart. I justthought we set it last time so that we would be within by September.It's 0.1 over.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement about not looking at a chart and assuming that a goal was set previously.


Passage number 252.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage mentions "MR. AXILROD" without providing any context or information about him. Therefore, it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 253.
 No, it has always been---28-8/24/82MR. MARTIN. It's 0.1 above. What's wrong with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states a fact and asks a question about the correctness of the information.


Passage number 254.
MR. PARTEE. And we said, of course, the top of the range inthe testimony.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that "we" (the individuals being referred to) said something about the top of the range in the testimony.


Passage number 255.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Boy, that's pretty close figuring.SPEAKER(.). That's what we are doing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses appreciation or admiration by saying "Boy, that's pretty close figuring." The response "That's what we are doing" suggests agreement or confirmation of the speaker's statement.


Passage number 256.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But I don't care a lot about that. Ithink how we manage ourselves is quite important in these comingweeks. Let me state my position very simply. I would be totallyunable to defend a policy on our part that brought the federal fundsrate up to 11 or 12 percent in the coming period. I would be veryhard pressed to justify in my mind a pronounced downward shift in thefederal funds rate in the near term from where it is. I think we'dhave the gold price rising--it's already rising--and an awful lot ofcommentary about what the heck the Federal Reserve was doing in termsof doing a real somersault. We already get that commentary. I thinkit's unavoidable and it would damage us.What we are saying in substance, I hope, is that if we don'tget a continuing growth in the money supply in coming weeks, interestrates probably should go down some. I should take out the "probably."If we literally didn't get any growth in the money supply in comingweeks, we'd presumably continue to take some combination of measureson reserve paths and discount rates that would produce somewhat lowerinterest rates. If the money supply came up rapidly enough to reach 5percent so that we get a pretty big increase in September, whichraises some of these problems that people have been talking about asto where we go then, I don't think we would get any further decline ininterest rates and we might get a little increase in market rates fromtheir present level. I think basically that's the way we ought toplay it. If money growth came in distinctly weak, we would ease up bysome combination of measures, which would produce a little lowerinterest rates. If it came in as strong or stronger than 5 percent, Iwould suggest that we probably would get some backing up of short-termrates through some combination of higher borrowing figures and notreducing the discount rate, or maybe just reducing it once instead oftwice as we might do in other circumstances. I think that is what thedecision ought to be in substance; we can look at it again in a fewweeks.I, frankly, cannot live in these circumstances, given what isgoing on in the money markets, with violent moves in short-term ratesin either direction. It would just be so disturbing in terms ofexpectations, market psychology, and fragility that it's just thewrong policy, period, during this particular period. Again, that isnot inconsistent with more moderate movements in either directiondepending upon what happens to the aggregates. But I just think we'dend up in sheer confusion--more than confusion; we'd end up with anatmosphere in markets that deteriorates rather than improves things.I don't know how to word all this, frankly, but what I would beinclined to do--let me experiment here a bit--is to take out that lastsentence entirely and replace it with something like this: "TheChairman may call for Committee consultation if it appears thatpursuit of the monetary objectives and related reserve paths duringthe period before the next meeting is likely to be associated with-29-8/24/82unusually volatile conditions in credit markets." That covers amultitude of sins. The reason I'm reluctant to put a federal fundsrate range in there is that I don't think it's realistic--I just speakfor myself--on either end of the range, particularly the upper end.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 257.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The realistic range would be 7 to 10.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the statement "The realistic range would be 7 to 10." It is a statement presenting a range of numbers, without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 258.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no passage provided to analyze and determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 259.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Vice Chairman Solomon without providing any information or context that would suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 260.
 And if we don't want to show thatnarrow a range--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could put a narrow range in there, butI'm not sure that people want to do that. But, in substance, I thinkfor the weeks immediately ahead that is about where we are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any outright contention or disagreement. The speaker presents their uncertainty about whether people would prefer a narrow range but ultimately agrees that a narrow range would be appropriate for the weeks ahead.


Passage number 261.
MR. BLACK. What you're really saying is that on the oldprocedures you would favor a money market directive. I think that'sessentially what I said, really.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not exhibit any contention or disagreement. Mr. Black is simply restating and agreeing with the previous statement.


Passage number 262.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is correct. But how we lean would beguided by the money supply, assuming that something drastic isn'tgoing on in the rest of the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a statement and provides a qualification or condition that would guide the leaning.


Passage number 263.
MR. ROOS. The sort of wording we had in the directive inthis previous period would have meant much more active reaction towhat has happened. In other words, what happened in the last weekinvolved rather volatile interest rates, even though they werevolatile in a pretty good direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Roos, is simply stating that the wording in the previous directive would have required a more active reaction to the recent volatile interest rates.


Passage number 264.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not very happy about the speedwith which they went down, frankly, because I think it raised somequestions. But it was at least in the direction that was acceptable.I'd be more disturbed if they suddenly went bouncing up again. Now,when I say suddenly bouncing up again, I'm not talking about thefederal funds rate going up [a little]. Where is it now. It is below9 percent now. If it went up 1/2 or even 1 point, particularly if themoney supply were rising, that wouldn't bother me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their opinion and concerns but does not contradict any previous statements or arguments.


Passage number 265.
MR. ROOS. Would the changed wording cause eyebrows to risewithin the--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply asking if the changed wording would cause surprise or concern within a certain group.


Passage number 266.
MR. FORD. Yes, how is it going to be read when this--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: This passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a simple question asking for clarification.


Passage number 267.
MR. ROOS. That's what bothers me, whether it would be readas a signal of a return to stabilizing interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a concern and discussing their thoughts on whether something could be interpreted as a signal of stabilizing interest rates.


Passage number 268.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 269.
 I think it's going to be read--MR. PARTEE. It's giving the Chairman all the authority; thatis what it amounts to. It gives the Chairman all the authority; Ithink the Committee renounces its responsibility if it accepts such athing. Given the two choices, I would much prefer 7 to 10 percent [onthe funds rate range].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses disagreement with the idea of giving the Chairman all the authority and believes that the Committee would be renouncing its responsibility if it accepts such a thing. Additionally, the speaker expresses a preference for a different percentage range for the funds rate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 270.
MR. MORRIS. Yes, I don't see anything wrong with setting a 7to 10 percent range specifically. It's still 300 basis points. It'snot cast in stone that we have to have a 400 or 500 basis point-30-8/24/82spread, and it seems to me foolish to have one that we don't plan touse.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Morris, expresses disagreement with the idea of setting a spread of 400 or 500 basis points. He argues that it is unnecessary and foolish to have a spread that they do not plan to use.


Passage number 271.
MR. FORD. Well, what would you have done if we had set a 3percentage point range six weeks ago when it actually moved more thanthat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a hypothetical question.


Passage number 272.
MR. PARTEE. We would have gone through it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is a statement made by an individual named Mr. Partee and there is no indication of contention or disagreement within the passage itself.


Passage number 273.
MS. TEETERS. We would have gone through it, which we did.We went through the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about going through a range.


Passage number 274.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We would have had a consultation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that a consultation would have taken place, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 275.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We would have had a consultation and gonethrough it. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact or affirmation.


Passage number 276.
MR. PARTEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply responding with a one-word answer in agreement.


Passage number 277.
MR. WALLICH. I think we're giving altogether too muchemphasis to the range. It's the intention that lies behind the rangethat matters. I understand perfectly well what the intention is and Ithink it's the right intention at this time. Maybe Chuck's problemcould be met by the Chairman declaring his intention to call on theCommittee if these conditions arise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. Mr. Wallich expresses his support for the intention behind the range and suggests a solution to address Chuck's problem.


Passage number 278.
MR. PARTEE. Well, the wording you have there, Paul, justsuggests that we have in mind these monetary aggregates but that whatwe will do is run the market according to what you think creditconditions ought to be like. That's what it says, I think, or it'svery close to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 279.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 280.
MR. PARTEE. I just don't think the Committee ought to dothat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no direct contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is expressing his personal opinion and suggesting that the Committee should not take a certain action. However, this does not involve any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 281.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't understand your point, butI'm in a somewhat different position than you are in understandingperhaps. What it is meant to say is that we're going to conductoperations so that there isn't undue volatility in the federal fundsrate but that the direction in which the funds rate will go in thefirst instance is determined by developments in the aggregates. Ithink in substance it means something like 7 to 10 percent probably.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing a different understanding or perspective on the topic.


Passage number 282.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think we have three choices: Wecan say 7 to 10 percent; we can say 7 to 12 percent with anunderstanding that when the rate is outside 7 or 10 percent theChairman will call a consultation; or we can take his language aboutunusual volatility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 283.
MS. TEETERS. Or we could take both because I think some ofthe volatility is going to come, say, from extra borrowing byContinental Illinois or Chase or something of that sort. And it wouldsignal to the market that we're going to be there as the lender oflast resort.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is suggesting that it would be beneficial to take both options, indicating agreement or consensus rather than disagreement or contention.


Passage number 284.
-31-8/24/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That, I think, is a little differentquestion. That goes to how we establish the borrowing level moreimmediately than the federal funds rate. On the borrowing level, I'dbe a little reluctant to move it up very much unless and until wereduce the discount rate. Then I think we might do it and try a verymodest snugging to offset the downward impact of a discount ratechange.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing a personal opinion or perspective on the issue of establishing the borrowing level and the potential impact of changing the discount rate.


Passage number 285.
 I would not want to do it tomorrow, have the rates go up, andthen reduce the discount rate--MR. ROOS. Isn't it desirable, with things at least presentlygoing our way, in effect, to word this directive much like previousdirectives. In other words, isn't it desirable to avoid anything thatmight imply any [move away from such a directive].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 286.
 I think the worldtoday thinks that you have done a great job since '79 in getting uswhere we are right now and I just--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A small part of the world.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their positive opinion about the person's performance since 1979.


Passage number 287.
MR. ROOS. My side of the world.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 288.
MR. BLACK. People in St. Louis.SPEAKER(.). If not 100 percent of the businesses.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply presents a statement by Mr. Black and a clarification question by an unidentified speaker.


Passage number 289.
MR. MARTIN. Not the Democrats, that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Martin, explicitly states that the Democrats are not the ones being referred to, indicating agreement rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 290.
MR. BALLES. Did you see Lindsey Clark's article in The WallStreet Journal this morning.SPEAKER(.). Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information regarding the content or main idea of Lindsey Clark's article, so it cannot be determined whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 291.
MR. CORRIGAN. That should really make you worry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "That should really make you worry" is an expression of concern.


Passage number 292.
MR. BALLES. It leaves the Fed alone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a simple statement of fact. There is no indication of any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 293.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What did it say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but your question is not clear. Could you please provide the passage or context you are referring to?


Passage number 294.
MR. BALLES. It says, in effect, "Leave the Fed alone anddon't mess around with them. They're doing a great job.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing support and satisfaction with the work of the Federal Reserve.


Passage number 295.
"MR. MARTIN. Clark said that.SPEAKER(.). Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging Mr. Martin's statement without providing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 296.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Specifically, what I would do is to leavethe first two sentences in the present directive as they are. Infact. I'd put a few words in there like "continues to seek" and "asindicated" or something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting a specific action they would take, which involves adding a few words to the first two sentences.


Passage number 297.
MR. MARTIN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage.


Passage number 298.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And I'd leave out the next sentence, whichis crossed out in the draft. Then my proposal was to replace the lastsentence with something like what I had suggested. Now, the nearestequivalent to that, I think, is just leaving the same sentence butputting in 7 to 10 percent, which conveys the same flavor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is discussing a proposal and suggesting changes to a sentence. The author is considering different options but does not express any disagreement or disagreement with others.


Passage number 299.
 I thinkeither way of doing that---32-8/24/82MS. TEETERS. Wouldn't narrowing the range give somestability to the markets, indicating that we weren't just going to letthe rate fluctuate all over the place. I think there's a distinctadvantage to doing that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and suggesting that narrowing the range would bring stability to the markets. They also believe that there is an advantage to implementing this approach.


Passage number 300.
MR. WALLICH. They will only know that [in October].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context that suggests contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Wallich without any opposing views mentioned.


Passage number 301.
MS. TEETERS. Yes, in October. That's true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply confirms that the statement made in October is true.


Passage number 302.
MR. RICE. Of course, they will say we have starting watchinginterest rates again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact that some people will say that they have started watching interest rates again.


Passage number 303.
MS. TEETERS. That's all right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "That's all right" suggests that the speaker is okay with or accepting of something.


Passage number 304.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, there has been some speculation,incorrectly, in the papers that we have moved away from aggregatetargets to interest rate targets. So, I would feel a bit like Chuckdoes on that, although I agree with what you want to do. So, maybe 7to 12 percent with consultation at 10 percent or something like that[is the way to go].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is clarifying a misunderstanding and expressing agreement with the proposed approach.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 305.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't like this idea of 7 to 12 percent,which gives a public impression that is different than the privateone. I'd have a little difficulty defending it. I don't know as ithas become a big issue of why we said 12 percent in the first place onthe credit conditions.SPEAKERS(.). Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement expressed in the passage. The speaker expresses their dislike and difficulty defending the idea of 7 to 12 percent, suggesting a difference between the public and private impression.


Passage number 306.
MR. PARTEE. This says consultation. These [ranges provide]test points for consultation, as indicated in the very first part [ofthe sentence]: "The Chairman may call for Committee consultation....
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply quoting and explaining a clause about consultation within a committee.


Passage number 307.
"MR. MARTIN. Well, that [implies] 10 percent, not 12 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It only includes a clarification about the percentage being discussed.


Passage number 308.
MR. PARTEE. Yes. So, I don't see quite how we can say 7 to12 percent except that if it's over 10 percent there should be extraconsultation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply expressing his confusion about how a range of 7 to 12 percent can be determined, and suggesting that if the percentage is over 10, there should be additional consultation.


Passage number 309.
MR. BLACK. That does present a problem. In view of thesearticles that have been appearing--I'm just picking up on Larry'spoint, I guess--I'd rather hate to change the wording right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker is expressing concern about changing the wording but does not indicate any disagreement or contention with anyone else.


Passage number 310.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I think we'd get a lot of comment on it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is expressing his opinion and believes that there would be a lot of comment on the subject.


Passage number 311.
MR. BLACK. I know. That's my feeling, although I agree withwhat Paul suggested we do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Black, states that they agree with what Paul suggested, indicating alignment rather than disagreement.


Passage number 312.
MR. BALLES. Well, I think the market would read more intothe narrowing of the range than most of us would want read into it.And I think we'd be going the wrong way in any event.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about the market and their belief that interpreting the narrowing of the range could lead to wrong conclusions.


Passage number 313.
MR. BLACK. Yes. I always favor no range--no limits really.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. Mr. Black is expressing his preference for no range or limits, suggesting a personal opinion without contradicting or opposing any previous statements or opinions.


Passage number 314.
MR. BALLES. Yes. I'm in favor of a broader, not a narrower,range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion in a clear and straightforward manner.


Passage number 315.
-33-8/24/82VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, if we choose [the wording]"unusual volatility," we haven't any range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement discusses the potential wording to use but does not imply any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 316.
 Some of you are--MR. PARTEE. It's just a question of the definition of"unusual volatility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that there is a question or uncertainty about the definition of "unusual volatility".


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 317.
"MR. MARTIN. We have a very [unintelligible] word in here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 318.
MR. BLACK. Yes, all volatility is unusual but some is moreunusual than others.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that all volatility is unusual but implies that there are varying degrees of unusualness.


Passage number 319.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It has to be pretty darn unusual to beunusual compared to what we've had.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply suggests that whatever is being referred to needs to be very unusual in order to stand out compared to previous experiences.


Passage number 320.
MR. WALLICH. Well, they probably will think when they readthis seven weeks from now that we thought the banking system was evenmore delicate than it had appeared to the market. I'm not sure thatthat is a good signal to give them ex post.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 321.
MR. PARTEE. It might be a self-fulfilling forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee about a potential self-fulfilling forecast.


Passage number 322.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, they already think that. I'velooked at this from that point of view. I'm not sure that that willaggravate what they already think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that others already hold a certain belief and states that they have considered the situation from that perspective. They express uncertainty about whether a certain action will worsen or intensify the existing belief, but there is no clear disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 323.
MR. MARTIN. What they think is that we provide reserves.They are not focusing on the interest rate movements, are they.Because this rate says something else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Martin is providing an explanation or clarification regarding what "they" (presumably referring to a group of people) think about reserves and interest rate movements.


Passage number 324.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it sounds more exceptional the wayI suggested, in a temporary sense, than narrowing the range. Bothways substantively are pretty much the same thing. I think what themarket is going to say is that we had had a sharp decrease in ratesand we were a little concerned about the volatility in rates. That'sgiven against the background of the markets and everything else. Ithink that's a correct reading.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and providing an explanation for it without contradicting or arguing with any other perspective.


Passage number 325.
MR. BLACK. I suppose it's conceivable that they could thinkthis "unusual volatility" wording was a widening of the range or anelimination of the range if we haven't specified any range. Theycould come out that way. I don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and speculation about how others might interpret a certain wording.


Passage number 326.
MR. BALLES. Could you clarify please, Paul, how you phrasedthat. It was "unusual volatility" in what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a question seeking clarification, and there is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 327.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "In credit markets" is what I have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement "In credit markets" is simply an introductory phrase and does not convey any conflicting or disputed information.


Passage number 328.
MR. FORD. Could you read that again please, Paul, so we canstudy it a bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Ford simply requests Paul to read the statement again for further examination.


Passage number 329.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "The Chairman may call for consultation ifit appears that pursuit of the monetary objectives and relatedreserves paths during the period before the next meeting is likely tobe associated with unusually volatile conditions in credit markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply stating a potential action that the Chairman may take in certain circumstances.


Passage number 330.
"VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So you're leaving out the Manager forDomestic Operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward statement without any conflicting ideas or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 331.
8/24/82CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm leaving that out, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context that suggests there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 332.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In other words, the judgment is theChairman's without any advice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that the judgment is solely the Chairman's without any advice from others. This implies that there is potential for contention or disagreement as other individuals are not involved in the decision-making process.


Passage number 333.
MR. PARTEE. It's "is likely to be associated" too, not"because of unusually volatile conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this quote. Mr. Partee is simply correcting the statement by emphasizing that it should include the phrase "is likely to be associated" instead of solely "because of unusually volatile conditions."


Passage number 334.
"MR. ROOS. Well, is there anyone in the markets who doesn'tthink that if there were an unexpectedly volatile occurrence in creditmarkets that we would not consult. They assume that, don't they. Inother words, do we have to tell them that exactly. Obviously, we'llaccept your phone call, Mr. Chairman, any time. But do we have to sayit. I just don't like to rock the boat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is questioning whether it is necessary to explicitly state that they would consult in an unexpectedly volatile occurrence in credit markets. The speaker states their willingness to accept the phone call from the Chairman at any time but expresses a preference not to "rock the boat."


Passage number 335.
MR. MARTIN. If the phone system works.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements that indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 336.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, if we had better technical apparatus,I assume.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a hypothetical statement that states a condition ("if we had better technical apparatus") and makes an assumption. There is no indication of any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 337.
MR. MARTIN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not mention any specific statements or ideas that could lead to contention or disagreement.


Passage number 338.
 We may not be able to reach you, but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the most important thing is agreeingon the substance. My sense is that there is a considerable area ofagreement on the substance anyway. I'm not sure it's unanimous, butis that a correct reading. Are we reducing our focus to how to wordthis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and seeking clarification regarding the level of agreement on a certain matter.


Passage number 339.
MR. FORD. I don't know that there is. I think we have asizable minority who are concerned about sending out a signal thatwe're going back to managing interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. Mr. Ford states his opinion but does not directly oppose or argue against any other viewpoint.


Passage number 340.
MR. PARTEE. You meant the substance of what you thought thepolicy ought to be rather than what is stated here, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It is a clarifying question seeking confirmation or clarification on the speaker's intention or understanding.


Passage number 341.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I'm now talking about the substance,before we get to how we state it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The author is clarifying the direction of their discussion.


Passage number 342.
MR. PARTEE. If we have a shortfall in money growth, interestrates go down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a cause and effect relationship between a shortfall in money growth and a decrease in interest rates.


Passage number 343.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Or maybe Bill Ford is talking aboutthe substance also.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply presents a possibility or alternative explanation without contradicting or opposing any other statements or ideas.


Passage number 344.
MR. PARTEE. If we don't [have a shortfall in money growth].maybe they won't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement expressing a hypothetical situation.


Passage number 345.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If he thinks that the substance of 7to 10 percent, roughly, is going to be a constraint, maybe he'sconcerned about the substance too. I don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that the speaker does not know the reason behind someone's concern about the substance.


Passage number 346.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me resolve the substantiveissue. As I say, I'm not all that concerned about the precise numberswe put down here. But just for lack of anything better, I'm assumingwe will keep them the same as before with the modifying sentence thatcomes afterwards, which says that at the moment we're not tooconcerned about M2 at the very least running high. And if theaggregates appear to be running low, we will lean on the somewhat-35-8/24/82easier side, which presumably would be accompanied in the firstinstance by some continuation of the decline in money market rates,some easing pressure in reserve positions, a decline in the discountrate or some combination thereof. If money growth seems to beexceeding those numbers and getting a certain amount of momentum, wewould snug up a bit. But we are not going to react very drasticallyone way or the other in these coming weeks. That's the substance ofit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their position on the issue and how they plan to handle it, without any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 347.
MR. FORD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 348.
 Yes, except--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And we keep an eye toward the market.Now, you may or may not accept that. I wonder how many people findthat substance generally acceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It is simply stating a fact or opinion and expressing curiosity about what others may think.


Passage number 349.
MR. MARTIN. I certainly do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Martin simply expresses agreement or confirmation to something that was said or asked, without any indication of disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 350.
MR. FORD. What I'd like to know is this. Right now the fedfunds rate is 9 percent and we're talking about a period of six weeksbetween August 24th and October 5th. Are you really saying that youwould define market conditions as volatile if in six weeks the fedfunds rate went up by 2 percentage points from 9 to 11 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The person is questioning whether the increase in the fed funds rate can be considered volatile in a six-week period.


Passage number 351.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement mentioned in this passage. The statement "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" simply refers to someone's title or position.


Passage number 352.
 No, I might not if--MR. FORD. How can that be volatile. If you look at ahundred years of history of short-term money rates, that has happenedlots of times.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing doubt or uncertainty about a statement made by someone else.


Passage number 353.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I can't define every possiblehypothesis that one can put forward. This is operational. I wouldnot necessarily find it volatile if it happened at the end of sixweeks; I'd find it pretty volatile if it happened in the next twoweeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their opinion or perspective without contradicting or challenging any other ideas.


Passage number 354.
MR. FORD. Well, obviously, the shorter the time horizon themore [it might be considered volatile]. I think if it happened in twominutes we'd all agree it's volatile. But we're talking about threeto six weeks. And it really does bother me to think that every timewe walk out of here we are setting--or it could be conceived that weare setting--a cap on the fed funds rate for six or eight weeks fromnow at either right where the rate is or a point above.SPEAKER(.). Or four.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion and concerns, but there is no opposing viewpoint presented or any argument taking place.


Passage number 355.
MR. MARTIN. But that's why we have the ability to consult.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that Mr. Martin acknowledges the reason why consultation is necessary, indicating agreement rather than disagreement or contention.


Passage number 356.
MR. FORD. Yes, but then we're managing interest rates; thatis the image given. I'm very worried as to how the market would takethis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Ford is expressing concern about how the market would react to managing interest rates, indicating worry but not necessarily conflicting with anyone else's viewpoint.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 357.
MR. PARTEE. Bill, I think you're still talking about thewording in that suggested alternative. The trouble with "volatile" isthat it means different things to different people.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be seen through Mr. Partee's statement that "Bill, I think you're still talking about the wording in that suggested alternative." This suggests that there is a disagreement or conflict regarding the suggested alternative and its wording.


Passage number 358.
MR. FORD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only mentions Mr. Ford responding with a single word, "Yes." There is no indication of any contention or disagreement present in this particular statement.


Passage number 359.
-36-8/24/82MR. PARTEE. But the substance of the idea is that ratesprobably will go on down if we have weakness in money supply growthbut they probably wouldn't go down, and they might even go up some, ifM1 growth is at or right close to the 5 percent growth rate for thequarter. That's the substance, as I understand it. And I don'treally see what we disagree about. But "volatile" is a funny word.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker explicitly states that they do not see anything to disagree about.


Passage number 360.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Much as it may surprise some of you,I also feel it would be a little disturbing to put in the phraseology"unusual volatility." We will get more stories, anyway, about ourputting monetary policy on the back burner because of our concernabout fragility. And even though we are doing that, in a certainsense we are not; we are luckily enough consistent with our monetarypolicy [targets] at the moment. It seems to me that it's morestraightforward to say 7 to 10 percent with consultation. The factthat we narrowed the fed funds range to 3 points during a particularlydifficult period doesn't mean we're going to continue it at 3 points.The following meeting we may go up to a 5-point range again.SPEAKER(.). Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 361.
MR. MORRIS. And 300 basis points is not managing interestrates. When we managed interest rates we had a 50 basis point range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris is arguing that managing interest rates means having a 50 basis point range, while the other person(s) seem to believe that managing interest rates means a 300 basis point range.


Passage number 362.
MR. RICE. As for the wording, why couldn't we say both. Whycouldn't we have your language and then after "credit markets" say "orconsistently outside a range of 7 to 10 percent." Either way theChairman calls a consultation.SPEAKER(.). Use both.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Rice is proposing an alternative wording for the language being discussed, and the Speaker simply responds by suggesting that both options could be used.


Passage number 363.
MR. RICE. Yes, he would call a consultation when marketsare, in his judgment, volatile. But he also would call a consultationif the rate falls below 7 percent or goes over 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply presents Mr. Rice's criteria for calling a consultation, without indicating any conflicts or differing perspectives.


Passage number 364.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Express your view, Mr. Axilrod. Mr.Axilrod has a concern; I'm not sure if he will share it or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement evident in the passage. The speaker simply invites Mr. Axilrod to express his view and acknowledges that he may have a concern, unsure if he will share it or not.


Passage number 365.
 I'mnot sure I do, but--MR. AXILROD. Well, I was just thinking of the image, sincethe Committee was discussing images. The image of a narrow range forthe fed funds rate strikes me more as an effort to manage interestrates in this sensitive period as we go toward the elections than doesworrying about the volatility of credit markets. The latter does notimply to me volatility in the funds rate, as it did to President Ford,but volatility in bond markets and other markets; a little funds rateincrease might have very severe repercussions on those markets. So,that's the context in which I would have thought about volatility, notjust the funds rate movement per se.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

The speaker is giving their perspective on the topic, but there is no clear disagreement or contention in the passage. They are simply presenting their thoughts on the matter.


Passage number 366.
MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, what about using both.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a question or suggestion without any opposing ideas or opinions.


Passage number 367.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How do we use both.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The question is asking for information or guidance on a specific topic, but it does not present any conflicting viewpoints or opinions.


Passage number 368.
MR. RICE. Just put "or outside a range of 7 to 10 percent"after "credit markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Rice is simply suggesting to add a condition to an existing statement.


Passage number 369.
"MR. PARTEE. I don't know about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is neither contention nor disagreement in this passage. The speaker's statement is simply indicating that they are uncertain or lack knowledge about something.


Passage number 370.
8/24/82MR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any information or statements that suggest contention or disagreement. It appears to be a date or a part of a name, which does not involve any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 371.
 A kind of footnote, which means a certain--MR. RICE. No, it's not over [unintelligible]. These are twodifferent circumstances. One is a matter of the Chairman's judgmentas to volatility and the second is objective--if the market producesrates at a certain level, that automatically triggers a consultation.And that takes care of everybody's concerns.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is merely explaining two different circumstances and how they address concerns.


Passage number 372.
MR. PARTEE. If we're going to do that, I would rather havethe funds rate limitation and then add another proviso saying thatthis is for consultation. Remember, Emmett, what we are talking aboutis consulting with the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee expressing his preference for adding a provision for consultation.


Passage number 373.
 If unusual instability develops inthe credit markets, which is an obvious reference to bank problems--Iprefer "instability" to "volatility," I think--MR. RICE. That's fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both parties agree with using the term "instability" rather than "volatility" to refer to bank problems.


Passage number 374.
MR. CORRIGAN. I'm getting more and more nervous about this[wording]. Again, I have no problems with any of this, but thislanguage or prospective language about unusual volatility orinstability or whatever we put in there runs at least some risk, itseems to me, of a self-fulfilling prophecy down the road.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Mr. Corrigan expresses concern and caution about the wording in the passage, but there is no direct contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 375.
MR. FORD. The market will wonder why [we said that].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making a statement about the market's potential reaction.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 376.
MR. CORRIGAN. I started out liking it, but I'm getting moreand more gun-shy about it. I'm not sure it's the right way to go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses both liking the idea initially and growing skepticism about it over time, indicating a disagreement or inner conflict about the best course of action.


Passage number 377.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure I understand the point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 378.
MR. RICE. Why is it self-fulfilling.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 379.
MR. CORRIGAN. What I'm suggesting is that when that languageis published, even though it will be some time from now, it entailssome risk--and I didn't think it was much until I listened to thisdiscussion--that we are telling the world that things are a lot worsethan the world thinks they are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is expressing a suggestion and the speaker is simply discussing the potential risks associated with publishing certain language.


Passage number 380.
MS. TEETERS. I think they're pretty bad.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 381.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, boy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Oh, boy" does not indicate contention or disagreement. It is an exclamation that expresses surprise, excitement, or anticipation.


Passage number 382.
MR. CORRIGAN. That's precisely what worries me. As I listento the discussion, I'm beginning to think it's a bit too much of a redflag.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Corrigan is expressing his concerns about the discussion, but he does not explicitly disagree with anyone or engage in an argument.


Passage number 383.
MR. ROOS. Haven't we had a 500 basis point fed funds rangefor a long time.SPEAKER(.). Four or five [months].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 384.
MR. ROOS. Four or five. We're leaving the aggregate targetsabout where they are. Why don't we set a broader range and,certainly, if something unforeseen happens, the Chairman will call aconsultation. Why do we have to spell it all out. I think theimportant thing is not to deviate from what we've done, because wedon't want to cause anyone to misconstrue that we've made a majorchange in our policy prescription.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a discussion about setting aggregate targets and the importance of not deviating from previous policy prescription.


Passage number 385.
-38-8/24/82MR. BALLES. I think there's a lot to be said for that. Wehave lived with this 5-point range now for some time. Has it been aproblem in the last six weeks. If it was, it has not been notable tome. I still wonder why you want to narrow it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing agreement with the idea that there is a lot to be said for a 5-point range and questioning the need to narrow it.


Passage number 386.
MS. TEETERS. If our concern is mainly on the upper side andwe want to maintain the 5-point range, then it ought to be 5 to 10percent. That signals very clearly that we don't want to go above 10percent on the funds rate. I don't particularly want to go down to 5percent at this point, but our overwhelming concerns are upward, notdownward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Teeters, is expressing her opinion and stating that her concerns are mainly about keeping the funds rate below 10 percent. She mentions that she doesn't necessarily want to decrease the rate to 5 percent, but emphasizes that the main focus is on avoiding upward movements.


Passage number 387.
MR. FORD. Well, if I heard correctly Paul's response to whatI asked, he said that if the funds rate were 11 percent six weeks fromnow it would worry him a lot less than if it were 11 percent tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating Mr. Ford's understanding of Paul's response.


Passage number 388.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends upon what else is happeningduring that period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is providing a conditional response and does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is stating that the outcome or answer is dependent on the context or circumstances during the mentioned period.


Passage number 389.
MR. FORD. Depending on what else is happening. When I lookat what has been happening at the Desk in New York in terms of theManager making adjustments in the reserve paths for various reasons atvarious times, it seems to me that we still have the latitude to takeinto account what is happening, how fast it is happening, and so on,without giving this overt signal in the directive. That's why I saystick with a range of 5 points. If we don't want to center it onwhere the funds rate is, center it a little below where it is if ourbias is in favor of seeing rates come down, and certainly mine is.Then use discretion at the Desk to see that it doesn't happen in twodays rather than two months. Then we'd have a much stronger consensuson the Committee and the market would be less likely to misread thestrong change in language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It is more of a suggestion or opinion presented by Mr. Ford regarding the appropriate range for interest rates.


Passage number 390.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not very impressed by puttingdown language we don't believe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is stating their lack of being impressed by putting down language they do not believe in, expressing a personal opinion rather than a disagreement or contention with another viewpoint.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 391.
MR. CORRIGAN. Why don't we put some language in there thatdoesn't have those sensational sounding adjectives. Use a range of 7to 10 percent, say, but add a phrase such as "giving due regard toevolving financial and credit market conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: The presence of the phrase "Why don't we put some language in there that doesn't have those sensational sounding adjectives" indicates that there is disagreement or contention regarding the use of certain adjectives in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 392.
" That gives somegreater flexibility without--MR. ROOS. Isn't that implied, Jerry. We have always givenregard to these things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is indicated by Mr. Roos interrupting the speaker, Jerry, and challenging his statement by asking for confirmation.


Passage number 393.
MR. CORRIGAN. Well, no. I think what Paul is looking for issomething a little more than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Corrigan acknowledges Paul's desire for something more.


Passage number 394.
MR. PARTEE. For a change we are going to look at creditconditions. "Giving due regard to unusual credit conditions" orsomething like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not include any statements that indicate contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a topic of discussion, credit conditions, without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 395.
MR. BALLES. The trouble is "credit conditions" is anundefined term. The market will want to know what we mean. I'm noteven sure we can agree around the table what we mean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Balles expresses doubt and uncertainty about agreeing on the meaning of "credit conditions." This indicates a disagreement or lack of consensus among the participants.


Passage number 396.
MR. FORD. Isn't that less information. The market issupposed to have good information from us, not something more vague.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 397.
8/24/82MR. PARTEE. Well, we could make it more neutral and have "orif such consultation is indicated by credit market conditions."That's very neutral. But, then, why would we put it in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting a neutral alternative for the wording of a statement, without expressing any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 398.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I think that's worse from thatstandpoint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 399.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think what does the least damage interms of market perception, if we're going to be honest about it, Mr.Chairman, is the narrower range of 7 to 10 percent. Otherwise, therewill be a lot of speculation as to what "unusual volatility in creditmarkets" means and some further stimulation to the belief that we areputting monetary policy on the back burner. Whereas if we say 7 to 10percent, they will know that we just don't want too much movement inthe period ahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker is stating their opinion about what range of damage would be best in terms of market perception. This suggests that there may be different opinions or perspectives among the individuals involved in the discussion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 400.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can use this phrase about a distinctionbetween monetary policy and something else. I know what you mean, butI don't think the distinction exists in reality. It's all monetarypolicy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that they understand the intended meaning behind the phrase about a distinction between monetary policy and something else. However, they express their opinion that this distinction does not actually exist in reality and that it is all monetary policy.


Passage number 401.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, I know, but it's a way ofputting it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Yes, I know, but it's a way of putting it" suggests that the speaker acknowledges a point made by someone else but offers an alternative perspective or interpretation. It does not imply any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 402.
MR. MARTIN. [The distinction is] monetary targeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that the topic of discussion is "monetary targeting" without any indication of disagreement or contradictions.


Passage number 403.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The alternative, basically, would beBill Ford's suggestion of 7 to 12 percent with a private understandingthat it's really 7 to 10 percent. And that has disadvantages, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply presents two different alternatives without expressing a preference or taking a stance on either option.


Passage number 404.
MR. PARTEE. The rate is around 9 percent now, isn't it. Howabout 7 to 11 percent. It's neutral.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply stating a fact and suggesting a range for the interest rate.


Passage number 405.
MR. FORD. At least that's within the range of ranges we havebeen using.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presented as a fact, without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 406.
MR. PARTEE. And we had a 400 basis point range not too long[ago].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making a statement about a 400 basis point range, which does not involve any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 407.
MR. MORRIS. That's a Las Vegas range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement.


Passage number 408.
MR. BALLES. It may be a good compromise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The phrase "It may be a good compromise" suggests a potential agreement rather than a dispute.


Passage number 409.
MR. FORD. And at least that's as narrow as we've had it inthe last year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing an objective statement about the narrowness of the current situation.


Passage number 410.
MR. PARTEE. For a couple of years we had a 400 basis pointrange, as I recall. Do you remember, Normand. Do you have a record.We had 400 basis points quite a lot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 411.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, we've had it many times.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that they have had something many times, but without specifying what it is.


Passage number 412.
MR. FORD. That wouldn't be as unusual as the other stuff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It seems to be a statement of fact or opinion without any contradictory or conflicting perspectives.


Passage number 413.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not unusual at all. We've had it asmuch as not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage simply states a fact without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 414.
-40-8/24/82MR. FORD. I'd rather go along with that 7 to 11 percent ideathan what we've had.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 415.
MR. BLACK. 6-1/2 to 11 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a range of numbers without stating an opinion or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 416.
MR. FORD. We've had 10 to 14 percent and we've had 11 to 15percent; we've been as narrow as 4 points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is simply stating different ranges of percentages without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 417.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what do you want to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It is merely a question, asking for the person's preference or desired course of action.


Passage number 418.
MS. TEETERS. Let's make it 4 points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not have any indication of disagreement or contention. It appears to be a simple statement or suggestion without any conflicting opinions or arguments being presented.


Passage number 419.
MR. MARTIN. 7 to 11 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The excerpt simply states a numerical range without indicating any conflicting views or contrasting opinions.


Passage number 420.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't like it much, but if that'swhat you want to do, let's do it. Let's have a vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their personal preference but ultimately agrees to go along with the other person's suggestion by suggesting a vote as a means of making a decision.


Passage number 421.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Borrowing is what--$300 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement stated in this passage. The passage simply mentions borrowing a specific amount of money.


Passage number 422.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. $300 million or a little above.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply states a numerical amount. There is no contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 423.
MR. CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 424.
 Why don't you have a show of hands on--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. $300 to $350 million. Vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is a question asking for a show of hands to determine the amount of money, between $300 to $350 million. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 425.
MR. BALLES. Excuse me, what are the Ms we are voting on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification on the topic they are about to vote on.


Passage number 426.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The same as it was, 5 and 9 percent [forM1 and M2 respectively]. The second sentence has "continuing;" thethird sentence is out; we put in 7 to 11 percent down at the bottom;and initial borrowing is $300 to $350 million with appropriateadjustments for exceptional borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information about percentages and borrowing amounts, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 427.
MR. BALLES. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not include any statements or indications of disagreement or contention. It seems to be a straightforward statement or response without any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 428.
MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Balles YesPresident Black YesPresident Ford YesPresident Horn YesGovernor Martin YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich NoThe vote is 10 to 1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. All but one person voted in favor, resulting in a 10 to 1 vote.


Passage number 429.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. I guess we will eat in here, right.Do we have anything else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a simple question about where to eat and if there is anything else available.


