Passage number 1.
 Miller, Assistant Vice President,Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis-2 -Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofSeptember 16, 1980CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can come to order and approve theminutes if somebody will make a motion to approve. Without objectionwe will approve the minutes. Mr. Pardee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the process of approving the minutes of a meeting.


Passage number 2.
MR. PARDEE. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no disagreement or contention in the passage. Mr. Pardee is simply making a statement.


Passage number 3.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any questions or discussion. We have toratify the transactions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 4.
MS. TEETERS. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "So moved" simply indicates support or agreement with a previous statement or proposal. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this statement alone.


Passage number 5.
MR. PARTEE. Seconded.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "MR. PARTEE. Seconded" simply indicates that someone named Mr. Partee has seconded or agreed with a previously mentioned proposition or statement. It does not imply any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 6.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection they are ratified. Doyou have any recommendations, Mr. Pardee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Without objection they are ratified" indicates unanimous agreement or approval. The question asking for recommendations does not introduce any disagreement or confrontation either.


Passage number 7.
MR. PARDEE. Yes, in terms of first renewals on swapdrawings, there are six drawings on the Bundesbank for a total of$301.2 million. And there are three drawings on the Bank of Francefor a total of $85 million, one of which is a second renewal for $24million. The second renewal will require authorization by theCommittee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is presenting information about the number and amount of drawings on the Bundesbank and the Bank of France. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 8.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I assume that if we have to renew these,we will do that without any objection. I don't think it takes anyformal action. I might say that Mr. Pardee raised with me thequestion of whether we want to change the terms on the swapagreements. We can consider that perhaps next month; I'll talk to theTreasury first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing possible actions and considerations without expressing any opposition or disagreement.


Passage number 9.
 The Committee discussed making the terms moresymmetrical a year ago or two years ago--well, maybe both--MR. PARDEE. Both; [the first discussion was] about two yearsago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker affirms that both discussions took place, but is uncertain about the exact timeframe.


Passage number 10.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Most of the swap agreements now say thatwhen we are in debt, we share the loss or share the gain with theother central bank; when they are in debt, they take all the risk. Soit's an asymmetrical arrangement and the Germans have raised the issuein the past. They didn't raise it again this year, did they.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 11.
MR. PARDEE. They are prepared to at any moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply stating that the individuals mentioned are prepared to act at any moment.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 12.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They probably will raise it again. Theyhave raised it in the past and we have had some discussion of it. Thearrangement looks peculiar the way it is [structured] now. Whether wegain or lose on the operation depends not only on the gain or loss buton the interest rate differential, because the other side of thebargain would be to shift to the foreign rate rather than [use] ourrate on the interest rate dimension on the swap. We, this Committee,if I am accurate, arrived at a consensus either two years ago or oneyear ago or both that it would be a good idea to change this and [makeit] more symmetrical. The Treasury agreed in principle but didn'twant to raise the issue at that time for a variety of reasons. Iforget just what the reasons were.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "The Treasury agreed in principle but didn't want to raise the issue at that time for a variety of reasons" indicates that there is disagreement or contention between the Committee and the Treasury regarding when to raise the issue.


Passage number 13.
9/16/80VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. My reason was very simple. At thatpoint Proxmire was opposed to intervention and so was Henry Reuss.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Both Proxmire and Henry Reuss are described as being opposed to intervention, indicating agreement on the matter.


Passage number 14.
And the Exchange Stabilization Fund of the Treasury, because of payingoff the Roosa bond guarantees, was beginning to run in the red--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To put it mildly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is an objective fact and does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 15.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's finally back in the blackbecause the IMF drawing added to the resources, and the extra interesthas helped on that. But at that time we were in the red and we wouldhave gotten a major reaction from the Congress plus a very high levelof unhappiness being expressed by both Proxmire and Reuss onintervention as opposed to free floating. So I said the timing wasbad even though I agreed in principle. I think the conditions havechanged now. Proxmire and Reuss are much more reconciled to a managedfloat and are not that unhappy with it, and the Exchange StabilizationFund balance sheet has moved back into the black. Under thosecircumstances, I assume the Treasury would not object.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an explanation of the situation and the change in conditions, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 16.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know that for a fact; Ihaven't talked with them. And I don't mean to debate the issue today.I just want to warn you that it will probably come up [at our meeting]next month and we will provide a little more explanation and have somematerials for the Committee. A logical time to bring it up isprobably next month as we get ready for the [annual] renewal [of theswap agreements] in December. Mr. Sternlight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and making a suggestion for a future discussion, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 17.
MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This is because there is no indication of any disagreement or contention in the passage. The statement given is simply a name followed by a statement or a remark.


Passage number 18.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions or comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 


Passage number 19.
MR. ROOS. Yes sir. May I start, Mr. Chairman. Peter, wedid an analysis of the direction of interest rates in the period fromJune 13 through September 5. That's about a three-month period. Andit's rather amazing, as you pointed out, that most short-term rateswere up [significantly]--90-day certificates were up 239 basis points,4-month commercial paper was up 236 points, and 6-month bill rateswere up even more than that--and yet the fed funds rate increased byonly 79 basis points according to our computation. Why would there bethat enormous disparity. Why would the fed funds rate have risen somuch less than other short-term interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply presents information and raises the question of why there is a disparity in interest rate changes. There is no clear contention or disagreement between the speakers.


Passage number 20.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I'm not sure. It depends somewhat on thetime period one takes. Mid-June was just about the low point in themarket rates. The funds rate had come down in June, I believe, to the9 percent area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Although there may be a difference in opinions regarding the time period and market rates, the passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents different information and possibilities.


Passage number 21.
MR. ROOS. Doesn't the funds rate normally track these otherrates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a question seeking clarification about the relationship between the funds rate and other rates.


Passage number 22.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I'm not sure which follows which.Normally, some of these other rates tend to build on the funds rate oron dealer financing costs, [which] tend to track fairly close to thefunds rate. As one goes out in the maturity spectrum, there is adescending degree of tracking to the dealer financing costs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is providing an explanation of how other rates tend to track the funds rate or dealer financing costs. It does not present any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 23.
MR. ROOS. You mentioned in your report the sense of thetelephone conference, which caused you to intervene in the fed funds9/16/80market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply sharing information about a telephone conference and the intervention that followed.


Passage number 24.
 Did you have a feeling from that call that you had someconstraints on--MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't think it was a serious inhibition.I would not say that it was something that caused us to intervene; Iwould say that it was something that modified in some modest degreethe form of intervention. We had some reserves to drain to meet ourpaths. We undertook those draining operations rather gingerly; for afew days, we got some help from the Treasury by getting them to raisetheir balance so that reserves could be taken out without the Deskhaving to enter the market in an overt way and be seen taking reservesout aggressively.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 25.
MR. ROOS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage provided.


Passage number 26.
 But you don't feel that--MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't think it stopped us at any point,really, from reaching our paths.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The statement is simply expressing a personal belief or feeling.


Passage number 27.
MR. ROOS. That wouldn't have been a major contributingfactor to the fed funds rate moving up only 80 basis points, whereaseverything else was going up 250 to 300 basis points. We weren'tholding the funds rate down, were we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement and question about the fed funds rate.


Passage number 28.
MR. STERNLIGHT. We were not holding down the funds rate; wewere seeking in late August to reach our reserve paths in a way thatavoided putting aggressive new upward pressure on it. In any event,the funds rate at one point touched the lower bound of 8-1/2 percentin July, around mid-July, and was up to nearly 11 percent in August.So it may be to some extent just a choice of the time period in yourcomparison.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information and explaining the fluctuations in the funds rate over a specific time period. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 29.
MR. MORRIS. Early in the period, Larry, the market wasleading the funds rate in anticipation. And I think that's the baseperiod pattern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is simply explaining that the market was leading the funds rate in anticipation, and he believes this to be the base period pattern.


Passage number 30.
MR. AXILROD. Well, the dating might change your results. Itis true that recently other short-term rates have risen more than thefunds rate. But I don't think that is terribly unusual. After all,you are talking about 3- and 6-month rates as against a 1-day rate.There are times when people begin to expect a rise in rates, and the3-month or the 6-month rate will move a little more than the fundsrate under those conditions. In August we had a big resurgence inbank credit demand and large CD issues, which pulled up the CD rate inparticular. I don't think that is extremely unusual, although thoserates have moved up closer to the funds rate than had been theexperience over the past two or three years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is providing an explanation and discussing possible reasons for the change in rates.


Passage number 31.
MR. ROOS. Those figures in that period did seem to be[unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 32.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, if you used something like the past5-week interval, the funds rate would be up something like 1-3/4percentage points--from around 9 to, say, 10-3/4 percent--which isroughly [comparable to the move on] other short-term rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It merely presents information and figures without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 33.
MR. ROOS. Thanks, Peter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists of a simple statement acknowledging gratitude towards someone named Peter. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 34.
9/16/80MR. BLACK. If we hadn't overshot our targets, [the fundsrate] would have been up more, too, more than likely. I wonder ifthat didn't contribute to some of the rise in the other rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is merely speculating and wondering about a possible contributing factor to the rise in other rates.


Passage number 35.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Total reserves were [above the path]; wewere about on target on the nonborrowed reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not suggest any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the total reserves being above the target and the nonborrowed reserves being on target.


Passage number 36.
 If the aggregateshad not overshot the target, yes, that surely would have made--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Peter, based upon nothing more thanreading the newspaper, I have the sense that the market is a littleless hypersensitive to our daily operations than they were two monthsago. Is that true or not true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage. Peter is simply expressing his opinion based on his observations, and there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 37.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Just in the last week or two, I would sharethat sense. There was one incident during the period, which Imentioned, when we did some RPs and the markets really took off; butthey just may have been reacting because they had overdone their sell-off during August. I wouldn't want to bet a lot of money that theyhave really matured to the point where they will take our operationsas fully in stride as we'd like from day to day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the speaker's personal opinion or observation.


Passage number 38.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even though you're right that ithasn't been [the case] in the current [period], I still think there isa residue of misunderstanding about the Desk's operations. I hearthat from all of my visitors--that the Fed is giving conflictingsignals. They don't understand [our new procedures] completely nomatter how much Paul has said on this. That's why we were thinkingthat a technical explanation by Peter and his people to the dealers,with the press listening in, might make a lot of sense. But it mightbe wise to wait on the timing of that until we sense that concernincreasing again. At the moment things are quiescent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that the other person is correct about the current situation, but still expresses their own opinion and suggests a potential solution.


Passage number 39.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think The New York Times has a differentguy writing the articles now, don't they.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No - The statement is a question expressing uncertainty or seeking confirmation rather than presenting a disagreement or contention of any kind.


Passage number 40.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual content of the passage.


Passage number 41.
 That's true, but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That fellow seems to have gone out of hisway a couple of times to say that these operations are just to providereserves or to withdraw reserves and they have no implication forinterest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 42.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But he's quoting dealers, too. Andsome of the dealers who were critical a couple years ago are morerelaxed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the person mentioned is quoting dealers and that some dealers who were critical in the past have become more relaxed.


Passage number 43.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It wasn't quite clear to me whom he wasquoting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing uncertainty about who the person being quoted is.


Passage number 44.
 I thought maybe he was quoting Peter or you; I'm not sayingthat was so but I think--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. [Unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage because the speaker is simply expressing their own thoughts and does not appear to be contradicting anyone else's ideas.


Passage number 45.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, with the Times change, there is abetter man on the bond market. But this period of misunderstandingdid not involve just that one paper or just the press, Mr. Chairman.I think it was people in the market, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the speaker's opinion about the bond market and suggests that the misunderstanding was not limited to just one paper or the press, but also involved people in the market.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 46.
9/16/80MR. ROOS. The Wall Street Journal has changed its team. Inoticed that Mr. Foldesse, or whatever his name is, who used to write--or used to misinterpret this--is no longer on that column in theWall Street Journal. Is that his name.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses disagreement about the accuracy of Mr. Foldesse's previous writings or interpretations in the Wall Street Journal.


Passage number 47.
MR. STERNLIGHT. It's Foldesse. He is writing it sometimes,I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Sternlight believes that Foldesse is sometimes writing the given text.


Passage number 48.
MR. ROOS. Is he.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states "MR. ROOS" without providing any information or context that could indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 49.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Maybe he's on vacation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a possibility or speculation about someone being on vacation.


Passage number 50.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the sentence "Any other comments." It is a neutral prompt for further input or opinions.


Passage number 51.
MR. EASTBURN. I have questions, Peter, about the discountrate. First, has the rate level been a problem for you in theseasonal targets and so on. Second, what is the market sentimentabout the discount rate and the changes in it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Eastburn is simply asking Peter questions about the discount rate and the market sentiment regarding it.


Passage number 52.
MR. STERNLIGHT. As to whether the rate level has been aproblem, it has [made it] difficult in these last couple of weeks interms of aiming for nonborrowed reserves in that we expected somegreater borrowing. It has been hard to gauge just how much thatborrowing would be. I think one of the factors was that the fundsrate was 1/2 or 3/4 or sometimes even a point above the discount rateand there was an attraction to the discount window, which makes itharder to judge. I wouldn't say that it is a serious problem for usat this point nor do I get the sense that it has been that serious--some of you [from the Reserve Banks] probably know better--in theadministration of the window. As to market expectations, there wassome feeling around late August that there might be a move on thediscount rate. That has died down some. Possibly it has begun tocrop up again lately, but I have not heard too many comments on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply discussing their observations and opinions about the rate level and the potential impact on borrowing and market expectations.


Passage number 53.
MR. EASTBURN. Would a change be a substantial shock to themarket.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is a simple question without any conflicting opinions or views expressed.


Passage number 54.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I think at the moment it would be somethingof a surprise, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Sternlight believes something would be a surprise.


Passage number 55.
MR. MAYO. Would it make your job easier if there were achange, or is that an unfair question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question asking for an opinion or preference from someone in regards to their job.


Passage number 56.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't see it making the job easier.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Sternlight is simply stating his opinion that he does not believe something will make the job easier.


Passage number 57.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage based solely on the given information "Governor Wallich." The passage does not provide any context or additional details to make such a determination.


Passage number 58.
MR. WALLICH. Peter, when you made that adjustment of $150million to the nonborrowed reserves target, what determined thedecision to make it that amount and not $100 million or $200 millionor some other number. This had to do with the overrun on the totalreserves so, of course, by that decision you were determining thelevel of borrowing. The level of borrowing again determines the fundsrate. So I'm trying to understand the structure of this reasoning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question posed to Peter, seeking clarification on the decision-making process behind the adjustment of nonborrowed reserves target.


Passage number 59.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I'm not sure we have a closely reasonedrationale for just how we arrive at those [adjustments]. This is donein consultation with Mr. Axilrod and his staff, but it was with Ed9/16/80Ettin at the time I believe. Were you there, Steve. We have closeconsultation with the Chairman as well. On this occasion and in otherinstances when that kind of adjustment was made, it was typically forsome fraction--often roughly but not precisely half--of the overage orunderage of total reserves from the path. I must say that on thisparticular occasion it was also because we had had a bulge inborrowing in the Labor Day week. And if no such adjustment had beenmade--if we had not reduced the nonborrowed path--it would have leftus in a position of expecting almost no adjustment borrowing for thebalance of the period. In a way one might say we backed into it bysaying, in effect, that we probably wanted to keep adjustmentborrowing in the $400 to $500 million area. And that contributed in amajor way to that $150 million decision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply describes the process of making adjustments and explains the factors that contributed to a decision.


Passage number 60.
MR. WALLICH. Do you use a monthly model or do you use somerelationship between the funds rate and the level of borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage simply asks a question about the model used for determining the relationship between the funds rate and the level of borrowing. There is no contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 61.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 62.
 I don't think it's that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't have that pseudo-precision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about something without directly contradicting or arguing against anyone else's viewpoint.


Passage number 63.
MR. ROOS. Well, if the level of borrowing comes in higherthan we would anticipate, [can't] you reduce the level of thenonborrowed reserves path accordingly. Can't you adjust your openmarket operations for the unexpected bulge in borrowing or theunexpectedly low borrowing if you ignore the effect on the fed fundsmarket. Can't you just supply or withdraw reserves to compensate forwhat has happened.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking if adjustments can be made to the level of nonborrowed reserves in response to higher or lower borrowing levels, without considering the effect on the fed funds market. The passage is seeking clarification or confirmation rather than expressing disagreement.


Passage number 64.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, we could. There's always that questionof how much we want to compensate for that high borrowing. We facedthat kind of decision in [this statement] week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 65.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The Desk can't [adjust] in the short run.It's fixed. In a sense they could do it over time if people areborrowing more, as they may be now. They seem to be borrowing morethan we would expect, given the differential from the discount rate.But in any particular week it is fixed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presented as a fact without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 66.
MR. ROOS. Do we have to supply the reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if it is necessary to provide reserves.


Passage number 67.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to supply the reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "We have to supply the reserves" is a straightforward assertion without any conflicting perspectives or conflicting statements.


Passage number 68.
MR. ROOS. [Why] do we have to supply the reserves. If wedid not supply those reserves, we'd force the commercial banks toborrow or to buy fed funds, which would move the fed funds rate up.What is lurking in the back of my mind is this: Are we, in effect,frustrating our ability to achieve what we want with the aggregatesand with reserves because of possible concern about fluctuations inthe fed funds market. In other words, do we accommodate that problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is questioning the need to supply reserves and contemplating the potential impact on the fed funds rate. They are evaluating the potential consequences rather than disagreeing with a specific argument or position.


Passage number 69.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can force [the depository institutions]to borrow more in a given week, but we can't force the level ofreserves lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact that depository institutions can be compelled to increase borrowing, but there is no control over reducing the level of reserves.


Passage number 70.
MR. WALLICH. Yes, but by forcing them to borrow more, we areraising the funds rate. And the question here is: Are we in thatmore distant sense back on a funds rate target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact and asking a question.


Passage number 71.
9/16/80MR. ROOS. You said it, Henry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states that "You said it, Henry" without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 72.
MR. AXILROD. Governor Wallich, as you know, with laggedreserve accounting there is simply nothing we can do in the currentweek other than determine the level of free reserves in the bankingsystem with open market operations, given required reserves. And tothe degree that there is a relationship--and it's pretty loose thesedays--between free reserves and interest rates, we are in some sensein the short run determining the funds rate. But in the longer run,of course, it's the market movement in the money supply relative toour target that will determine the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is describing the process of determining the funds rate and acknowledges that there is a relationship between free reserves and interest rates, but it also acknowledges that it is the market movement in the money supply relative to the target that will ultimately determine the funds rate. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 73.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All this affects the funds rate, but Idon't think one can say that doing what we did, which was a compromisein that one week, was aimed to affect the funds rate. You could arguethat if we were pulling back the nonborrowed reserves, that would[imply] a funds rate objective--that we were forcing a higher fundsrate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is stating their opinion and explaining their reasoning, but there is no indication of conflicting viewpoints or an argument being presented.


Passage number 74.
MR. AXILROD. I was trying to say that, inevitably, doingthat in one week would have an effect on the funds rate relative tonot doing it in that week because required reserves are fixed. Butover the longer run--though I don't know what the funds rate would bebecause of the looseness in the relationship between free reserves andthe funds rate--it does not. That little [effect] passes away.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the potential short-term and long-term effects of a certain action.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 75.
MR. WALLICH. I'm not saying that this was not the best wayof coping with it. But conceptually, for instance, one could say thatfor every dollar of overrun on total reserves we will reduce thenonborrowed not by $.50, not by $1.50, but by $10. Well, that wouldhave produced massive borrowing and the funds rate would have shot up.Presumably that wouldn't have been a very good decision with thereason being that one shouldn't disturb the markets unnecessarily.It's a question of how much of a disturbance to markets one is willingto accept in order to get closer to the total reserves path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is presenting an alternative approach to dealing with a dollar overrun on total reserves, suggesting reducing nonborrowed funds by $10 instead of a smaller amount. This approach would result in massive borrowing and a potential increase in the funds rate. However, he acknowledges that this may not be a good decision due to the potential disturbance it could cause in the markets. This presents differing opinions on how much disturbance in the markets is acceptable in order to achieve a desired outcome.


Passage number 76.
MR. AXILROD. Well, as Peter mentioned, this was done in thefourth week of a 5-week period. So one could ask: Should it havebeen done in the third week or the second week. It was delayed untilthe fourth week because there was some hope that what was in train inthe first and second weeks, in terms of tightening, would show someevidence of bringing down required reserves. Then, by the fourth weekwe were still running well above our total reserve path, so by thattime it seemed only reasonable, in view of past experience and pastoperations with this technique, to make an adjustment of roughly half.As Peter mentioned, if that adjustment hadn't been made at that time--and I would say maybe we should have done it earlier--then we wouldhave had a very sharp drop in borrowing and maybe some drop in thefunds rate in the short run, but I'm not sure. We had a large bulgein borrowing earlier without a lot of rise in the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the decision-making process and reflecting on potential alternative actions that could have been taken.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 77.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have been in one of these periods,which seem to be recurrent or almost perpetual, [where the incomingdata on the aggregates seem to move] in one direction or another.It's not always in the same direction. But all of the actualpreliminary figures and the estimates keep showing lower money supplyfigures than eventually materializes. We have had runs either of this9/16/80sort or precisely the reverse before. But it doesn't seem to berandom.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The author states that the incoming data on the aggregates (presumably referring to the aggregates of money supply) seem to move in one direction or another, but all the preliminary figures and estimates consistently show lower money supply figures than what eventually materializes. This implies that there is a disagreement or discrepancy between the initial data and the actual outcome.


Passage number 78.
 It does--MR. PARTEE. It's a [long-running] characteristic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any form of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 79.
 I've seenit--MR. MORRIS. Well, I think it's because the economy isstronger than we are projecting, Paul.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion on why they believe the economy is stronger than projected.


Passage number 80.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That may be, but I [don't] see why thatwould affect the actual estimates that are made. Why thesepreliminary numbers run low or high when they are supposed to be akind of random sample is beyond me. But it seems to happen for weeksin a row.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 81.
MR. MORRIS. Nonetheless, I think the system is working,Henry, in the sense that the Desk has pushed the funds rate up 200basis points, which I suspect is more than this Committee would havedone if we had made an overt decision on it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Morris agrees that the system is working and acknowledges that the Desk has successfully raised the funds rate.


Passage number 82.
MR. WALLICH. That's for certain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement that can be interpreted as a simple agreement or acknowledgement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 83.
MR. ROOS. I hate to belabor this, but if we look at thequarterly average rates of money growth on page 7 [of the Bluebook],for example, we see that in the first quarter M-1B grew at 6 percent,in the second quarter it declined at minus 2-1/2 percent--[the numberin the column labeled "Alt. B"] is a misprint, I think--and in thethird quarter its growth has skyrocketed to 12-1/4 percent. One can'tfeel that our basic objective is being met with those violentfluctuations. And I don't think those rates of growth in any wayreflect any action that this group agreed upon or any policy ordirective that we gave. They're just all over the lot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Roos, expresses his belief that the fluctuations in the rates of money growth do not reflect the agreed-upon actions or policies of the group. He suggests that these fluctuations are not helping achieve the group's objective.


Passage number 84.
 And whatworries me is--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't understand those numbers, frankly.Just stop for a second. That second quarter has a misprint in it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is expressing confusion and concern about a misprint in the numbers, but there is no disagreement or conflict present.


Passage number 85.
MR. ROOS. Yes, that's minus 2-1/2 percent, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is simply a statement by Mr. Roos, without any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 86.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It should be minus 2-1/2 percent in bothof those columns.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement that specifies a percentage for both columns.


Passage number 87.
MR. ROOS. But what worries me is that we will agree onsomething today for the next three months, or whatever period, andthen we will hope like mad that somehow or other something out in thewild blue yonder will occur to enable us to meet that. I don't havethe feeling that we really are causing the events to occur through ouroperations that we on the Committee have agreed upon from time totime.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Roos is expressing his concern about relying on external events to occur in order to meet the agreements made by the Committee.


Passage number 88.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think that's quite true. But thequestion is whether we have control in the short run, and I'm afraidthis recent pattern that you point to shows that we don't. Most ofthis increase in the third quarter came in one week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. The speaker agrees with the initial statement and expands on it by introducing their own perspective.


Passage number 89.
MR. WALLICH. But we really do have to look at what FrankMorris pointed to, the behavior of interest rates. You don't like thebehavior of aggregates. Interest rates have been the one thing that9/16/80have been even more volatile. And I think that since the mechanismworks through these interest rates, we really have had more leveragein what we have done.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Wallich is simply acknowledging the volatility of interest rates and stating that they have been an effective mechanism for controlling the economy.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 90.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we got criticized by the bankerswhen they were here the other day for having too much volatility inthe money supply growth and too much volatility in interest rates. Itold them they could criticize us for one or the other but not both atthe same time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is disagreeing with the bankers' criticism that there is too much volatility in both the money supply growth and interest rates. The speaker argues that the bankers can only criticize them for one of the two, but not both simultaneously.


Passage number 91.
MR. FORD. Did you offer them interest rate controls.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of fact asking whether the speaker offered interest rate controls.


Passage number 92.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We have had volatility in both. Whycan't they criticize us for both.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply mentioning that there has been volatility in both areas and questioning why they cannot be criticized for both.


Passage number 93.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what mechanism gets rid ofthe volatility in the one without increasing [the volatility in] theother.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing uncertainty about the mechanism that reduces volatility in one thing without increasing volatility in another.


Passage number 94.
MR. ROOS. Well, Paul, maybe we ought to do some work to tryto see whether we're approaching this in the most effective manner interms of accomplishing what we have all agreed we ought to accomplishand whether the mechanism [we're using] is really the best one or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Instead, it suggests a need for evaluation and improvement in the approach being used to achieve a common goal.


Passage number 95.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's always a fair question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses their belief that a certain question is fair. This does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 96.
MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, if we do that, we ought to besure we understand what our long-run objective is. As I view it, itis not to make the money supply grow by a steady amount quarter byquarter but to achieve a longer-run path of monetary and creditexpansion that is conducive both to healthy economic growth and areduction of inflation. I don't see the system as working outunfavorably just because the quarterly pattern is so erratic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Gramley is expressing his viewpoint and explaining his understanding of the system without presenting any opposing arguments or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 97.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. These are all matters that we have to lookat as time passes. I don't particularly like what has been happeningin the sense that we have put all this money in the money supply andhave had these quarterly fluctuations which don't seem to beparticularly controllable. What is the significance of that. Themost optimistic view is that these quarterly movements are not verysignificant. We had a decline in the second quarter and we have [now]made up for it. We will see what happens in the fourth quarter, butthe jury is still out. We may have had a short-run bounceback here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their personal dislike for the quarterly fluctuations in the money supply and the uncertainty of their significance. They mention the optimistic view that these fluctuations are not significant and acknowledge that the future outcome is uncertain. However, there is no direct disagreement or opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 98.
MR. WALLICH. But by having interest rates collapse asdramatically as they did, don't you think that we did a good deal toshorten the recession. Housing must have come back somewhat earlierand some other things may have come back earlier than they would havehad we let interest rates go down gradually the way we otherwisenormally would have done.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich makes a statement about the potential positive impact of collapsing interest rates on shortening the recession, without indicating any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 99.
MR. PARTEE. And then as the economy [rebounded], the demandfor money increased again and we found ourselves reacting againstthat. There is a demand side, Larry, and it has shown sharp shiftsthis year. We've worked against them and, of course, it's a questionof judgment as to how strongly to work against the demand factors inthe market. But by [historical] standards, we worked against them agood deal harder than we did in the past. We have had both a sharper9/16/80decline in rates and a sharper, earlier recovery in rates than everbefore in my recollection. And that is because of the change inpolicy announced last October.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement by Mr. Partee explaining the actions taken by the economy in response to increased demand for money.


Passage number 100.
MR. ROOS. Chuck, I think we've made great progress. All I'masking is whether from time to time we shouldn't review what we aredoing and try to make it even better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Roos is simply expressing his opinion and suggesting the possibility of reviewing and improving their actions.


Passage number 101.
MR. WALLICH. If we do something along those lines, I wouldurge that it include an effort to see if we can't systemize theperiodic adjustments in the path and find some way to appraise whatthe likely effect will be of [making adjustments of] $100 million or$200 million or whatever.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement reflecting a suggestion or idea.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 102.
MR. SCHULTZ. I would call to your attention that Mr. Axilrodand Mr. Lindsey recently wrote a paper for the American EconomicAssociation which addressed some of these questions. You might findit interesting reading. I suspect that you will not agree with itvery much, President Roos, because the indication is that we need tocontinue to exercise some judgment and that we need to continue tolook at interest rates to some degree. I also felt that it arguedvery strongly for keeping fairly wide target ranges, which I think isconsistent with that as well. But there has been some thinking andsome writing on that subject, and you might find that articleinteresting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement or contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Schultz, suggests that President Roos may not agree with the paper written by Mr. Axilrod and Mr. Lindsey, indicating a difference in opinion or perspective.


Passage number 103.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I'm unable to generate a response without any passage provided. Could you please provide the passage you would like me to analyze?


Passage number 104.
MR. WINN. Paul, I wonder if the October 6th anniversary datedoesn't give us an opportunity to make some educational efforts thatare unrelated to the current market scene to reaffirm some of thesethings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Winn is expressing an opinion and wondering about a possible opportunity for educational efforts. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 105.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have been considering how best todo that. I have a public appearance tomorrow; I may or may not takethe opportunity to do that. But it is a matter that continues toconcern me and we will find an opportunity. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses a plan or intention to address a matter of concern.


Passage number 106.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, my point is related to the one thatI believe Henry was making. It seems to me that we may have held offmaking the adjustments to the nonborrowed reserve target too longbecause we expected, on the basis of our projections of the demand formoney, that we would get certain behavior. That's very hard to[predict], as all of us know. It's almost next to impossible to do, Ithink, so I would favor a little more prompt adjustments to the harddata we have in terms of setting our nonborrowed reserve targets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 107.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Could I differ with that. I seeproblems with that. There are times when, given the unpredictabilityof the markets, if we are in there too quickly making adjustments, wecould be whipsawing the markets. And we will get all kinds ofcomplaints about the unpredictability of Fed policy. I don't thinkthere's any across-the-board rule of thumb that we can adopt on thefrequency of adjustments. I think we have to leave it to the judgmentof the people who are [tracking] this on the Board staff and at theDesk, regarding the chances that a certain movement will get reversedand whether we should move [immediately] or wait a day. I just don'tsee any other way of playing this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker raises concerns about making quick adjustments in the markets and suggests that there is no set rule of thumb for the frequency of adjustments. This implies a disagreement or difference of opinion about how to handle market unpredictability and whether immediate adjustments should be made.


Passage number 108.
-10-9/16/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we probably ought to find some timeto discuss this at greater length. But following up on Mr. Solomon'scomment, there is a danger [in making adjustments too promptly].Let's take March, when the aggregates were running a little high. Wewere pretty tough then, but suppose we had followed this procedure andhad made even sharper adjustments to the aggregates when they wererunning high in March. What would have happened in April. We in facthad a 16 percent [rate of] decline; one just doesn't know lookingahead. The problem is that this process apparently runs, likeeverything else in economics, with some lagged effect. And it's thoselags that give us 90 percent of the problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the potential danger of making adjustments to aggregates too promptly, using the example of the decline in April following tough adjustments made in March. There is no opposition or contradiction of ideas in this passage.


Passage number 109.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, could I just make a briefstatement. I think Tony is right that we would get a lot of criticismfrom the market for more movement in interest rates, but I believe wewould smooth out some of these abberations in the money supply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is simply adding his perspective and agreeing with Tony's point about potential criticism from the market. He also suggests that smoothing out the aberrations in the money supply could be beneficial.


Passage number 110.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a question of what is important.Now, we can't answer these questions this morning, but I have begun tohear a lot of comments from people who say the volatility of interestrates in and of itself is a bad thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents a statement about the volatility of interest rates without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting arguments.


Passage number 111.
MR. BLACK. Most people believe that, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that "Most people believe that, I think."


Passage number 112.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not just talking about market people.I've had a complaint from automobile companies that their dealers willnot hold inventory because, while they perhaps can afford presentinterest rates, they're not going to get stuck with a big inventory ofcars [with] the risk that the interest rate will go up to 20 percenton them and they can't get rid of the inventory. It's that kind ofproblem, which I don't think is irrelevant. I hear the same thingfrom the homebuilding industry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 113.
 I don't know how justified that[complaint] is, but--MR. BAUGHMAN. It's not necessarily bad.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that they do not know how justified a complaint is but someone else interrupts and states that it is not necessarily bad.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 114.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, the passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 115.
MR. PARTEE. It depends on what your economic objective is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It presents a statement that indicates that the economic objective will determine the answer to a question.


Passage number 116.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's hard to say. The housing people, ofcourse, argue the same thing: That they'd go ahead at currentinterest rates, but they are afraid of getting caught in an upswing[in rates] before the house gets completed. So, I don't know whetherit's good or bad.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents a statement about the housing people being afraid of rising interest rates and the speaker acknowledges their perspective but states uncertainty about whether it is good or bad.


Passage number 117.
 But there are a lot of problems here that are--MR. BAUGHMAN. Capital goods can be built to order.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there are problems, and Mr. Baughman mentions that capital goods can be built to order, which seems to be a neutral statement.


Passage number 118.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, if I may just take one minute ofthe Committee's time: It's a little difficult to think of what isgoing on with the money supply in a vacuum, independent of what isgoing on in the rest of the economy. In the spring we had ratherstrange events: We had the introduction of a credit control program,which was rather unique in our history; we had interest rates going tolevels that were unique in our history; and we had responses in therest of the economy that were rather unique. Among those responseswere that people chose to get out of debt rapidly and to get alongwith less cash by a huge amount. And the mechanism that the Committee-11-9/16/80put in place, as I would see it, was flexible enough--it could be alot more rigid with certain institutional changes--to be responsive tothose changes. I believe it's wrong to think that in the short runthe money supply will behave only in the way the Committee a prioriwants it to behave, Rather, in the short run it will behave inresponse to what is going on in the economy, only toned up in certainways by what the Committee wants. It's an awfully big thing theCommittee is confronting and in the short run it's very hard toinfluence it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion on the behavior of the money supply and acknowledging the challenges faced by the Committee in influencing it.


Passage number 119.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there is a range of issues to whichwe will be returning continually and maybe in a more orderly fashionthan this morning. Mr. Kichline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 120.
MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The use of square brackets [ ] suggests that there is additional information or clarification being provided by the speaker, Mr. Kichline. This indicates that Mr. Kichline may be challenging or contradicting something said prior to his statement.


Passage number 121.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In view of the questions about the presenteconomic situation and the discussion of a turning point and all therest, let's just pause here for questions and comments on the businesssituation. And if anybody wants to volunteer attitudes toward taxreduction, I would be interested in hearing them. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting a pause for questions and comments on the business situation, and expressing interest in hearing people's attitudes toward tax reduction.


Passage number 122.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I might ask Jim: Whatwas the selling rate for automobiles in the first ten days ofSeptember.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 123.
MR. KICHLINE. It was 7.3 million units using our seasonals,and in both July and August it was 6.4 million at an annual rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply states the number of units using seasonal adjustments for different months without any conflicting views or opinions being expressed.


Passage number 124.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When do the leading indicators come out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a straightforward question asking about the release timing of leading indicators. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 125.
MR. KICHLINE. I don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Kichline, starts his sentence saying "I don't know," indicating a lack of knowledge or disagreement with the previous statement or question.


Passage number 126.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not very soon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Not very soon" does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply indicates that something will not occur in the near future, without any conflicting claims or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 127.
MR. MORRIS. It's usually at the end of the month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact without including any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 128.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Am I correct in associating theincrease in employment with the reduced rate of decline in realoutput. I get an impression that probably no productivity gains aregoing on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply questioning whether their understanding of the relationship between employment and the decline in real output is correct, and expressing a possibility that there may not be any productivity gains occurring.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 129.
MR. KICHLINE. We have a significant decline in productivityin our forecast for the third quarter. The decline in the secondquarter was revised since the last Committee meeting. The earlynumbers showed a decline of 4 percent; it's now roughly 3 percent andwe have forecast a further decline. That is, the increase in outputis not sufficient to offset the substantial change in hours worked,and our productivity number in the current quarter is down aboutanother 2 percent at an annual rate. So the productivity performancethat is associated with this forecast is a distinctly poor one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker describes the productivity forecast as a "distinctly poor one," which implies a negative assessment of the situation.


Passage number 130.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. When people talk about the underlyingrate of inflation corresponding to the average hourly increase inlabor costs in the industrial sector are they assuming flatproductivity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement about the assumption of flat productivity. It simply presents a statement about how people talk about the underlying rate of inflation and the average hourly increase in labor costs.


Passage number 131.
-12-9/16/80MR. KICHLINE. Well, people refer to different things. Astandard approach is to use a cyclically adjusted productivity number,and those estimates range all over the lot. Our own is something like3/4 of a percentage point. And it's assumed that businesses tend torespond to changes in productivity over a longer period of time andare not influenced by the quarterly changes. So, taking those kindsof productivity numbers on average, they would dispense with [thequarterly fluctuations] and say that the underlying trend is somethinglike [a rise of] 1/2 to 1 percentage point. Using that kind of numbergives us unit labor costs running about 9 percent. Compensation is 10percent, and with 1 percent or so productivity you get unit laborcosts of 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It only presents different approaches and estimates regarding productivity numbers and unit labor costs.


Passage number 132.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Aren't hours worked going to be down inthis coming quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is made in the form of a question and is asking for information or clarification.


Passage number 133.
MR. KICHLINE. Just a small amount--3 percent relative to [adecline of] 8-3/4 percent in the second quarter. So they are stilldown.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing information about a decline in percentage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 134.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Three percent down. But you have a GNPestimate down 3 percent, roughly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

There is disagreement in the passage because it states that the down payment is 3 percent, but then mentions that there is a GNP estimate down 3 percent. The two percentages are similar but not directly related, so there may be some confusion or disagreement about how they are connected.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 135.
 I just--MR. KICHLINE. Well, I am referring to the nonfarm businesssector. Nonfarm business sector output in this forecast is down 4.9percent. Nonfarm productivity is down 1.9 percent and hours workedare down 3 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Nonfarm business sector output in this forecast is down 4.9 percent" is in contrast to the statement "Nonfarm productivity is down 1.9 percent and hours worked are down 3 percent." The first statement implies a larger decline in output than the second statement suggests.


Passage number 136.
MR. MORRIS. But you implied that if you had had the retailsales figure when you made the forecast that the forecast would showless weakness than was in the Greenbook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 137.
MR. KICHLINE. Yes, we would take some of the gain inpersonal consumption expenditures out of inventory, so it wouldn't allshow up. But I think we'd have at least a percentage point lessdecline; instead of a 3 percent decline in real GNP we would now havea decline of perhaps 2 percent or a shade under.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion on the potential decline in real GNP.


Passage number 138.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Mayo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage given as it cuts off abruptly.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 139.
MR. MAYO. Mr. Chairman, I have a question, which I couldhave asked last time too but didn't, on the gross domestic businessproduct fixed weight price index. That is the index the staff uses inits projection as the best index of inflation. [The projection hasfor] the first quarter of '81 of [an annual rate of] 10.3 percent, forthe second quarter 9.5 percent, and for the third quarter 8.5 percent.I can't understand what causes that tremendous improvement in theinflationary outlook in those two quarters. Also, my second questionis: Why do we use this rather than the GNP deflator, particularlysince we usually respond in terms of the GNP deflator when Congress orothers ask us for figures along this line.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Mayo is questioning the use of the gross domestic business product fixed weight price index as the best index of inflation and requesting an explanation for the projected improvements in the inflationary outlook. He also questions why this index is used instead of the GNP deflator.


Passage number 140.
MR. KICHLINE. With regard to the first question, the majorchange in this improved outlook is that we have assumed the increasein social security taxes in January. The employer portion will becranked directly into unit labor costs obviously, and we assume thatbusinesses will try to pass those increased costs through fairlyquickly. So, the first half of the year is importantly influenced by-13-9/16/80the social security tax increases, and that effect tends to wear off.In addition, running with slack labor markets and unutilized capacityfor an extended period of time we think will begin to make largerinroads on the level of inflation. But it's mainly social securityaffecting the first half and pretty much absent in the second half.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their analysis and assumptions regarding the influence of social security tax increases on the economy.


Passage number 141.
MR. MAYO. In the 1980 pattern, though, you have a higherrate of inflation in the fourth quarter. I assume that's the CivilService [pay] increase and you don't have that for the next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply making an assumption about the reason for the higher rate of inflation in the fourth quarter.


Passage number 142.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's a Civil Service increase in here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 143.
MR. MAYO. It's 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement of a numerical figure.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 144.
MR. KICHLINE. The big factor is the rapid acceleration offood prices that we have projected. On the second question you asked,on why use this one, all of the price indexes now present a[distorted] picture and we are frustrated as to which one to choose.We obviously shifted away from the implicit deflator because of theshifting weights, which give a distorted picture at times. You arequite correct that the Congress and others often refer to the implicitdeflator. My own preference, frankly, is for something like the PCEdeflator. But in a world in which we have rapid increases in energyprices, both the implicit deflator and the business fixed productdeflator tend to understate what is happening because of thesubtraction that is cranked into these numbers. So, you can put yourmoney down and take your choice. There are many indexes available.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. This is evident in the statement "all of the price indexes now present a distorted picture and we are frustrated as to which one to choose." This suggests that there is disagreement and frustration regarding which price index to use due to the distorted picture they present. Additionally, the speaker mentions their own preference for the PCE deflator, indicating a difference in opinion or preference compared to others who may refer to the implicit deflator.


Passage number 145.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage only mentions the name "Mr. Corrigan" without providing any further information or context.


Passage number 146.
MR. CORRIGAN. Jim, I have noticed--and this may be graspingat straws--that the average hourly earnings series for the months ofJuly and August shows a very marked deceleration to around 4-1/2 to 5percent on top of almost 10 percent for each of the first twoquarters. Is there anything to that or is that just a statisticalaberration.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents an observation made by Mr. Corrigan regarding the average hourly earnings series for the months of July and August.


Passage number 147.
MR. KICHLINE. On average hourly earnings, I don't know ofany quirky information in terms of the monthly numbers. We haveassumed, in fact, on a quarterly average basis that the hourlyearnings index will be running around 9 to 9-1/4 percent, down alittle from the second quarter. These numbers are very volatile on amonthly basis but we have not altered our view that there is adeveloping trend that's very different from what we have seen in thefirst half of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their own perspective and analysis without opposing or contradicting any other viewpoint.


Passage number 148.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no passage provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 149.
MR. WALLICH. The economy seems to be coming around muchfaster than expected. This could be for one of many reasons, whichcould be very hard to disentangle. I'd like to get your reaction.One would be that the automatic stabilizers are stronger than wethink, that the budget goes into a bigger deficit faster, and othersuch events. Another might be that our interest rate policy has beenparticularly effective. A third might be that the economy is just soinflation jittery that after people catch their breath they rush outand try to beat the game again. But in any event, we do seem to have-14-9/16/80gained a responsiveness to upward factors and lost a responsiveness todownward factors. I'd like to get your thoughts on that.Now, with respect to tax policy, I'd just say that if theeconomy is stronger than expected, interest rates presumably will behigher. Monetary policy in some sense would be tighter. A tax cutwill make fiscal policy easier. So we would be moving exactly in thewrong direction on the fiscal/monetary policy mix--toward tightermonetary policy and an easier budget stance. That's just the oppositeof what a growth-oriented economy should have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, suggests that the economy is coming around much faster than expected and lists several potential reasons for this. However, he expresses his disagreement with the idea that a tax cut would be beneficial in this situation, as it would move in the opposite direction of what he believes is needed for a growth-oriented economy.


Passage number 150.
MR. KICHLINE. With respect to your question, I would linkthe second and third quarters together. If you look back at themisses in terms of actual performance relative to expectations, thesecond quarter was a big miss not only to the staff here but I thinkas a general matter. It was much weaker than before. So, I wouldthink that the rather extraordinary measures taken in late winter orearly spring had a significant impact, and in retrospect a greaterimpact than we would have judged at the time. It would not seemunusual, therefore, to find some snapback in the third quarter in someof those sectors that were sharply depressed. Now, [I don't know]whether that has occurred because interest rates are lower, consumerattitudes are different, monetary policy is different, the automaticstabilizer response is working, or fiscal policy [is easier]. I thinkin general one can say that we got off track in the second quarter andit's not unusual to see some snap-back. The critical question iswhether in fact this is the beginning of a sustained sizable expansionin real activity. And assuming the monetary policy that's in theforecast, which we perceive to be restraining--consistent with somefurther rise in interest rates--even with the tax cut we do notbelieve that we are on the verge of seeing sustained strong expansion.It's quite possible that we could have a couple of months of fairlystrong business news followed by some weakness. But I don't see that.The key issue is whether we are set up for continued strong expansion.I don't see that as a likely outcome at the present time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement providing analysis and opinion on the second and third quarters of performance.


Passage number 151.
MR. WALLICH. This few months of weakness that you set out asa possibility: Could you visualize that going to the extent of GNPgrowth turning negative again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking for clarification or further explanation.


Passage number 152.
MR. KICHLINE. Oh, I think so. That's the double dip or theW or the extended L or any of the other exotic terms in fashion. Ithink that's quite possible. In the staff forecast, for example, weare talking about a small negative, and it doesn't take a great dealat an annual rate to find something that would flip that to positiveor [more] negative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion and providing examples.


Passage number 153.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In our financial report for theRedbook, we included the views of some key financial experts in NewYork. And Henry Kaufman in those remarks is predicting a double-diprecession.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply includes the views and prediction of Henry Kaufman regarding a double-dip recession.


Passage number 154.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Baughman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 155.
MR. BAUGHMAN. Are there any estimates yet as to the amountand the timing of capital expenditures associated with the energyprograms that are now apparently getting shaped up and into form for-15-9/16/80financing either directly by the government or by governmentguarantees of the interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply asks for information about the estimates of capital expenditures.


Passage number 156.
MR. KICHLINE. We do not have anything in house and I am notaware that anything is available within the government. Our ownassumption is that the program is being funded essentially withwindfall profits and [will involve] synthetic fuel and that sort ofthing. We have much longer lead times. It would not have anappreciable impact within the year 1981 but would be building overtime. The energy sector itself in our forecast is fairly strong. Weimplicitly are using the energy sector as one that is holding upbusiness fixed investment. That is, we'd have a sharper decline if itweren't for substantial energy sector investments. I can't answeryour question directly, but I'm not aware of any such numbers around.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply states their lack of knowledge and awareness regarding the availability of funding and specific numbers related to the program.


Passage number 157.
MR. BAUGHMAN. Would you anticipate, assuming the programevolved, that we would be speaking about magnitudes of capitalexpenditures that would become a significant element in the trend ofthe economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is asking for a prediction or expectation about future capital expenditures and their impact on the economy. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 158.
MR. KICHLINE. Yes, over the long run. But I really do thinkwe are talking about a medium-term horizon, in the mid-1980s or so,given that these programs have long lead times. So, later on in thisdecade, if the programs continue, the dollars expended [will besignificant]. In current dollar terms, expenditures of $200 billionplus over a period of time are being talked about. That, in fact,will be a principal feature of the business investment sector later inthe decade.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing their opinion on the timeframe and potential expenditures of certain programs in the future.


Passage number 159.
MR. BAUGHMAN. As to your question on the turning point, Mr.Chairman, I think the staff projection is about as good as can bedone. I see no reason why it doesn't have as high a probability ofmaterializing as any that might be made. And I certainly share theview that we don't seem to have the stage set for a sustainedrecovery. I would visualize the next year or so as an ongoing battlebetween monetary restraint and the deeply imbedded and still spreadinginflationary thrust, with the result that improvements in employmentand production may well be a casualty of the struggle betweencontinued [monetary restraint] and the surging inflation thrust.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Baughman agrees with the staff projection and shares the view that there is no sustained recovery and an ongoing battle between monetary restraint and inflationary thrust.


Passage number 160.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether I should regionallyadjust that comment; I interpret it as quite bearish.SPEAKER(.). Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is uncertain about whether they should make a regional adjustment to a comment, and they interpret the comment as being bearish. This is a statement of the speaker's personal opinion and interpretation, without any disagreement or contention being expressed.


Passage number 161.
MR. PARTEE. That was a national comment; it wasn't a Texascomment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the comment made was of national nature rather than specific to Texas.


Passage number 162.
MR. BAUGHMAN. Now that you've provided an opening, there isa continuation of what strikes me as a rather unbelievable volume ofnew office building construction in all centers of significantpopulation size through the Southwest. It does not seem to be slowingdown. That is, new projects are being planned, funded, announced, andstarted. And the financing for them, particularly the equity money,almost without exception seems to come from foreign sources. I'm toldthat if you can't figure a project so that it looks as if it will beprofitable and viable with some debt in it, that presents noparticular problem. The suppliers of the equity simply supply more-16-9/16/80equity and are willing to take a fairly low computed return on theequity they put in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply presenting information about the volume of new office building construction and the foreign sources of financing without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 163.
 It just goes on seemingly without--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There must be some correlation between ourability to sustain office building and not do much factory buildingand the productivity figures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a statement or observation without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 164.
MR. BAUGHMAN. That could well be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 165.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The given passage only mentions "Mr. Ford" without providing any further information or context.


Passage number 166.
MR. FORD. You asked about where we stand on tax policy, andthat's one of the things my staff has been looking at. We're veryconcerned about the explosive growth on the spending side that we'veseen in the last year or so. It now appears that on a year-over-yearbasis federal spending both for defense and nondefense purposes iswell up into the double digit range, well beyond earlier forecasts.I'm curious to know, Jim: In your projection and in your model of thefederal deficit on an NIA basis, I take it that $67 to $68 billionshown is without the tax cut.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Ford is simply expressing concern about the increase in federal spending.


Passage number 167.
MR. KICHLINE. No, we have a $28 billion tax cut in ourforecast; [that is an assumption] we adopted two months ago or so. Wehave not changed it; we haven't matched it up with theAdministration's proposal. So we do have roughly a $28 billion taxcut.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states the forecasted $28 billion tax cut and mentions that it has not been adjusted based on the Administration's proposal.


Passage number 168.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Effective January 1st.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This sentence states a fact about a specific date. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 169.
MR. KICHLINE. That's right. Well, retroactive to January 1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage only states a fact without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 170.
MR. FORD. You're saying that without the tax cut there wouldbe a $40 billion deficit next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Ford is making a statement about the potential deficit without the tax cut, but there is no opposing viewpoint or disagreement presented in the passage.


Passage number 171.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, roughly. We'd have a somewhat weakereconomy, we would assume, so receipts would be lower. So it wouldn'tall be taken out. The Administration has a $36 billion deficit infiscal '81 with their tax proposal, which is assumed to come alonglate in the fiscal year and that affects receipts principally in thefollowing fiscal year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining the potential impact on the economy and tax receipts based on assumptions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 172.
MR. FORD. Well, I remember the President saying just a fewweeks ago that there was going to be a zero deficit next year. So I[proceed] based on the trend in their forecast rather than theabsolute level. Looking at off-budget spending trends that are comingon stream and adding them on to a realistic estimate of the deficit, Iwould come to the conclusion that we definitely have to resist acountercyclical tax cut at this time. It would lay the groundwork, asa couple of the previous commentators have noted, for a very toughsituation for us early next year in that we would be looking at a lotof pressure in the financial markets with a possible crowding outscenario. We'll be caught in the trap of either having to create andbe given [the blame] for a credit crunch or for letting the aggregatesget away from us in the first, second, and third quarters of nextyear. And when we have already committed ourselves in public toreducing the rate of growth of the money supply I don't see how we canhope to do that if we have to do it in the context of a huge deficitdeveloping early next year. So, I think we have to fight this-17-9/16/80countercyclical tax cut. But if we wanted to add something to what wesay, I'd say it should be directed toward the need for a longer-termchange in the tax structure that would emphasize taxing consumptionmore and investment and saving less, together with some indexedreduction over a longer period of time of the inflation premium in thetax structure on incomes of all kinds. I'd be inclined to continue tofight the tax cut as a countercyclical [measure] and start to fightfor tax reform as a longer-term measure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Ford, believes that a countercyclical tax cut should be resisted at this time. However, he suggests that instead of a countercyclical tax cut, there should be a longer-term change in the tax structure to emphasize taxing consumption more and investment and saving less. This implies a difference in opinion about the best approach to address the current economic situation.


Passage number 173.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 174.
MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, I'm basically in agreement withthe staff's view on where the economy is going. In the near term Imight be even a bit more optimistic than the staff. I've felt forsome time that the recession is likely to be short and I think when welook back a couple of months from now we may find that July was thetrough of the recession and we were starting to come out of it inAugust. But the long-run growth prospects that the staff sees are notgood. And certainly the growth of 2 percent is far, far below what wehave typically seen for the first four quarters of a recovery. Ibelieve we need slow growth, and I'd be happy with 2 percent realgrowth. I do think Ernie is right that we're going to be strugglingover the next year. I think we will struggle not just over the nextyear but over the next 5 to 10 years with the question of how we tradeoff real growth against fighting inflation. We're going to have totry to find a policy that will let us stick with the long-run battleagainst inflation and not try to get it done right away.Now, I want to call attention to the fact that I can agreewith the staff's forecast for next year only if the kind of policyassumptions that underlie it [are realized]. They include asubstantial tax cut at the first of the year and a monetary policythat I don't think is properly characterized as simply saying that M1grows at the midpoint of the range we've been setting. [The reason isthat] the staff's forecast hypothesizes a substantial reduction indemand for money. I'd like to have Jim expound just a little on hisbest judgment as to what the outlook for next year would be if in factthat drop in the demand function for money doesn't occur.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker states that they are in agreement with the staff's view on the near-term economic outlook, but have concerns about the long-term growth prospects. They also express the need for slow growth and discuss the trade-off between growth and inflation. The speaker then calls attention to policy assumptions that need to be realized for the staff's forecast to come true. Overall, there is no clear disagreement or contention present in the passage.


Passage number 175.
MR. KICHLINE. I think I've heard this question somewherebefore. As you know, we have assumed a further downward drift in themoney demand function. For 1980, from the fourth quarter of '79 tothe fourth quarter of '80, given what has happened and assuming nofurther downward drift, the drop amounts to about 3-1/2 percent. For1981 our forecast assumes [a drop of] about 4 percent. That is thedifference between the assumed actual money growth and that whichwould be predicted by the econometric model, which was estimatedthrough mid-1974. It implies that there are financial innovations orother changes. We have assumed 4 percent [based on] what has occurredin several years in the past. But it's really a matter of faith, onemight say, at this juncture. There is some basis for assuming it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 176.
MR. PARTEE. Is that for M-1A, Jim.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is posing a question or seeking confirmation from someone named Jim about something related to M-1A. There is no specific disagreement or contention indicated in this statement.


Passage number 177.
away--MR. KICHLINE. That's M-1A, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply confirms that the item being referred to is M-1A.


Passage number 178.
 Now if you take that-18-9/16/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's M-1A unadjusted. You just take M-1Aat its raw value.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply explains a process or calculation without any conflicting opinions or contradictory statements.


Passage number 179.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or statements that indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 180.
 We've got NOW accounts--MR. KICHLINE. No, we don't. It's M-1A adjusted for ATSaccounts. It gets very messy and complicated and is best leftuntouched here. But in any event if we take that away, we have ineffect a tighter monetary policy than is assumed in our forecast. Wedid a model run which essentially limited measured money growth to4-1/4 percent and had no drift [in money demand], and we get norecovery in economic activity at all. It's flat throughout 1981 andthe deflator is .3 to .4 lower. So we're talking about nominal GNPdown 2 to 2-1/2 percent from what we have in the forecast now, but wedon't get a recovery in economic activity. And the model says that weget astronomical interest rates that are hard to believe--a bill rateof 18 percent or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of information and analysis without conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 181.
MR. GRAMLEY. Why are they hard to believe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question.


Passage number 182.
MR. AXILROD. It's hard to believe they'd be sustained, Ithink.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "It's hard to believe they'd be sustained" is a personal opinion or belief and does not necessarily indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 183.
MR. KICHLINE. Yes, if we extend this to the second quarterof 1982, we can see the collapse. Bill rates are, say, 18 percent andthe deflator is 8 percent. It's hard to believe that that wouldpersist for any extended period of time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting a statement and providing reasons to support their claim.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 184.
MR. GRAMLEY. But it persists unless the economy has an evenworse performance than that or unless the political pressures on us togive up are so substantial that we cannot persist.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there could be contention or disagreement about whether or not to pursue a particular course of action, depending on the economy's performance and the political pressures faced.


Passage number 185.
MR. KICHLINE. Right. I have no problem with that. I'm justsaying it's not a sustainable pattern. At some point you have to getback into balance, which can occur from any of a number of sides.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Kichline states that he has no problem with something and then expresses his opinion about sustainability. However, he does not directly disagree with anyone else's statement or opinion.


Passage number 186.
MS. TEETERS. What is the historical record on this drift inmoney demand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Ms. Teeters is asking a question about the historical record on the drift in money demand. There is no explicit contention or disagreement indicated in the passage.


Passage number 187.
MR. KICHLINE. Let me just read [the numbers]: 5-1/2 percentin 1975; 4 percent in 1976; 1-1/4 percent in 1977; 1/2 percent 1978and 1979, and we're estimating 3-1/2 percent in 1980.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating numerical figures without expressing any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 188.
MS. TEETERS. It's not a steady series.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The provided passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 189.
 It fluctuatesrather--MR. KICHLINE. Oh, it's by no means steady.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the fluctuation is not steady.


Passage number 190.
MR. WALLICH. It fluctuates cyclically, doesn't it. That isto say, at the beginning of a recovery velocity increases more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing a statement about the fluctuation of velocity during a recovery, without contradicting or opposing any other claims.


Passage number 191.
MR. GRAMLEY. This is not a velocity increase; it's adownward shift in the money demand function. This takes into accountthe cyclical movement in velocity that accompanies rising interestrates. This series is one that says: What would the demand for moneybe, given both nominal income and interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It is explaining a concept and providing an analysis of the situation.


Passage number 192.
-19-9/16/80MR. WALLICH. I was thinking without rising interest rates.At constant interest rates, velocity tends to increase more at thebeginning of a recovery. The explanation would be that people haveaccumulated some liquidity and some idle funds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is made without any contradictory or conflicting ideas presented.


Passage number 193.
MR. AXILROD. I think what Governor Gramley is saying,Governor Wallich, is that in '75 and '76 we might have been making ananalysis that we were at the beginning of a recovery and velocitywould be increasing. That's true. But if we only said that much, wewould have been underestimating how stimulative monetary policy reallywas in 1976 because in addition we had this downward shift in moneydemand. People didn't want to hold money, so velocity was going up inpart also because of that. That's what this demand shift is; italready takes into account the impact of interest rates. And withthat impact, people want to hold even less money, so we have an evenbigger velocity. In effect, the measured growth of money in '75 and'76 of 4 or 5 percent or whatever it was in an economic sense wasreally more like 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 194.
MR. MORRIS. Yes, but what you're talking about is anunexplained residual that we can't forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is evident from the absence of any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements. Mr. Morris is simply acknowledging the existence of an unexplained residual that cannot be predicted.


Passage number 195.
 Isn't that really--MR. KICHLINE. That's the problem with this. This is anerror in an equation in which [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "That's the problem with this" suggests that the speaker is expressing an opinion or observation, rather than engaging in an argument or disagreement.


Passage number 196.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You know the great faith I have in theseequations in general, Mr. Kichline. But given that great faith, thenaive question that [occurs] to me is: Why do we keep talking aboutthis equation that had [an end point] of '74. Why don't we refit itthrough '79 or something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses a question regarding the relevance of a particular equation.


Passage number 197.
MR. KICHLINE. The period [since 1974] is one in which wehave had lots of financial innovation going on; it [leads to] veryunstable [relationships]. You can fit anything you want. We have analmost unlimited capacity to supply new equations or numbers. But youare quite correct in suggesting that one ought to be cautious in usingthis. Nevertheless, I think it is instructive in the sense that it'sa money demand function that makes some economic sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges the potential issues with using financial innovation but still finds the money demand function instructive.


Passage number 198.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But when you read off those numbers itsounded as if this demand shift that Governor Gramley talks aboutwould basically disappear if you had used the last five years infitting the equation. It would be in the equation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 199.
MR. KICHLINE. No, I don't think so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their opinion.


Passage number 200.
MR. GRAMLEY. It would be hard to fit that for the wholeperiod and get [meaningful equations] because the co-efficients wouldbe moving. You would be averaging through them and you'd get a resultthat would be neither fish nor fowl. It wouldn't pertain to the pre-1974 period or the post-1974 period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In this passage, Mr. Gramley is expressing his opinion on how fitting meaningful equations for the entire period would be difficult due to the coefficients constantly changing. There is no clear contention or disagreement being presented.


Passage number 201.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I was thinking about just fitting it forthe post-1974 period. The average shift was what, 3 percent orsomething, in those numbers you read.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their thoughts about fitting something for the post-1974 period and mentioning the average shift observed in the numbers they read.


Passage number 202.
-20-9/16/80MR. AXILROD. If we throw out '75 and '76, it probably wouldstill fit [the rest of the period]. It depends on what one thinksreally went on in that period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is open-ended and acknowledges that different individuals may have different perspectives on what occurred during the specified period.


Passage number 203.
MR. KICHLINE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as the statement "MR. KICHLINE" does not provide any information or context to determine if there is an argument or disagreement.


Passage number 204.
 Well, [if you throw out] '75, '76, and '80,you're right on track, but--MR. GRAMLEY. The point that I want to make is that sincewe're uncertain about this shift--and I agree with you, Mr. Chairman,that we just don't know enough to put a lot of faith in theseequations--what we're looking at is a policy course that we reallyought to be assessing in terms of a potential for real growth atsomething between 0 and 2 percent. We really don't know where[potential] falls in that interval. It may fall toward the lower endor it may fall toward the upper end. So we're looking at a forecastfor economic activity which will produce an unemployment rate that mayhold steady or may rise very substantially next year. And that is theway we need to assess what we're doing, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the chairman's point about uncertainty in the forecast and is suggesting that the policy course should be assessed considering a potential for real growth between 0 and 2 percent.


Passage number 205.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 206.
MR. BALLES. Jim's answer to your question, Mr. Chairman,reminds me about a forecaster friend of mine who was quoted in thepaper recently on the outlook as saying that he had a whole pile ofnumbers in front of him and they were all useless. It is frustratingwhen one hears all the scenarios that could develop--the double-dip,the L, and so forth. But cutting through all that, if one looks backthree or four months ago and considers the divergence of opinion then,there may be a little more unanimity on what is really going on orlikely to go on than there was earlier, for whatever that may beworth. What seems to be showing through, particularly in comparisonwith the expectations of last spring, is that almost everybody wouldagree that the recession is going to be shorter than expected--that'sthe good news--and that inflation is going to be worse than expected,which is the bad news. And I know a few that I would consider to bereputable forecasters who are forecasting a boom in 1981. And thereinlies our real dilemma. As I look at the Board staff's forecast onreal GNP and the implicit price deflator and the unemployment rate--and our staff forecast is not significantly different on any one ofthose--the inflation picture is certainly discouraging, particularlyin terms of past cyclical experience. You will recall that in thelast recession the GNP deflator stood at 10.6 percent at the trough,the first quarter of '75. But a year later it was about half thatamount. We really made progress in the four quarters after the troughof the recession. If one tracks [the progress] in previousrecessions, [the pattern] is essentially the same. The real dilemmafor us on the policy side is posed by the inflation numbers we arelooking at in this forecast, where one year after the presumed troughof the recession, which is the fourth quarter of this year, we stillhave an implicit deflator of 8.8 percent, an unemployment rate of 8.3percent and a real growth rate of somewhere around 2 percent. Thequestion it poses is: How much, in fact, can demand management do tochange this. I'm not happy about what I consider a reversed mix ofmonetary and fiscal policy that seems to be shaping up; I would shareGovernor Wallich's feeling on that. But as long as we have this kindof inflation outlook, which is certainly too high to be socially oreconomically acceptable--and ditto on the unemployment rate--it wouldbe hard for me to favor a tax cut for the reasons that have already-21-9/16/80been set forth. I cannot support a tax cut in view of the outlook forpersistently high inflation unless or until the federal budget getschanged in a way I don't think it is going to get changed. I think weare stuck being the only game in town in terms of gradually bringingsome pressure to bear on the inflation problem. And as much as Iwould like to see tax reform, tax reduction net, I share your viewthat it's something we shouldn't encourage in the near future.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Balles, expresses disagreement with the idea of a tax cut and argues against it due to the high inflation outlook. He also mentions a possible reversed mix of monetary and fiscal policy that he is not happy about. This shows a disagreement in opinions and approaches to addressing the economic situation.


Passage number 207.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 208.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We're estimating in New York that thefiscal year 1981 deficit, brought up to date with all the recentadjustments, is around $61 billion. Most of the people in Wall Streetare also estimating a deficit in the $60 billion area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating an estimate of the fiscal year 1981 deficit in New York, as well as noting that most people in Wall Street have a similar estimate. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 209.
MS. TEETERS. Does that have a tax cut in it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The quoted statement is a question asking whether or not something includes a tax cut. It does not present any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 210.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That has in it a tax cut whichrepresents basically the consensus [unintelligible]. Remember, wehave the Reagan tax cut, the Carter Administration's, and the SenateFinance Committee's. [Our forecast] is based more on theAdministration's [proposed] tax cut. It also includes thecancellation of the import levy tax and the withholding tax oninterest and dividends, which revises the estimates. And there is arevision involving improved revenue because of the earlier bottomingout of the recession. I understand that the Administration hasupdated its estimate only to $41 billion so far. What they did wassimply to take the mid-session figure of $29.8 billion and add theadjustment for the economic renewal package and the failure of thebill on withholding tax on interest and dividends. Having said allthat, I don't see how we could oppose for substantive reasons, asidefrom the momentum, a moderate tax cut. I think a moderate tax cutmakes sense. I agree with what I believe is the general feeling inthe country that it ought to be focused in a more structural sense topromote investment and hopefully, although I'm not very sanguine aboutit, some improved productivity. The impression in the press, Paul,was that you took the line in your first appearance on tax mattersthat a tax cut probably would be advisable this year but was prematureto consider at the time [of your Congressional testimony] and ought tobe studied carefully. I had the impression, maybe an erroneous one,from the press that in your more recent appearance you seemed to beopposing any tax cut. There was an implication of that more than theemphasis on timing and composition in your earlier appearance. Isthat an accurate press [account].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It simply discusses different proposed tax cuts and the speaker expresses their opinion on the matter.


Passage number 211.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know that I meant there to be anydifference, really. Both times I conceded that they could go aheadnow if they wanted, if they didn't put the expenditures up any higherthan they are now projecting on the investment side. I don't thinkthat's possible or practical. I don't think they're going to go alongwith just the investment side alone, but there's room [for that]. Iam not ready to say that there's room for anything beyond that unlessthe expenditure trend looks better than I so elegantly expressed it inmy last appearance. And I don't know what that [will be]. TheAdministration's pro forma projection for '82--with pro forma meaningjust where current services will carry it--is for roughly an 11-1/2percent increase in budget expenditures in fiscal '82, which is whentheir tax proposal would have its full effect. That might leave us-22-9/16/80with a balanced budget if the expenditures were no higher than thattrend, if I recall these numbers correctly, at around the 6 percentunemployment rate. The full employment budget would still be insurplus, but the full employment budget assumes a lower unemploymentrate than that by a substantial margin. Now, is that adequate. Idon't know. I think it's borderline. That is where I come out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 212.
MR. WALLICH. Well, we're not looking at the substantialadditional deficits from the off-budget agencies, which are now movingtoward $20 billion. Then there's the borrowing by the sponsoredagencies, which also is on the order of $20 billion. I don't know ifit's fair to throw that one in, but surely one has to add the off-budget agencies to the $61 or $62 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich mentions that there are additional deficits from the off-budget agencies and borrowing by the sponsored agencies, but he is uncertain if it is fair to include them in the total amount. So, there is contention about whether or not to include these additional deficits in the overall sum.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 213.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right. But at the same time, giventhe increase in the tax burden and given the psychological attitudesin the country--and I'm not talking about politics in the narrow senseof the term--there will be an enormous loss of confidence in thiscountry's future and in the vigor of the growth of this economy ifpeople feel that they simply have to accept this increasing tax burdenwith no relief in sight. As I said earlier, I strongly support notgiving any relief in across-the-board personal income tax cuts, eventhough those [taxes] are terribly onerous. But I think we have to dosomething to show that we're working toward a tax policy orientedtoward structural improvement in the economy. I suppose it isanalogous to my feelings on productivity. It's not a question only oftangibles, things one can quantify. It gets get into social,cultural, psychological, and work ethic attitudes around the country.In an intangible way the people's perception of the tax burden andwhat government is doing about it is a very important substantivefactor in the economy. And I don't think we can just look at thenumbers and say: Well, it's $60 billion and, therefore, because weknow it's going to make monetary policy tougher we oppose it.Obviously, if we can bring down the expenditures side, that would begreat. But I don't believe it's going to happen because of thedefense component, no matter who gets [elected]. We have a choiceamong various unpalatable alternatives. If we can do something to getthe spending side down, fine; everybody agrees on that. But the issuestill is: Where do you stand on the tax cut.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses support for not giving any relief in across-the-board personal income tax cuts, while also suggesting that something needs to be done to show a tax policy oriented toward structural improvement in the economy. This implies a disagreement or conflict between the need for tax relief and the need for a tax policy focused on economic improvement.


Passage number 214.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are going to have a little difficultywith time here, if we don't move along. We have talk of a double-diprecession and we have a double-dip request to talk from Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a potential issue with time and a request to move along. There is no conflicting opinion or argument presented here.


Passage number 215.
MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, I can't disagree with the staffprojection, although I put myself in the camp that thinks thepotential for a W shape [outcome] is very real. But we are also inanother period where I think there may an inordinate focus on what thenext quarter is going to be, whether it's going to be a little plus ora little minus. In a sense that question is academic because when welook beyond those numbers and underneath the numbers what we reallyhave to come face to face with is a rather dismal picture. We arealmost a year after October 6, 1979; and the year was by any standarda very wrenching one. Certainly, I think one can conclude that if itwere not for the role the Federal Reserve played, it would have been aheck of a lot worse. But the fact of the matter is, looking now ayear later at the price numbers, for example, one can throw a very,very small net around the annual inflation numbers for 1979, 1980, and-23-9/16/801981. And certainly the prospects for the real economy are at bestmixed. When I think about the whys of that, I am even more persuadednow than I was that the volatility and the uncertainty that we seestill reflect a fundamental fear and expectation that somehow or otherinflation is going to get worse. There is a recognition, I thinkoften subliminal, that if inflation does get worse, the result will beeven more instability.When I put that all together in the context of public policy,bypassing the tax question for a minute, it seems to me that we haveanother credibility problem to deal with. Up until now there has beena lot of discussion about credibility measured in terms of whether westick to and hit these targets for the money supply. If one looks at1981 and assumes that we stick to them and hit them, it seems to methat we are openly facing another credibility question. That is:Okay, we've done all this and we've hit these targets for two years ina row or whatever it will be, so where are the results. Thecredibility question that ultimately will arise is: Does it work, canit work, or will it work. And if we are looking at a situation at theend of 1981 that looks anything like the forecast, it's going to beeven more difficult to justify the kind of policy we are talking aboutsimply because people's frustration levels in terms of[unintelligible] and performance will have been eroded, I suspect.That's a back door way of getting to the tax question. Myinstinct is like a lot of other people's. Looking at the sheernumbers and the sensitivity of expectations and all the rest, my gutfeeling is that a tax reduction, even a well structured one, would becounterproductive at this time. But at the same time, I also feelthat there has to be a way that a tax reduction can be structured in apositive way, along the lines that Mr. Ford and Mr. Solomon spoke of.I am still very intrigued with the idea that somehow or other thereshould be a way to structure a tax cut that helps us get at the wagequestion. And I think the pressures are going to be enormous in thatdirection. I wish I could figure out a way to make some more senseout of it. But my bottom line on the tax cut again comes down to itsstructure and how it is done. If it's just a straight traditionalkind of tax cut, then I would have to resist it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Corrigan, is expressing his thoughts and opinions on various economic issues, but there is no indication of any disagreement or conflict with others.


Passage number 216.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black. And I urge succinct commentsby all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply urges all participants to provide concise comments.


Passage number 217.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, we have no serious disagreementwith the Greenbook forecast for the remainder of 1980. As for whetherthis flurry of favorable news we have seen constitutes an upturn thatis already in progress or near, we are inclined to doubt that. Wethink it might be, as Jim Kichline suggested, in part a bouncebackfrom the abandonment of the special credit restraint program. And Idon't think we have yet seen the full reaction to the deceleration inthe aggregates that we have brought about and that we have committedourselves to doing. So the main difference we see from the staff'sviewpoint is that we have more damping of inflationary expectationsand less inflation than they do. As for the reasons, I'd just have tosummarize by saying that we have more faith in our post-October 6thactions than I believe the staff does. It's easy to forget, as JohnBalles reminded us awhile ago, that we had a pretty significantdeceleration in inflation as late as the '75 downturn before theaggregates got away from us. I'm also a bit encouraged by the flurry-24-9/16/80of indicators in the Redbook that we have had some weakening of pricepressures at both the retail and the commodity levels. Finally, ifthe staff is right on its forecast of inflation, as most people seemto think--which I guess is more likely in some ways to be right thanours--then I would be very skeptical that we would have as muchstrength in the real economy as the staff projects.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is stating that they have no serious disagreement with the Greenbook forecast for the remainder of 1980, but they have some doubts about whether the recent favorable news constitutes an actual upturn. He also mentions that they have more damping of inflationary expectations and less inflation than the staff, but it is not framed as a disagreement or contention.


Passage number 218.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Schultz.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any specific context or information about the content of the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 219.
MR. SCHULTZ. My view is very simplistic. I have been onthis Board a little over a year now and my attitude has changed fairlyconsiderably. I've come to believe that inflation is intractable,dangerous, and overwhelms all other problems that we have. I think weare going to have a very slow recovery; I think we need a slowrecovery. I don't see how prices and wages are going to come downunless there is pressure on them over a considerable period of time.I hope whatever Administration we have understands the luxury ofhaving the first year of its Administration be one which follows arecession, which hasn't happened in a long time in the past. I hopethey understand that they can do something next year that they may nothave the opportunity to do any other time. My attitude on a tax cutis that it ought to be geared with inflation in mind. We shouldignore questions of equity; we should ignore questions of stimulus.Our policy should be geared entirely to attempting to do somethingabout inflation. I like the idea of doing something aboutdepreciation. I like the idea of trying to offset somehow the socialsecurity [tax] increase. I think we have to have some considerationof a tax-based incomes policy. I don't know how that would work. Ihaven't been able to figure out anything that is practical. Ourexperience with credit controls leads me to believe that it's hard asthe devil to have that kind of situation, so I'm not very sanguineabout [devising] one that can work. But I believe some kind of anincomes policy is necessary because I think every single thing we dohas to be geared to that one fact that inflation is the most seriousproblem we face. It's bigger than everything else put together andwe've got to begin to get it down over time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Schultz, expresses a strong belief that inflation is the most serious problem and that all policies should be focused on combating inflation. However, he also admits uncertainty about how to effectively implement an incomes policy and expresses skepticism about the practicality of credit controls. This suggests that there may be differing opinions or disagreement on the best approach to addressing inflation.


Passage number 220.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey. Welcome back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a simple greeting.


Passage number 221.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm delighted to behere. Let me just start by saying that we would not differ greatlyfrom the staff's projection on the economy. We think the comingquarter might be a bit stronger than their projection because we startfrom the premise, regardless of what the Chairman or others around thetable may say about a tax cut, that a cut is in train and we are goingto get one. We should be talking about the structure of that tax cutrather than whether or not we will or will not have one. Having saidthat, it also seems to me that we have not made any real progressagainst inflation as a result of the fact that people are nowprojecting a very short recession. Historically it's true that wedon't see any movement on prices until well after the recovery isunder way. What I'm afraid of is that our new procedures have donenothing more than shorten the cycle and that they will not produce anatmosphere that will permit any movement against prices this time. Ifwe indeed have the kind of growth that the staff is projecting, whichis modest to be sure, and if we have gone through 3 or 6 months ofdecline albeit very steep and we get no movement on the price side,then I think it will all have been for naught. That says to me that-25-9/16/80in the period ahead, since we are the only [game in town], monetarypolicy is going to have to be fairly restrictive. And we are going tohave to face the criticism that Jerry just mentioned, but that's ayear down the road. So I'd rather get something working now, eventhough we could have negative growth in the period ahead because ofthe tight monetary policy, given that we will get a tax break, andtake that heat a year from now. Otherwise, we have will gone througha period that has netted us nothing and we are going to have to startagain, whether it's incomes policy or some other type of governmentalpolicy. Maybe that will come to pass, but I would like this Committeeat least to put the kind of monetary policy in train that suggeststhat we may not have positive growth in the period ahead--that we maybe looking for a W or a little longer [before recovery].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that they do not differ greatly from the staff's projection on the economy. They also express a concern that the new procedures may not be effective in combating inflation, but this is not a disagreement with the staff's projection.


Passage number 222.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos. I assume you are going to havea statement of faith.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement or assumption made by Mr. Roos.


Passage number 223.
MR. ROOS. Succinctly, I would say that at a time when bothmajor political candidates seem to be competing for what they canpromise in the way of a tax cut, I would strongly support what youhave said, even if you have to overkill, in terms of opposing a taxcut until we get through the November [drama].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 224.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does that conclude comments on thisgeneral subject. Mr. Winn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply asks if comments on the subject have been concluded.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 225.
MR. WINN. Paul, personally, I have been surprised at thebounceback. I don't know how many more months it will take toconvince me that I'm wrong on that score, but I still have a questionmark. But I think we have lost our benchmarks regarding the impact ofcertain things on economic activity. Take interest rates, forexample, and the changes in financing practices that have taken placeto offset [the effects of changes in interest rates]. There is allthis building being done now with different kinds of financing wherethe interest rate per se is not as high, but a 10 percent gross kickeris established on top of any interest rate so that whenever we raisethe level of rates it doesn't necessarily change the outlook in the[usual] sense of the term. [Lenders] have gone to financing that isnot long-term; it's a 30-year commitment with a rollover every fiveyears and a 2-1/2 percentage point change in interest rates either wayadjusted over that [5-year] period of time. So there has been a lotof adaptability--in terms financing structures--to changes in rates,just as we have had adaptability in terms of money. I'm impressed asI watch the checks on the money funds flow through our office. Whenyou see a check for $12 million drawn against balances that don'texist, you wake up to what is being measured and what velocity means.There was an announcement this morning by Master Charge about theirintroduction of new check concepts and plastic money to replace someof our measures [of money]. So, again, I think our benchmarks interms of what we do [and the impact on] economic activity need to bereexamined.On the other side, I'm impressed with the sociologicalchanges that are taking place in our society. Part of this goes backto the inflation issue. We ought not miss the polarization that istaking place in society between those who are being pinched byinflation and those who are not. It's no longer just a racial issue;it's showing up in a variety of ways. And that scares me, frankly, as-26-9/16/80I ponder what it means down the road. When one talks to doctors andpsychologists and others about what complaints they hear [frompatients], one finds that finance has suddenly become the biggestfactor in their consultations. Personal bankruptcies in Ohio are thethird or fourth largest in the nation and they are growing. Again, ourbenchmarks are lacking in terms of our ability to appraise what ishappening on that score. There is a certain segment of our societythat is really being squeezed by inflationary developments, and foodprices are only going to add to this. So the pressure for a tax cutis going to be very real. The problem is that it won't really addressthe problem. It will just bail out a few people and the issue willcome back again down the road.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents contention and disagreement regarding the effectiveness of benchmarks in measuring economic activity and the impact of certain factors such as interest rates. The speaker expresses surprise at the bounceback in the economy but questions the reliability of benchmarks. Additionally, there is disagreement about the impact of inflation on society, with some being pinched by inflation and others not. The discussion also includes a disagreement about the effectiveness of a tax cut in addressing the issue.


Passage number 226.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are being squeezed for time, I keepsaying. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker is expressing a sentiment about being squeezed for time. There is no indication of a conflicting viewpoint or disagreement with Governor Partee.


Passage number 227.
MR. PARTEE. I would say first that I think the bottom of therecession has been reached or is very close to being reached and thatthe economy is probably turning up right now. Secondly, I think itwill be a sluggish recovery. The price increases will be so largethat there won't be available income to spur more than just a verygradual recovery. We could get a month or two of good retail salesbut then I think we will have a relapse and we won't have much of agrowth rate. Basically that is what the staff is forecasting. Third,I do believe in the W [scenario], but it's likely to be a W that is alittle more extended. I believe that 1982 will be the year ofrecession, similar to 1958 and 1960-61 when we had two rapidrecessions in a period of great concern about inflation and a periodof restrained policy in the late 1950s. And fourth, I think thesecond recession will bring the decline in income growth and,therefore, the decline in inflation. We have to get through this nextyear, and next year we will have a lot of inflation because of foodprices. The years 1960 and 1964 and the 1974-76 period were affectedquite a bit by a very favorable bump in agriculture. This year wewill not be getting a favorable bump; it's going to go the other way.Therefore, the inflation rate will remain high so long as incomegrowth remains high. But in the '82 recession I think income growthwill slow considerably and the rate of inflation will slowconsiderably. So if we just sort of float along with this and try notto be too expansive or too restrictive and bring about some kind ofchange in the structure of the system over the next year or so, Ithink in time what Fred hopes for will be accomplished.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their personal beliefs and opinions about the economy and future trends.


Passage number 228.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Gee, I hope this room isn't bugged.The Federal Reserve predicts a second recession [after] next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It consists of a statement expressing a hope and a prediction made by the Federal Reserve.


Passage number 229.
MR. PARTEE. That's just my own personal view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is solely expressing the personal view of Mr. Partee without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 230.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 231.
MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I can be very brief. I mainly wantto get on record on the tax cut question. I don't disagree in anymajor way with the staff forecast. The only reservation I would haveon the staff forecast is the qualitative amendment that was made onthe basis of the most recent retail sales numbers. I don't see anybasis for a sustained expansion in retail sales, and I don't seeanything in the personal income data or wage and salary numbers thatwould lead me to expect a strong or even a moderately strong-27-9/16/80resurgence in consumption expenditures. Like most people, I think weare seeing the signs of the early stages of the recovery, a very weakrecovery. And anticipating the discussion that is coming up, I don'tthink we ought to do anything to choke off this weak recovery in itsearly stages.With regard to the tax cut question, I'm pleased for thefirst time to agree completely with what Tony Solomon said, especiallyhis comments on the intangibles. I think that was a very perceptivestatement of our situation. So briefly, my position would be thatit's simply too late to think in terms of a countercyclical tax cut.But we have to think in terms of tax reform--tax reform in thedirection of increasing incentives to invest, incentives to save, andincentives to improve effort. And once an effective rational taxreform program has been developed, I think it would be very importantto announce the intent to reduce taxes over a given period in thefuture. In short, I have a great deal of sympathy for the Feldsteinproposal of announcing in advance what the government intends to dowith respect to taxes and the tax structure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Rice, disagrees with the qualitative amendment made to the staff forecast based on the most recent retail sales numbers. He does not see any basis for a sustained expansion in retail sales and does not expect a strong resurgence in consumption expenditures. However, he agrees with Tony Solomon's comments on intangibles and the need for tax reform. Therefore, there is disagreement about the outlook for retail sales and the need for a countercyclical tax cut, but agreement on the need for tax reform.


Passage number 232.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement involving Governor Teeters.


Passage number 233.
MS. TEETERS. I only have two quick questions. If we have nochange in tax laws, what is the increase in the tax burden from thefourth quarter to the first quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about the increase in the tax burden.


Passage number 234.
MR. KICHLINE. If we have no change in taxes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presented as a factual statement without any opposing views or conflicting information.


Passage number 235.
MS. TEETERS. No, if we have the tax increases that havealready been been legislated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there will be no tax increases if the ones that have already been legislated are implemented.


Passage number 236.
 How much of the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As a percent of GNP or something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any specific information or argument that could cause contention or disagreement. It simply introduces a topic without providing any details or opinions.


Passage number 237.
MS. TEETERS. No, just what the dollar volume is. We havethe social security [tax increase] and something else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contentious or disagreement elements. It simply mentions the need for clarification or information about the dollar volume and the inclusion of social security tax increase and another unidentified factor.


Passage number 238.
MR. KICHLINE. The social security [increase] is worth $18billion for the year; part of it is the [higher] rate and part of itis the [higher] base. The windfall profits tax next year I believe isworth $16 billion and bracket creep is worth about $10 billion. Sothe first digit is a 4; it's about $44 or $45 billion. We have a $28billion tax cut in our proposal here, so we still have the tax burdenrising in 1981.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply provides information about different monetary values and the effects on the tax burden in 1981.


Passage number 239.
MS. TEETERS. Suppose we don't have a tax cut. What happensto your economic projection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a hypothetical scenario and asks about the potential impact on economic projections.


Passage number 240.
MR. KICHLINE. The impact is a decline in real GNP of about1-1/4 percent fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter and that would mean inthat period maybe a tenth or two off the deflator.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a projection or estimate without any indication of disagreement or contention among individuals.


Passage number 241.
MS. TEETERS. So your growth in calendar 1981 would beessentially zero. Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Teeters is simply restating the information she has received and confirming if her understanding is correct.


Passage number 242.
MR. KICHLINE. Yes. It may be 1/2 or 3/4 percent--but small,very small.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply states that the percentage mentioned is small or very small.


Passage number 243.
-28-9/16/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Axilrod, why don't you introduce thenext subject and then we will [break for coffee].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking Mr. Axilrod to introduce the next subject before taking a break for coffee.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 244.
MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The words "MR. AXILROD" indicate that someone is addressing Mr. Axilrod, indicating that there may be a conversation or exchange of ideas.


Passage number 245.
][Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we can come to order, let's see whetherwe can resolve our business after our lengthy discussion, which hasperhaps had some discouraging tinges to it. I was struck in listeningthat it is quite conceivable, given what one senses is going on rightat the moment, that when some of these August-September figures comeout they will look a little better [than expected]. I don't thinkthat has any great significance. In terms of the sluggish outlook--nobody mentioned this so I will just mention it--apart from all theother conclusions which were quite general about having to have afairly sluggish recovery by historical standards because of theinflationary problem and longer-term needs of the economy, I thinkstatistically when we don't have productivity growing we don't havethe room for the same kind of recovery that we traditionally have had.If we have a recession, the economy can grow by 4 or 5 percent, even 6percent, for a few quarters. It doesn't bring us as far up theemployment curve as it does when we don't have any productivitygrowth. And for that reason alone one wouldn't look for the same kindof numbers, sustained very long, that we typically have had in earlierrecoveries. But we have problems. I did not detect from the earliercomments that anybody thinks he or she has any totally satisfactorysolutions, if I may put it that way. But this Committee does have toproceed on [making] some decisions, and presumably in the framework ofour established operating procedures.At this point, you have two [Bluebook] alternatives beforeyou. That does not exhaust all the possibilities, obviously. I maybe wrong, but ordinarily the alternatives we have before us haven'thad a gap [between them] that is quite this wide, for M-1A anyway.The reason may be that [the intermeeting period] is a little longer[than usual]. It is probably realistic to have it that wide to makethe decision meaningful since the reality does not obey the verynarrow differences that we typically are presented with. I would drawyour attention to these charts, which I'm sure you have already lookedat, that look backwards from the fourth quarter [to] early next yearif we do follow one or the other of these paths. They show how [theresults] would look against the targets that we have set and reset forourselves. I was a little surprised when I saw these. I just hadn'tquite caught up with the fact that M3 apparently was stronger inAugust than I had thought earlier. So while I had thought we wererather comfortably in the middle of the M3 range, M3 is within theboundaries but is relatively high [in its range]. And that is oneproblem, [that we are] testing the high side of our ranges in allthree measures except M-1A. That's the situation in which we findourselves. Would anyone want to take off from Steve's comments orotherwise suggest a course.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is providing their thoughts and observations about the discussion and the current economic outlook.


Passage number 246.
MS. TEETERS. May I ask a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple request for permission to ask a question.


Passage number 247.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 248.
-29-9/16/80MS. TEETERS. I might qualitatively expect interest rates tobe higher. Specifically, where would the federal funds rate be in thethird and fourth quarters under "A" and "B".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the expectation of higher interest rates and questioning where the federal funds rate would be in the third and fourth quarters under different scenarios labeled "A" and "B".


Passage number 249.
MR. AXILROD. Under alternative A we would expect an averagelevel of the funds rate by the fourth quarter of something like 11-1/4percent, give or take a little. So it may be higher than the level ofthe last few days by about 1/2 point or a little less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a prediction or expectation about the average level of the funds rate in the future.


Passage number 250.
MR. PARTEE. That's on average for the whole quarter, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, MR. PARTEE is simply stating an average for the whole quarter. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 251.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage "MR. AXILROD" as it is simply a title or a form of address for someone.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 252.
 Yes, and we'd expect a further rise--MR. PARTEE. It would be turning up as the quarter went on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Yes, and we'd expect a further rise" indicates that there is a difference of opinion or view between the two speakers.


Passage number 253.
MR. AXILROD. Yes. And under alternative B the average forthe quarter would probably be around 12-1/2 percent. That's assumingthat the move toward that level doesn't somehow affect economicactivity in the fourth quarter [very] promptly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing a statement and giving an explanation based on their assumptions.


Passage number 254.
MS. TEETERS. And that would produce a mortgage rate of what,about 14 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states a question about the potential mortgage rate without expressing any form of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 255.
MR. AXILROD. The mortgage rate we have under "A" would bearound 13-1/8 percent, which is not far from where it is now. But ifthat were wrong, I suspect the rate would be higher. And under "B" Icould easily see the mortgage rate moving up between now and year-end-- this is my view and others maybe differ--to around 14 or 14-1/2percent, depending in part on the degree of concern institutions haveon whether rates are going to move up even further.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is a disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, presents two different potential mortgage rates under "A" and "B" and acknowledges that others may have a different view on the matter. This suggests that there is contention or disagreement regarding the potential movement of mortgage rates.


Passage number 256.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me say that we are in a [difficult]position, and maybe we will always be in this position--certainly wewere when we met last month and we carefully set the level ofborrowings, which is a critical factor and one we have to considertoday. But [last month] within two days or something like that themoney supply exploded in a way that made that a nominal assumption--I'll call it nominal--because it was clear that the money supply inthe space of two days was way above the path we were talking about andthe real decision we made on borrowing quickly became nominal.Obviously, I don't know what is going to happen this time. Theassumption is--or as Steve said, "indications are" that money growthin September is going to be weak. "Indications" sounds to me like apretty strong word. I don't know what indication he has other than apreliminary figure for next week, and these preliminary figures havebeen notoriously unreliable. But the figure that he is assuming is adecline of $1-1/2 billion in M-1A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and questioning the basis for the assumption being made.


Passage number 257.
MR. AXILROD. In the week of the 10th we had a $1-1/2 billiondecline and [we expect] very little increase in the current week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply mentions a decline in the current week and expects little increase in the following week.


Passage number 258.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All I am noting is that if that did notmaterialize, whatever we talk about here in terms of the borrowingassumption can change rather quickly. Nonetheless, I think it issignificant to focus on that variable. It's a little difficult justin a technical sense in that I think it is fair to say that thefederal funds rate that seems to be associated with current borrowinglevels is less than one might have expected. So in that sense there-30-9/16/80seems to a little less restraint with a given level of borrowings thanwe were assuming last time we were in a borrowing phase, six monthsago or whenever.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the possibility of a change in borrowing assumptions and the observation that current borrowing levels seem to have less restraint than expected.


Passage number 259.
MR. PARTEE. What is the borrowing level, Paul.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The question is a straightforward inquiry about the borrowing level.


Passage number 260.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the staff is estimating it this weekat around $1.1 billion or so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states the estimation made by the staff without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 261.
MR. STERNLIGHT. This week could average about $1.1 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting opinions or ideas. It simply states an average amount of money for a particular week.


Passage number 262.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, actually, it has been well abovethat. It has been averaging $1.4 billion or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply clarifying that the amount being discussed (presumably in a previous statement) has been higher than the mentioned value.


Passage number 263.
MR. STERNLIGHT. It was $1.3 billion through yesterday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of fact.


Passage number 264.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And the federal funds rate has been about10-3/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states the federal funds rate without any conflicting opinions or viewpoints.


Passage number 265.
MR. STERNLIGHT. 10.80 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states a numerical statistic without any conflicting opinions or viewpoints.


Passage number 266.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" simply identifies a person and does not express any conflicting opinions or differing views.


Passage number 267.
 And that is not the relationship that weordinarily would have thought--MS. TEETERS. How much of that is a result of the banks beingout of the [discount] window.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It simply states a fact or observation about the relationship between the banks and the discount window.


Passage number 268.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it may just be that; we don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating uncertainty and lack of knowledge, rather than expressing any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 269.
MS. TEETERS. Everybody has been gone from the window forwhat, three months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that everybody has been gone from the window for three months.


Passage number 270.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It may be that or it may just be a gradualchange in attitude. Under the new operating technique they haven'tbeen chastised all that much when they are in as they were before. Idon't know. It may be that with the passage of time, when they havebeen in a little more, that the relationship will tighten up a bit.Maybe it's a more fundamental easing; I just don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a reflection on potential reasons or explanations for a change in attitude or behavior, but there is no explicit disagreement or conflict presented.


Passage number 271.
MR. MORRIS. Well, it's the first time that the funds ratehas been above the discount rate for a long time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement made by Mr. Morris is a simple observation about the funds rate being above the discount rate, without any conflicting opinions or conflicting information provided.


Passage number 272.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The discount officers tell me thatthey are reluctant, since the banks have been away for so long, to getright back to the same level of disciplined access.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 273.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether anybody has a senseof what may be going on in that area, but it's a rather significantvariable in terms of the way we now operate. Maybe we ought toconsider whether--. Well, is it a fair assumption to say that if youhaven't been talking to the banks in New York, that probably meansnobody has been saying anything to any of the banks. Now, this hasonly been going on for a month or so or less, so you haven't had muchchance to get after repetitive borrowers, I'm sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing uncertainty and suggesting considering whether certain assumptions are fair.


Passage number 274.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I can't change my mind set thatquickly. First of all, the volume of New York borrowing isn't thatbig. My impression, without remembering the numbers, is that it's not-31-9/16/80the usual proportion of nationwide borrowing. But we have been inrecession.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is based on the author's impression and lack of specific numbers, so there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 275.
 And it hadn't even occurred to me, Paul, that we shouldstart using moral suasion other than the normal level of trying todiscourage--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The question is: What is the normallevel.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply mentioning their own lack of consideration for using moral suasion at a higher level.


Passage number 276.
 I wouldn't think anything more than normal [is appropriate],but I--MR. PARTEE. We have that table that shows banks about tocome under administrative pressure and [the number] is virtually zeroas I recall, using the normal standards. There just hasn't beenenough borrowing for a long enough time for anybody except the onebank in Philadelphia.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It consists of a statement followed by additional information provided by Mr. Partee. Their statements do not contradict each other or express opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 277.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we should watch this for a whilelonger and see--I'm not suggesting any new departure here--whetherattitudes either in the Reserve Banks or in the banking world havesuddenly changed. But then, it's very hard to know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion and suggesting a course of action to observe and evaluate any potential changes in attitudes.


Passage number 278.
MS. TEETERS. The one week that we had very high borrowingswe also had very high excess reserves, didn't we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of fact that can be answered with a simple yes or no.


Passage number 279.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That was true for one week. It happenedin some week in August, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker states a fact about something happening for one week in August and then expresses uncertainty about the exact timing by saying "I think" it happened in August.


Passage number 280.
MR. AXILROD. The borrowing was high in the week ending[September] third; and excess reserves were originally extremely high,on the order of $650 million. That was revised down to about $489million a week later, but that is above average. I might add, Mr.Chairman, that I don't have the borrowing by Federal Reserve Districtbut I do have it broken down by money market banks, which are the 46largest, and others. In the week of the third, when borrowing was$1.3 billion, money market banks borrowed $800 million. And in theweek of the tenth, when borrowing was around $600 million, moneymarket banks borrowed around $400 million. I don't have any breakdownfor this week, but that indicates a fairly active use by the largebanks, which probably fits with the hypothesis that they don't feelvery reluctant to borrow, not having been in for ages.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any disagreement or contention. It is simply presenting factual information about borrowing and excess reserves.


Passage number 281.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, with that additional element, it'san inevitable uncertainty I suppose. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not include any conflicting or opposing ideas. It simply acknowledges the presence of uncertainty as an inevitable aspect.


Passage number 282.
MR. BALLES. I just wanted to ask Steve a question, followingup on an observation you made a little earlier, Mr. Chairman. As youknow, Steve, there have been some pretty large underforecasts in theBluebooks we had at the time versus how things turned out for June,July, and August. I just wondered what makes you so optimistic, as itwere, that we are going to get very slow money growth in September.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question being asked for clarification.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 283.
MR. AXILROD. I don't think we are going to get slow moneygrowth over the rest of the year. And whether that [more] rapidgrowth is going to occur in September, October, November, or DecemberI'd be the first one to say I couldn't really tell you because thereis a lot of noise in the month-to-month fluctuations of money growth.The only basis for saying slow growth in September is that we havemodestly firm data for the first three days of the month andpreliminary data for the next seven, so we have data for something-32-9/16/80like a third of the month. Those data show an average level for themonth below the level in August. So allowing for some rise over thebalance of the month--I think there will be some rise--we'd get a verylow growth rate. Now, if we get a revision in the preliminary datafor the week of the 10th of plus $1-1/2 to $2 billion, like we gotlast week, and if the week of the 17th shows no coming down from thatbut remains strong, then it's quite possible that September could bemoving up again to very high growth rates. Similarly, we could getdownward revisions and get very low growth rates. What I'm saying isthat all we have is the first 10 days, of which seven of those daysare partial data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod states that he doesn't think there will be slow money growth over the rest of the year, but he also acknowledges the uncertainty and noise in the month-to-month fluctuations of money growth. He presents different scenarios and acknowledges that the data for the first 10 days of the month show a potential for low growth but also states that there could be revisions and the possibility of high growth rates. This indicates a lack of consensus or agreement on what the future money growth will be.


Passage number 284.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Recent revisions all have been upward, butat some point that pattern will change. So, who knows.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 285.
MR. PARTEE. One could also say, Steve, that having had avery big month, which might represent some degree of stock adjustment,the odds are for a period of relative calm the following month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a possible outcome based on a previous month's performance.


Passage number 286.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, that happens often. [I feel fairlycomfortable] predicting what is going to occur--that there will bestrength sometime in the fall. But in which particular month isalmost impossible to tell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Axilrod about his ability to predict certain events in the future, specifically about there being strength in the fall.


Passage number 287.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only includes the name "Mr. Ford," so there is no indication of any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 288.
MR. FORD. May I ask: On this anticipated fluctuation in thefunds rate for alternative B, let's say that in the model it wouldaverage 12 percent. Do you also estimate what the peak pressures arelikely to be. In other words, are you anticipating that at times itis likely to hit the 14 percent ceiling [of our current range] andthat we'll have to react accordingly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking a question to gather information and clarify a specific aspect of the model.


Passage number 289.
MR. AXILROD. No, on the assumption that the Committeeretained a 14 percent ceiling, we wouldn't see that as an impedimentbecause it's largely been interpreted as an average over the days ofthe statement week. Therefore, if it were at 13 or 14 percent or evena little above 14 percent on some days, I wouldn't presume [theceiling] would be an impediment. If we were wrong and there was a lotmore demand for money and we are much closer to the ceiling, then itcould in fact become an impediment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses the interpretation of a numerical ceiling and the potential implications it may have.


Passage number 290.
MR. FORD. My feeling is in line with what John Balles said.I'm worried that the forecast may once again underestimate thepressures on monetary expansion. And given the fact that we arerapidly approaching the first anniversary of our new policy and aregoing to be scrutinized very carefully on the fourth quarter-to-fourthquarter performance, I would think we definitely have to get focusedon taking a conservative course of action, which would be moving tosomething like alternative B, possibly even widening the band ofallowable interest rates rather than narrowing it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Ford agrees with John Balles and expresses his concern about the forecast underestimating the pressures on monetary expansion. He suggests taking a conservative course of action, possibly by moving to alternative B or widening the band of allowable interest rates.


Passage number 291.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Mayo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions a person's name, "Mr. Mayo," without providing any additional information or context to suggest disagreement.


Passage number 292.
MR. MAYO. Mr. Chairman, I don't want to get into a debate asto whether the New York staff makes better estimates than the Boardstaff, but I'm fascinated--if I have my figures right--that for thefourth quarter New York has expansion in M-1A of 3.2 percent and the-33-9/16/80Board staff has 7-1/2 percent. The same [pattern] is true for M-1B;it's a little less so on M2. If I am reading these right, thedifferences seem unusually large. I'm wondering if anyone from NewYork or the Board would want to say anything about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Mayo is simply expressing his fascination and asking for clarification about the differences in estimates between New York and the Board staff.


Passage number 293.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They're not operating in a very fastleague either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "they're not operating in a very fast league either" simply states that the mentioned entities or individuals are not operating at a fast pace, without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas presented.


Passage number 294.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I didn't know that those estimateswere circulated. You're right about the New York numbers. But thedifference is not in real GNP estimates. It's almost entirely in ourassumption that there will be a reversal in the shift in money demand,wholly for transactions balances--that as people become increasinglysensitized to inflation they will reduce their holdings of non-interest bearing or low interest bearing transactions balances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining the reasons behind a difference in estimated numbers.


Passage number 295.
MR. MAYO. I find myself much more comfortable with the NewYork figure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Mayo simply states his personal preference or comfort level with the New York figure.


Passage number 296.
 That doesn't mean--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. On the other hand, let me point outthat the Washington figures have been more correct than New York's forthe last two months. This difference in assumption has been there fortwo months now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author simply presents a comparison between the figures from Washington and New York without expressing any disagreement or taking a stance.


Passage number 297.
MR. AXILROD. I'm not sure exactly how that 7-1/4 percent gotin there, but I probably ought to explain, President Mayo, that it issometimes difficult to make a distinction between projections andtargets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining a potential difficulty in distinguishing between projections and targets.


Passage number 298.
MR. MAYO. It may be a derivative figure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas. It simply presents a statement made by Mr. Mayo.


Passage number 299.
MR. AXILROD. And what we have in alternative A is 7-1/4percent growth in the fourth quarter, which would be the implicittarget if you were going to hit 4-1/2 percent for the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. It states a specific growth target for the fourth quarter and the year, without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements.


Passage number 300.
MR. MAYO. I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is a statement from Mr. Mayo, and there is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 301.
MR. AXILROD. We would expect that; that's very close to aprojection because we like to make projections assuming no changes ininterest rates. But we expect some rise in interest rates as Iexplained even with that. So in the Bluebook where we have the 7-1/4percent [growth rate], that is the target necessary to hit aparticular level over the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining their expectations and projections regarding interest rates.


Passage number 302.
MR. MAYO. Okay. Well, the fact that they are so differentdoesn't influence my own opinion, which is that alternative B is theright way to go. I think it's a much more prudent approach, but Ifound I was covered with curiosity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage indicates that the speaker's opinion is not influenced by the fact that the options are different. They only express their own preference for alternative B. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 303.
MR. AXILROD. I should add that if New York is right and theCommittee adopts either "A" or "B," there will be a sharp drop ininterest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is stating a potential outcome if certain actions are taken.


Passage number 304.
MR. MAYO. A sharp drop in interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states a fact about a sharp drop in interest rates.


Passage number 305.
MR. AXILROD. If money demand is going to be that low, thereought to be a drop in interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage presents a hypothetical argument that if money demand is low, there should be a drop in interest rates. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 306.
-34-9/16/80MR. FORD. Let's pray for New York [to be right].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply suggesting a prayer for the well-being of New York.


Passage number 307.
MR. PARTEE. Sometimes that's what it takes, prayer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply suggests that prayer is sometimes necessary.


Passage number 308.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have an opinion, Mr. Mayo, that youare going to give us as to why you have a [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement indicated in the passage. The question is simply asking Mr. Mayo if he has an opinion or reason that he intends to share.


Passage number 309.
MR. MAYO. My opinion is in favor of alternative B. I doquestion why there should be any difference in the fed funds rangeunder either "A" or "B." I think [the current range is] sufficientlybroad to encompass both of them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Mayo states his opinion and questions why there is any difference in the range of fed funds under "A" or "B." However, he does not express any disagreement or argue against any other viewpoint.


Passage number 310.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Eastburn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 311.
MR. EASTBURN. Mr. Chairman, I didn't comment in the go-around about the business outlook because I really don't know what isgoing to happen. So it seems to me that what we need to ask ourselvesis: Where can we make the biggest mistake. To me the biggest mistakewould be to underestimate the possible vigor of the recovery. That'sthe mistake we have made so far and I think it would be a greatermistake to underestimate than to overestimate. The other mistake isto be too liberal with monetary growth. Given that kind of approach,I think alternative A is unacceptable. Alternative B is just barelyacceptable, as far as I'm concerned; I would prefer something lessthan that. An alternative C of 4-1/4 percent for M-1B would providemore insurance for the year's growth; it would put growth for the yeara little above the midpoint, which would give us greater assurancethat if we miss, it would still be under the ceiling. That, I think,would require us to set a higher range for the federal funds rate of 9to 15 percent. If we do that, we should feel free to use the range asnecessary to accomplish those goals. That would be my preferredsolution. Another less acceptable alternative would be a "B-minus,"somewhere between "B" and "C." But I think we ought to go for "C" andwatch in the next couple of months to see if these biases that Iexpressed are being borne out. We do need to do something about thediscount rate. It may be too soon right now and [the current rate]may not complicate Peter's life very greatly, but we are in a newenvironment and I just don't know how the rate figures into thethinking of the banks [about] borrowing. So we might as well startgetting that in alignment and keep it there as much as we can. So Ithink we need to get that up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 312.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just translating your comments: You'reprepared to see a big increase in interest rates right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply relaying someone else's comments about being prepared for a potential increase in interest rates.


Passage number 313.
MR. EASTBURN. Yes, I think so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Eastburn simply expresses his opinion without any conflicting ideas or opposing views.


Passage number 314.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I cannot provide an answer with just "Mr. Morris". Please provide the full passage or context in order for me to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 315.
MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, to me alternative B defines themaximum growth paths for the aggregates that we can be satisfied with.I'm perfectly willing to accept that. I think the economy in thefourth quarter is likely to be stronger than projected and, therefore,we may see bigger rate increases than the Bluebook is contemplating,but I think we simply have to accept that. However, I wouldn't go asfar as Dave and shoot for something more stringent than "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Morris, expresses his willingness to accept alternative B as the maximum growth path for the aggregates. He also mentions the possibility of stronger economic growth and bigger rate increases in the fourth quarter, but he ultimately agrees with alternative B. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 316.
"-35-9/16/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether it's becausedifferent people are talking, but the business outlook suddenly soundsmore ebullient than the impression I was left with earlier. Mr. Winn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This passage simply states that the business outlook sounds more positive than before.


Passage number 317.
MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, I share the concern over the changein the funds rate range in alternative B and I would prefer to see itat 8 to 14 percent. Or, if we are going to move it, I would move thetop range as a signal without an intent to use it. But it seems to methat is the wrong way to signal what the staff had in mind. Secondly,I'd remind us of the considerable literature that we have created thatis less than three months old on the shortfall and its desirabilityand so on and so forth and the feeling that we need to perform thistime if we are ever going to. I would favor alternative B orsomething even a little less with a chance to review it afterexperience. I do not feel that this [decision] is carved in graniteand can't be changed, but I'd set out on that course because certainlywe have underestimated more often than we have overestimated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily expresses the personal views and preferences of the speaker.


Passage number 318.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but without the passage you are referring to, I am unable to provide an answer. Please provide the relevant passage, and I'll be happy to help you.


Passage number 319.
MR. WALLICH. Well, we had the luxury, relatively speaking,of moving back on track at an even faster rate than we had decidedsome months ago. Now we face the question of whether we want toovershoot the track or take the wrench of getting back on it firmly.I think we ought to get on it firmly. The economy once more is givingus less unemployment and more inflation. It's painful to think thatwe are going to move to a mortgage rate of 13-1/2 or 14-1/2 percent,but in an economy with 10, 11, 12 percent inflation, we are going tohave to get adjusted to that, bad as it may seem. The economyprobably will adjust more easily to it than [we expect] in our gutreactions. So, I wouldn't be too worried about letting rates rise.Alternative B seems about right to me. I would like to see the fundsrate move a little higher toward the upper end, [though] notimmediately; we need to pause before it goes to 14 percent. And Iwould like to place more emphasis on M-1B. When M-1A and M-1B divergeas much as they do now, that indicates to me that the factors thatdifferentiate them have gained in importance. And one is in somedanger of losing sight of that if one thinks more in terms of M-1A,with its seemingly rather low growth values. If one thinks in termsof M-1B, one gets to fairly respectable rates of growth even underalternative B. So I would like to stress M-1B, at least in ourthinking if not in the directive, instead of M-1A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and thoughts, without referencing or challenging the opinions of others.


Passage number 320.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I can't analyze specific passages or answer questions about specific individuals like Governor Partee.


Passage number 321.
MR. PARTEE. The comments so far have been [for a course thatis] tougher than I would like to be. I did indicate that I thoughtthe recession had bottomed out; but, of course, it's incorrect to saythe recession is over. It just means that the downward movement isover and we are at the low end of the range. And we have seen apretty considerable increase in interest rates, one that could beginto threaten even a moderate recovery in housing. So it seems to me alittle early to blithely expect to see interest rates go materiallyhigher. If one thinks of these numbers for the aggregates as beingtargets--and I believe that's how we should think of them--and theactual comes out differently, then we should modify our operations.Interest rates go higher than the median here if the aggregates arestrong, and they go lower if the aggregates are weak relative to the-36-9/16/80targets. If one thinks of these as target numbers for the 3-monthperiod of October, November, and December and looks at the charts,alternative A isn't that bad. It's a little high, I think, mainlybecause I don't like to see M-1B running as high in the range as it isthere. So, I would like to suggest an alternative between "A" and"B." I would say, for example, 4 percent for M-1A, 6-1/2 percent forM-1B, and 8-1/2 percent for M2; the latter would be the same as thealternative B number and is more a hope than anything that we woulddo, actually.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 322.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just give me those numbers again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "just give me those numbers again" is a simple request for the person to repeat the numbers they previously mentioned.


Passage number 323.
MR. PARTEE. I said 4, 6-1/2, and 8-1/2 percent. I do thinkit's probably time to make a little movement in our broad funds raterange, and I would raise it a point on the bottom and top and make it9 to 15 percent. Chances are that even under the staff presumption itwill be at about 11 percent and probably drifting up, so 9 to 15percent is not so a bad as an outer limit kind of range. And I woulddo that on the presumption that these are targets. If the aggregatescome in stronger than this, we will move up in that range; and if theyare weaker, we will move down in that range from our current 10-3/4 to11 percent. So, that's what I would prefer. As far as borrowings areconcerned, I don't think we should use a figure as high as the onethat Peter mentioned as the base, $1.1 billion or something like that.But it probably needs to be quite a bit higher than we talked aboutlast time. I was thinking of something around $600 or $700 million asthe base we would start from on the borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their preference for a specific range of interest rates and a higher base amount for borrowing, but there is no indication of disagreement or debate with other parties.


Passage number 324.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 325.
MS. TEETERS. I really only find alternative A acceptable.As Chuck says, we are probably at the bottom of the recession. Totake the few indications of reviving growth and use that as an excuseto tighten monetary policy seems to me totally unacceptable. We willcreate a double-dip recession if we start taking interest rates up ashigh as we would get them in alternative B. Last fall, which is notvery far behind us, mortgage rates in the 14 to 14-1/2 percent areaalmost completely closed down the housing market. It wasn't anavailability problem; it was lack of demand. So, I would stronglysupport alternative A, and I would keep the funds rate approximatelywhere it is. This just doesn't seem to me the proper time to rock theboat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, MS. TEETERS, expresses her strong support for alternative A and her belief that raising interest rates would be unacceptable and could lead to a double-dip recession. She also mentions past evidence of high mortgage rates causing a lack of demand in the housing market.


Passage number 326.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 327.
MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, all of us are deeply concernedabout the inflation problem; I don't think any of us is more concernedthan the others about it. And we are trying to find a way to dealwith it. But we just have to recognize that if we turn this economyaround again and promote another decline in economic activity once thebottom has been reached, this country and the Congress may not havethe tolerance to let us continue. I don't think it will. Now, thefinancial conditions that would emerge under "B" are no longerconsistent with the staff forecast. The staff's forecast has mortgagerates reaching 13-1/4 percent by the middle of 1981 and [underalternative B] we are talking about a mortgage rate of 14 to 14-1/2percent in the fourth quarter. I just think we ought to move slowerthan this. We will be in real trouble if we push so hard that we-37-9/16/80choke off any possibility of recovery. I want a slow recovery; Ithink we all do. But I don't want one that is so slow that theeconomy ends up turning back down again. So, I'm with GovernorTeeters. I would support alternative A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, expresses disagreement with the proposed course of action (alternative B) and argues for a slower approach (alternative A) in order to avoid choking off the possibility of economic recovery.


Passage number 328.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage about Mr. Guffey because it only states his name without providing any additional information or context.


Passage number 329.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would opt foralternative B, but with the caveat that the [monetary growth] figureslisted in "B" would be the maximum we would accept; we'd acceptsomewhat slower growth during the period ahead, if indeed the economyor other factors would dictate that. On the other hand, I see noreason to raise the lower bound of the federal funds range from 8 to 9percent, as suggested under alternative B. I would leave the fundsrange at 8 to 14 percent. In part my feeling about this stems fromthe fact that M-1B is more acceptable to me as an aggregate to measurewhat we should be doing with monetary policy in the period ahead.Looking at the quarterly average for M-1B under "B," for example, weare still talking about a [quarterly average] rate of 7-3/4 percentfor the fourth quarter, and that is a fairly high rate of growth.Anything that would exceed that would be troublesome to me. Just torestate my position: I would take "B" but as the maximum; I wouldaccept somewhat lower growth if it did indeed come about. I'd leavethe federal funds rate range at 8 to 14 percent because I don't thinkit makes that much difference. If the rate gets up to around 14percent, we ought to be talking; we can do that in a telephone callrather than at this time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 330.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information about Mr. Balles or any topic of discussion to indicate contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 331.
MR. BALLES. I pretty much share the feelings expressed byGovernor Wallich and Messrs. Guffey and Morris in that "B" is themaximum that I would like to see us go. We are all torn between therisk on the one hand of choking off recovery with too great a rise ininterest rates and the danger on the other hand that we will make nosignificant progress on inflation. My first preference would be tolean against the inflation problem a bit harder by what I would call a"B-minus." I wouldn't be unhappy if the specifications of "B" werereduced somewhat to avoid overshooting for the year as a whole, whichI think we could come pretty close to given the range of error and howthings go. Dave Eastburn mentioned 4-1/4 percent for M-1B. I hadjotted down 4-1/2 percent for the August-to-December target. Thatwould give us growth of 5.6 percent in M-1B for the year as a whole,pretty close to the upper end of the range. I think somewhere between"B" and "B-minus" is the lesser of the evils, considering the twodifferent evils we have to avoid.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Balles, expresses a preference for a "B-minus" approach to address the inflation problem, while acknowledging the risk of choking off recovery with too high of interest rates. This contradicts the views expressed by Governor Wallich and Messrs. Guffey and Morris, who believe that "B" is the maximum they would support. Therefore, there is disagreement among the speakers about the appropriate course of action.


Passage number 332.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 333.
MR. ROOS. I would prefer Dave Eastburn's alternative C. Iwould be pleased with John Balles's alternative B-minus. I wouldbegrudgingly support alternative B if that's the best we can get. Iwouldn't go with anything more expansive than that. For those who areconcerned about higher mortgage rates, if we do anything that wouldimply the possibility of an explosion in the aggregates, I thinkmortgage lenders in response to heightened inflationary expectationswould increase their rates anyway. If we cut this by having a controlon aggregate expansion on the down side, if you will, I think we won't-38-9/16/80get any higher mortgage rates than we would going the other way. Andwe would be consistent with our stated determination to give toppriority to our concern about future inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While the passage presents different alternatives, there is no direct disagreement or contention between the speaker and others. The speaker expresses their preferences for different alternatives but does not argue against or challenge anyone else's viewpoint.


Passage number 334.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Baughman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is any contention or disagreement. It simply states "Mr. Baughman," which does not indicate any conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 335.
MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, I think the target in Mr.Eastburn's suggestion is probably the appropriate one. We are at astage where we should make a small move on the discount rate. I havethe impression that there is something of a last gasp with respect tothe credibility of the Federal Reserve out there in terms of comingwithin our targets by the fourth quarter. I realize that the rangesare such that we probably can't get all [of the aggregates] into them,but we have to get some of them in and I would suggest that, forwhatever reason, those be the important ones. I think GovernorGramley is probably right that if we don't come out about there, weare going to get more specific instructions [from Congress] on wherewe should come out and we may have less freedom of choice in thefuture.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's opinion and suggestion regarding the appropriate actions of the Federal Reserve. There is no evidence of conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 336.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did Governor Gramley say that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: This question cannot be answered as the passage was not provided. Please provide the passage for further analysis.


Passage number 337.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I think I said something a bit different.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley simply states that he believes he said something different without any opposing statements or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 338.
MR. BAUGHMAN. For different reasons.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any reasons or arguments that would suggest contention or disagreement between individuals.


Passage number 339.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think he had rather the opposite inmind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion about what someone else might have had in mind.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 340.
MR. BAUGHMAN. He had different reasons, but wound up in thesame place. I would like to note also that when we reported to ourboard of directors last week on the new Regulation A and what weanticipate the guidelines coming along with that will be, we got quitea strong negative reaction. They felt it was a significantretrenchment in our posture at the window. They have been engagedaggressively in the last couple of years in trying to build betterrapport between the institutions in the District and the FederalReserve and feel they have been making considerable progress. Theyare persuaded that the institutions will see this as a more stringentface at the discount window and that they will have lost credibilitywith what they view as their clients in that respect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Baughman, and the board of directors have different opinions on the new Regulation A and its impact on their relationship with institutions in the District and the Federal Reserve. The board of directors sees it as a significant retrenchment and believes they will lose credibility with their clients, while Mr. Baughman may have different reasons and believes they wound up in the same place.


Passage number 341.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Schultz.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. However, since no specific passage has been provided, it is not possible to give an accurate assessment.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 342.
MR. SCHULTZ. I'm delighted to hear that there's so muchcommitment to our targets and that we're going to have the strength tomake sure we get growth within them. I'm a little surprised to hearso many people feel that the fourth quarter is going to be so strong.I would remind you that interest rates have already gotten to thepoint where they are having some impact on economic activity. Mr.Kichline, for instance, has housing starts for August at 1.4 millionbut then dropping to 1.2 million in September. And that's just withmortgage rates where they are right now. I don't know how sensitiveautomobiles are going to be to interest rates, but it seems to me thatwe don't have very much chance of a big strong recovery in the fourthquarter, yet that is what I hear influencing the [policy preferences]around the table. I'm afraid that alternative B or something evenmore conservative than that risks putting us in a more difficult-39-9/16/80position than a path that is a bit more expansive. I don't want to goto alternative A; that may put us in some danger of going out of therange on the upper end. But, you know, New York may be right one ofthese days. I'm afraid that if we go to "B" or something even moreconservative than that, we may get ourselves in the difficult positionof having to be too expansive in the fourth quarter. And we will getthis stop-start pattern again. With these forecasts being all overthe lot, I think we're much better off somewhere between "A" and "B,"which gives us much more flexibility. And I really think it iscrucial that we retain as much flexibility as we can. So that makesmore sense to me than anything else. That will give us an opportunityto look at September and will give us the kind of flexibility we needto get where we want to go through the end of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses surprise at the optimism of others regarding the strength of the fourth quarter and suggests that a more conservative approach may be necessary.


Passage number 343.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage "Governor Rice" without further context.


Passage number 344.
MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I favor alternative A for thereasons set forth by Governors Teeters, Gramley, Partee, and Schultz.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they favor alternative A and provide reasons given by other individuals who also support it.


Passage number 345.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. End of statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage, as it is not even a complete sentence.


Passage number 346.
MR. RICE. End of statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is not expressing any form of contention or disagreement. It simply indicates the end of a statement made by Mr. Rice.


Passage number 347.
MR. PARTEE. I didn't support alternative A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "I didn't support alternative A" shows Mr. Partee's position or personal opinion on the matter, but it does not indicate any contention or disagreement with others.


Passage number 348.
MR. RICE. I know you didn't, but you gave reasons forfavoring alternative A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is acknowledging that the person did not favor alternative A, but they still gave reasons for it.


Passage number 349.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is insufficient information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 350.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'll try to be almost as brief asGovernor Rice. I think we can best hit the balance we're looking for,in terms of both the credibility of policy as perceived by the marketsand the country on one hand and our concern about aborting the modestrecovery, by an intermediate solution. I'd like to suggest somethingthat isn't too different from what Chuck Partee suggested. I think weought to have borrowing of $700 million, 4-1/4 percent for M-1A, 6-1/2percent for M-1B, and 8-3/4 percent for M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting their suggested solution, which is similar to what Chuck Partee suggested.


Passage number 351.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What was that last one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage asks a question and does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 352.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. 8-3/4 percent. Even though I'mindifferent on whether we have 8 to 14 percent on the fed funds rangeor the extended one, I think it's unnecessary to extend it, and we maybe giving some policy signals unintentionally. I don't really seemuch advantage [to changing it]. On balance, I would say we ought tostick with 8 to 14 percent.Let me say a word about my feelings on credibility. I'msorry to take longer than I intended but [let me say a few] moresentences on this. When I talk to people in the markets, they are notquestioning our credibility or the steadiness of our policy at themoment. There is a vast underlying skepticism that we will stick tothis policy later in the year or early next year, but at the moment Ithink they are impressed. They have seen a very substantial rise ininterest rates as the aggregates have moved up and they have not seenus try to stop that. So I don't think we have a credibility problemat the moment. We have the constant suspicion that we will buckle at-40-9/16/80some point but [market participants] don't feel we have done so or arein the process of doing so at this point. If the projections turn outto be anywhere close to accurate and we take these intermediatetargets and and the borrowing level we've talked about, I think wewill end up with interest rates somewhere in this range in the shortrun. And if necessary, we can tighten up later in the year when thepressure comes on. So that is what I would [do].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing their own thoughts and opinions on the topic.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 353.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's everybody, isn't it. I confess Iam a little struck by what seems to me a contrast in some of thepolicy judgments, or aggregates judgments, and what I took to be thetone of the earlier discussion, which was highly restrained in termsof a forecast of ebullience in the business world and somewhatskeptical of full faith in short-term movements in the aggregates. Iapproach this with a feeling of some concern about [how we will] comeout of this meeting right at this stage. We've had a very highAugust, to be sure. We've had several months that were very high, butAugust was particularly high. There is some hope that September willshow a leveling and a possible turn in the business situation. Ithink it's probably [going to be] a real turn, if a real turnencompasses the idea of a W, with a rather weak middle of the W.I was somewhat concerned that we would come out and say, ineffect, that we're throwing down the gauntlet and that we would makedamn sure that we would meet our targets in a very acceptable way andtake all the risks on the side of interest rates and the economy. Ithink that's a real implication of "B." I don't think we can inhonesty adopt "B" without saying: Okay, beginning tomorrow orwhenever we will go out and in effect force interest rates up. And Iwould have great reservations about that kind of approach. On theother hand, I don't feel quite comfortable with "A," given the waythose charts look, particularly the M-1B chart, which a number ofother people have mentioned. I think Governor Partee's comments arecorrect. We look at these as targets--and God knows what's going tohappen--but we haven't got the short-term control mechanism thatguarantees we're going to meet the targets. That much has beendemonstrated by recent experience. But we do bias the [decision in aneffort to meet the targets]. I would pick up in Governor Partee'scomment, which has been seconded by the comments of a number ofothers, that the best thing we can do is to aim someplace in between"A" and "B." I think that's consistent with not taking much of anovert step at the moment. We'll see how the money supply figuresdevelop. That may be as early as when we get a revision in thepreliminary [M-1A] figure. But certainly we keep getting surprised bythese [numbers] in one direction or another as time passes. I don'tknow what projection is right. But if the number comes out high, Ithink any of these alternatives imply that [market conditions] couldget tighter and borrowing would go up. If it comes out as favorablyas New York suggests, I suppose it would go the other way. If itcomes out as favorably as New York suggests, it probably means aweaker business picture than many people have in mind and we might geta rally in the markets. In those circumstances, with that kind ofaggregates picture, I'm not sure that would be undesirable.So, consistent with what a number of people have said, butcertainly not everybody, I would play it neutrally at the moment.That's what we did last time. It lasted for about two days until themoney supply figure came out high [unintelligible]. I hope another $9-41-9/16/80billion increase doesn't come along and throw us off course quite soquickly as last time. But [ongoing developments] are what we would beguided by to a considerable extent. I don't know what neutralitymeans precisely, given this borrowing discussion we just had. Ibelieve you've assumed $800 million with alternative B, Steve, andthat seems to me low if we really wanted to get to alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses concern and disagreement with the policy judgments and forecasts presented in the earlier discussion. They express reservations about adopting "B" without forcing interest rates up and also express discomfort with "A" given the current economic conditions. They suggest aiming for a middle ground between the two alternatives.


Passage number 354.
MR. WINN(.). Don't we have to have a discount rateassumption, though, to make that borrowing assumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and seeking clarification.


Passage number 355.
MR. AXILROD. We assume the present discount rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement of assumption without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 356.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, at the moment, we assume the presentdiscount rate. That doesn't say the discount rate wouldn't go up ifthe funds rate moved significantly higher. Presumably, we wouldmaintain some relationship [between them]. I'm not saying the presentrelationship is all that bad--I don't think it is all that bad--but if[the spread] got substantially wider, the discount rate question wouldcertainly arise. As I say, I don't quite know what neutrality is. Ithink a figure as high as $800 million or perhaps $700 to $800 millionor someplace in that area might be consistent with neutrality in theshort run. In that way I am picking up something Steve associatedmore with "B" than with "A." But in terms of the targets, thisimplies amid all the uncertainty a change in trend, and if there'sanything to the longer range interest rate forecast, I'm not sure wewant to go quite that far. By the longer range interest rate forecastI'm talking about the quarter. That's not a very long range, but it'sbeyond the next two weeks. I don't know what it really does imply; wehave these different estimates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage is discussing various possibilities and uncertainties regarding the discount rate and its relationship to the funds rate. There is no clear contention or disagreement among the statements made.


Passage number 357.
MR. AXILROD. I might add, Mr. Chairman, that when we werewriting "B," which was Friday afternoon, we were not aware that bankswere going to be quite as willing borrowers as they were.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact about the timing of the writing and the lack of awareness about banks' willingness to borrow.


Passage number 358.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm obviously affected by the mostrecent evidence, which may be false evidence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating that they are influenced by the most recent evidence, but they acknowledge that it could potentially be false.


Passage number 359.
 But it sounds to me asthough right at the moment anyway a little higher level of borrowing--MR. PARTEE. It's very temporary, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about a temporary increase in borrowing.


Passage number 360.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there's some evidence for it. Idon't think it's just a phenomenon this week. What are thoseborrowing figures in the recent week. You just had them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for information and stating their belief that there is evidence supporting a certain phenomenon.


Passage number 361.
MR. SCHULTZ. But they are going to be distorted by LaborDay, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by Mr. Schultz is a personal opinion about the potential distortion of something due to Labor Day. It does not indicate any opposing views or contradictory statements.


Passage number 362.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Mr. Axilrod without providing any information or context about him. As a result, it is impossible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 363.
 The borrowing has run--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was over $1 billion in the week ofSeptember 3 and I don't remember what the funds rate was then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is providing information about the borrowing amount and the funds rate during a specific week. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this statement.


Passage number 364.
MR. AXILROD. It was 10-1/2 percent and then it dropped to10.22 percent and borrowing to around $600 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating factual information about the interest rate and borrowing amount without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 365.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My impression is that, more often thannot, these borrowing figures have been higher than what we normallyassociate with the equivalent federal funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating an impression or observation, rather than presenting a point of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 366.
-42-9/16/80MR. AXILROD. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is stating a factual statement, mentioning someone's name and confirming their correctness.


Passage number 367.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But obviously there's an area ofuncertainty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "But obviously there's an area of uncertainty" suggests that there is a recognition or agreement about the existence of uncertainty.


Passage number 368.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Mr. Chairman, may I make asuggestion, building on what you've said. If we go for what you calla "neutral" or what some of us have called an "intermediate" solution,we might take a leaf out of what we did earlier in the year but on theopposite side. We might say that if the aggregates come in somewhatlower than the intermediate targets, we won't adjust the reserve pathaccordingly but would accept that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It presents a suggestion to build on previous actions.


Passage number 369.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [We wouldn't adjust the path] quite soquickly anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 370.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. [Yes, not] quite so quickly. Wewould accept them. So if the opportunity offers itself, we'd err onthe side of not pushing in reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 371.
MR. WALLICH. Do you mean that we should then reduce thenonborrowed reserve path or not reduce it. If the aggregates areweak, I think the analogue to our earlier action would be to reducethe path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 372.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's right.SPEAKER(.). That's what he said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply affirming and agreeing with what someone else said.


Passage number 373.
MR. PARTEE. Without limit. That's rather wide open; itcould mean zero, -5, -10.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a wide range of possibilities without expressing any disagreement or opposition.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 374.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No, it brings us out to somewhere[unintelligible] than if in that situation we had put in "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The statement "No, it brings us out to somewhere" suggests a contradiction to the idea that inserting "B" would have resulted in a different outcome. The speaker is possibly asserting that using "B" would not have brought them to a different place or situation than they are currently in.


Passage number 375.
"MR. MORRIS. We would be tolerant of errors on the lowerside.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply states that "We would be tolerant of errors on the lowerside." There is no opposing viewpoint or conflict expressed.


Passage number 376.
 That's--MR. PARTEE. Remember, we did say last October and throughoutthe next several meetings--as I recall, the number was 4-1/2 percent--"or somewhat less." But it was only somewhat less; if it weresignificantly less, we would move against it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement clarifying a previous agreement made by Mr. Partee.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 377.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we obviously have some difference ofopinion and I am proposing that we come out someplace in between.These numbers do not lend themselves to easy averaging without comingup with rather small fractions. And when we get down to the lastquarter, I think it becomes fairly irrelevant. We have heard twoaveraging proposals. Mr. Solomon was a 1/4 percentage point higherthan Mr. Partee on two of the numbers. Have we ever used a numberwith 1/4 for a period this long.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions a difference of opinion and suggests finding a compromise between the two sides. Additionally, the speaker questions the relevance of the last quarter and brings up the discrepancy between Mr. Solomon and Mr. Partee's averaging proposals.


Passage number 378.
MR. ALTMANN. I don't recall that we have; I'm not sure.Steve might know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Altmann is unsure and suggests that Steve might have the necessary information.


Passage number 379.
MR. GRAMLEY. May I ask, Mr. Chairman, to what specificperiods Mr. Solomon's and Governor Partee's numbers refer. I wasn'tquite sure. August-December.-43-9/16/80SPEAKER(.). August-December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Gramley is simply seeking clarification about the specific periods that Mr. Solomon's and Governor Partee's numbers refer to.


Passage number 380.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we're all talking about theAugust-December figures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that "we're all talking about the August-December figures," indicating that there is agreement among the speakers.


Passage number 381.
MR. PARTEE. No, mine is September-December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement made by Mr. Partee about the timing of something, without any disagreement or contention evident.


Passage number 382.
MR. GRAMLEY. No, Governor Partee says his was September toDecember.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 383.
MR. PARTEE. The base month is August and the last month isDecember.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states the information about the base month and the last month.


Passage number 384.
 That means we're talking about--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I assume we're all talking about the same[period as in the Bluebook alternatives], which is August to December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making an assumption that everyone is referring to the same period (August to December).


Passage number 385.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think a very good case can bemade for using quarterly averages for two reasons. One is that ourtargets are set in terms of quarterly averages, and the second is thatthe figures look a little better in a sense. If, for example, we wereto hit the 5-1/4 percent midpoint that we originally had, it wouldrequire a rate of growth in M-1B of only 3 percent between August andDecember. But it would require 4.9 percent between the third and thefourth quarters because August was very high. If we take the 5-3/4percent midpoint that we talked about earlier, that would involve 4.8percent growth between August and December but 6.8 percent between thethird and the fourth quarters. That is, what I'm doing is assuming asteady progression from August to December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 386.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure what the significance of thatis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any points of contention or disagreement. It simply expresses uncertainty about the significance of something.


Passage number 387.
MR. BLACK. Well, we set our targets in quarterly figures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about setting targets in quarterly figures.


Passage number 388.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" is simply a designation or title of a person and does not indicate any conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 389.
 We set the annual targets that way, but--MR. BLACK. Yes, but it's difficult to know what to do withAugust to December because we don't know what the configuration of thelast quarter will be. And the figures I use just assume an equalprogression.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This statement is just an explanation of the difficulty in setting annual targets due to uncertainty about the configuration of the last quarter. Both speakers seem to agree on this point.


Passage number 390.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll let Mr. Axilrod comment. But itseems to me a lot more convenient operationally to talk about amonthly target than a quarterly target that is so much affected bywhat has already happened.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 391.
MR. AXILROD. We tried to blend this in some sense by havingthe operational target go from month to month, but trying to get it sothat it results in the quarter-over-quarter growth that the Committeewants.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a statement made by Mr. Axilrod about trying to blend operational targets with the committee's desired quarter-over-quarter growth.


Passage number 392.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Obviously, one can express it either way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states that there are different ways to express something.


Passage number 393.
MR. AXILROD. In general I have a little trouble with thequarterly average because if one took that quarterly average extremelyseriously, whatever we put in there for the fourth quarter implies onereal wrench to hit it. If we go off [target] very early in thequarter--if the pattern month to month varies from what we have in-44-9/16/80here--in the last part of the quarter we really have to wrench itaround to hit the target. It is true that the quarter over quarterwill vary, but it makes for a much more orderly procedure in relationto markets to do it that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing their own personal difficulty with the quarterly average and proposing an alternative method. There is no contention or disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 394.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And we're stuck, unless we make an extremeassumption, with the fact that the quarterly jump is going to befairly sizable because August went way up. Even if growth is levelfrom now on, we'd get an increase of some magnitude in the fourthquarter. That's a fact of life. But if we were concentrating solelyon quarterly figures--while mechanically we can rationalize one withthe other--I think we'd tend to get more abrupt changes than we reallycontemplated in setting the target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing the potential increase in the fourth quarter due to significant growth in August. There is no disagreement or contention presented.


Passage number 395.
MR. BLACK. But that assumes we don't do anything about abulge that appeared early. Then we'd have to wrench it later. But ifwe take action promptly, we don't necessarily have to wrench it later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Black, is simply stating a cause-and-effect scenario. He suggests that if they don't address the bulge early on, they will have to deal with the consequences later by wrenching it. However, if they take prompt action, they may be able to avoid the need for wrenching later.


Passage number 396.
MS. TEETERS. But we have taken action. After all, billrates are up quite a bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. MS. TEETERS states that there has been action taken and that billrates have increased. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this statement.


Passage number 397.
MR. BLACK. I'm talking about in the future, Nancy. Mypersonal feeling is that we're not going to have as much upwardpressure on rates as people think because I don't see that muchstrength in the economy. But that's a guess. We really can'tforecast that with any degree of certainty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing a personal opinion and acknowledging the uncertainty of making forecasts about the future state of interest rates.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 398.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if we took these--if I may so termthem--more hawkish views and if we were honest with ourselves giventhe range of probabilities, we would be saying that we've got to goout this week and take a rather overt step to tighten up the market.That may not be necessary, for sure. That's what we don't know. Now,[doing] that may turn out to be wrong if the economy is very weak, andwe might have to retrace the step. And that's one of the things thatI think we would be better advised to avoid.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges the possibility of taking a more hawkish approach but also suggests that it may not be necessary. They also mention the potential for being wrong if the economy is weak and the need to avoid retracing steps. Overall, there is a back-and-forth between different perspectives and potential actions.


Passage number 399.
MR. GUFFEY. There's an alternative for that, Mr. Chairman,is there not. [We could adopt] the alternative B [growth] rates anddrop the borrowing assumption from $800 million to perhaps $700million, thus increasing the nonborrowed reserves to make up thetotal. That would not push up interest rates early in the periodnecessarily. It would give us a bit of time to view what is happeningto the aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. Mr. Guffey is suggesting an alternative approach to managing the economy without conflicting with any previous statements or opinions mentioned in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 400.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I may just be talking about a gut feeling,but I tend to share the view that Steve first expressed: That ifthere's a risk here, it's going to be on the high side rather than thelow side. I'm just going by recent experience; that's the way it hasbeen. That could well be wrong. I have no problem with starting outwith $700 million or something in that range. But I do have a feelingthat starting out in that range and putting a lot of weight on [growthrates] as low as those in "B" may delay for two weeks what you'retalking about. I think the odds are that at some point we're going tohave to put [interest rates] up quite overtly and strongly. We mayhave to do that even if we went with "A." If we went to an "A+" wemight have to do it. I can't guarantee [anything]. All I'm saying isthat we have a stronger case if [growth in the aggregates] did gethigh. Obviously the higher the monetary numbers are, the more-45-9/16/80protection one has in a sense--the more explanation one has for whythe market is reacting the way it has and why we have reacted the waywe have under those circumstances. I don't think we have much[protection] if we're demanding that September be practically flat,which is what the staff is projecting. And I hope that's what it is.But we're also demanding that October and November be [almost] thoughnot quite as flat. Obviously there's an arithmetic difference betweenthese, and the way one falls in the spectrum is what we're talkingabout. But I would want a little more justification, in terms of theaggregates, for the kind of interest rates some of you are talkingabout before I saw those interest rates in the market. We are talkingabout an M-1B that I quite agree is a little higher than I'd like tosee ideally. Just rationalizing, M-1A doesn't look so bad under thesealternatives. M2 we think is going to be a little high. There's notmuch we can do about it. M3 is a little higher than I'd like to seeit. But just weighing the risks, and against the background of thebusiness [conditions] discussion that we had, I would like to have alittle more evidence that the aggregates are fully running in excessof reasonable targets before very overt moves are forced. That's whatit comes down to. Mr. Corrigan, did you comment. You didn't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses their gut feeling that the risk is on the high side, while Steve expressed a different view. The speaker also expresses a disagreement with the staff's projections for the aggregates and the interest rates being discussed.


Passage number 401.
MR. CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage mentioning "MR. CORRIGAN."


Passage number 402.
 Since I got penalized for my double-dippingbefore--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought I counted and we had everybody.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply provides a statement about the speaker's previous experience and their assumption about everyone being present.


Passage number 403.
MR. PARTEE. Well, you thought he'd used up his turn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee is simply sharing his opinion or a statement without any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 404.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did I miss anybody else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is a simple question seeking confirmation or clarification.


Passage number 405.
MR. BLACK. I didn't say anything, Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement indicated in the passage. Mr. Black states that he didn't say anything, which does not imply any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 406.
 Chairman, but I will--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm sorry. I deprived all our double-dippers. I added up wrong. There are more people here than Ithought.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker realizes their mistake and apologizes for it, acknowledging that there are more people present than they originally thought.


Passage number 407.
MR. CORRIGAN. Well, I'm not sure I can add anything much towhat has already been said. This is a nasty dilemma. One point thathasn't been mentioned, which does loom somewhat large in my mind, isthe fact that how we end up in 1980 is going to have a bearing on howwe start 1981 as well. And that at least has led me in the directionof "B," but that's not a very powerful feeling at this time because ofthe uncertainty. The other thing that is bothering me about thisquarter is that it's a quarter in which we are probably going to haveeven more problems with numbers because of all the news reporters andeverything else. We could be a bit more in the blind than we usuallyare. I just wonder [about that] in terms of the interval we'relooking at now, if we did something like Mr. Solomon has suggested inthe very near term. If we do get continued rapid [monetary] growth inSeptember and early October, I think the credibility issue will becomevery real. Market rates are going to move up anyway, and we'll havethe worst of both worlds. Maybe there is a middle ground: Perhaps inthe context of something like Mr. Solomon has suggested, the quarteras a whole could be looked at again at the next meeting and we couldoperate more with an eye on the next month until we see where we are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 408.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's what we've been doing the lastfew months, in effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states that a certain action has been taken in the past few months, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 409.
-46-9/16/80MR. CORRIGAN. I think that's right. But as I would look atit, I tend to think we're at or near a pretty critical crossroads.All I'm suggesting, within the framework of some sort of compromise,is that maybe we can get September under our belt and keep a littlemore open position on the fourth quarter until we see where Septembercomes out. That's because if September [growth] really is modest, Idon't think we're necessarily talking about the kinds of pressuresthat people are so concerned about and that I'd be concerned about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and suggesting a compromise in order to assess the situation better.


Passage number 410.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information or statements that suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 411.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I really made my main point. Icome out around "C," [which some speakers have proposed]. The mainpoint I want to get across is that there's a lot of repetition inthese figures. And if we say we want to hit that midpoint of 5-1/4percent, for August to December that translates to about 3 percent butfor the third quarter to the fourth quarter it's a great deal morethan that, about 4.9 percent. That doesn't sound so bad.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is simply stating his main point and providing some numerical analysis.


Passage number 412.
MR. PARTEE. You're talking about M-1B, Bob.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 413.
MR. BLACK. Yes, M-1B. And if we hit the 5-3/4 percentmidpoint, that would give us a quarterly growth rate of 6.8 percent,which sounds fairly high. But that translates into growth from Augustto December of 4.8 percent if you assume equal [monthly] increments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is simply stating a fact and presenting the data.


Passage number 414.
MR. PARTEE. All you're saying is that August is a big month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is simply making a statement about the month of August without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 415.
MR. BLACK. That's what it amounts to. And I'm saying thatwithout much growth, because August was so high, we can get a goodquarterly growth rate with figures that look scandalously low on anAugust-to-December basis. That's the point I wanted to get across.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Black regarding the potential for a good quarterly growth rate despite low figures from August to December.


Passage number 416.
MR. PARTEE. You still have a [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement made by Mr. Partee seems to be incomplete or muddled, but there is no clear opposing viewpoint or conflicting ideas being presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 417.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's right, but you're playingwith arithmetic in a sense. The question is what we want to do in asubstantive sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, the speaker acknowledges that the other person's statement may be correct but expresses a difference in approach or perspective. This suggests a disagreement or contention.


Passage number 418.
MR. BLACK. The other point I was going to make is aboutcredibility. If [monetary growth] comes in as high as a lot of peopleexpect, I think we're going to have a pretty serious problem. We mayhave not only high inflation but high interest rates as well. Whereasif we [hit our target], I think we're going to see some effects oninflation and we may end up just with higher rates, without as muchinflation. But this route is going to give us both.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage states that if monetary growth comes in high, there may be a serious problem with high inflation and high interest rates. On the other hand, if the target is hit, there may be some effects on inflation and higher interest rates, but not as much inflation. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 419.
MS. TEETERS. How would you formulate this to make it aneutral policy until the next FOMC meeting. What numbers would fit aneutral policy for the next month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage as it simply asks a question and requests numerical information.


Passage number 420.
MR. MORRIS. What do you mean by neutral policy--no change ininterest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a question asking for clarification about the meaning of "neutral policy" and "no change in interest rates".


Passage number 421.
MS. TEETERS. No, I'm just saying that I would like to seethings rather calm until we have a better idea of what is going on outthere. I agree with Jerry: Things are too uncertain to try to set apolicy at this point that's going to carry us through December. So,-47-9/16/80if we could find some way to wait a month without rocking the boat inany way and get a little better idea as to whether some of these[developments] are real or transitory, that would be the wise thing todo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. Teeters is expressing agreement with Jerry's viewpoint and suggesting that it would be wise to wait and gather more information before making any decisions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 422.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I sort of disagree with Jerry. We'retrying to set a target path that we think is acceptable. If thenumbers come in high, then markets are going to have to tighten; andif the numbers come in low, markets are going to have to ease. It's atarget concept rather than a projection concept that we should thinkabout when we're specifying these. So I don't see why we can't state,as suggested in the Bluebook, the target growth rate we would like tosee for the last four months of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee disagrees with Jerry's suggestion and offers a different perspective on how to approach specifying the target growth rate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 423.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My comment about neutrality relates to howwe come out of this meeting right now, not for the next month. Idon't think we can ignore what is happening to the money supply forthe next month. As I said, we take a chance whatever target we set.If next week's figure comes out to something like a reduction of $1-1/2 billion it doesn't apply to anything we have said here. But if itcomes out significantly different from that, we're already beginningto diverge under any of these targets. I guess one can argue it anyway. My particular problem is that I think ["B"] is a bit unrealistic--that may not be a good word because anything can happen, includingthe New York projections, in which case it wouldn't be at allunrealistic--taking the broad range of probabilities. We probablywouldn't be neutral coming out of this meeting with alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses doubt and skepticism about the "B" alternative, suggesting that it may be unrealistic. They also mention that anything can happen, including the New York projections, which could make alternative B more realistic. So, there is contention regarding the feasibility and practicality of alternative B.


Passage number 424.
MR. WALLICH. Neutrality has many meanings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that neutrality has many meanings without expressing any disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 425.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I talked abut neutrality with a veryparticular meaning: What is the level of borrowings that we start offthis track on, recognizing that it will change if within the weekthese figures begin deviating substantially from whatever target weset.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 426.
MR. WALLICH. That's really the old funds rate technique inan aggregates version. That is, we immediately allow the funds rateto respond to any change in the aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich is simply explaining the concept of the funds rate technique in an aggregates version.


Passage number 427.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We would be allowing the borrowings torespond, that's right. I don't know any way of running this techniquewithout having a--. Well, let me put the question to you. Do we havea conclusion for somewhere between "A" and "B". I will leave forlater exactly how to compromise those numbers. Does a borrowing levelof $750 million, just to take the midpoint of some that have beenmentioned, and something in between "A" and "B" attract a spectrum ofsupport.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the idea of allowing borrowings to respond and finding a compromise between two numbers without any opposing opinions or conflicting ideas being presented.


Passage number 428.
MR. ALTMANN. People could raise their hands.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that people have the option to raise their hands.


Passage number 429.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given response does not indicate contention or disagreement. It simply acknowledges the uncertainty or lack of definite knowledge regarding the topic being discussed.


Passage number 430.
MR. GRAMLEY. What aggregates would you associate with this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about the topic of aggregates.


Passage number 431.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Between "A" and "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without a specific passage or context regarding "A" and "B" in the question, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement between them.


Passage number 432.
"-48-9/16/80MR. GRAMLEY. If you start out with "A" and then go halfwaybetween that and "B," that's $700 million on borrowing. To go alittle further to $750 million--another $50 million in borrowing--means it's so close to "B" that I am getting very uncomfortable. I'mnot at all sure that we might not end up with 14-1/2 percent mortgageinterest rates on average in the fourth quarter. And that just seemsto me to be too big a wrench.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement expressing uncertainty and personal discomfort with the possibility of high mortgage interest rates. There is no opposing view or argument presented.


Passage number 433.
MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me on the basis of theopinions that were expressed that the compromise would really be[halfway] between the [midpoints] of "A" and "B" and the midpointbetween "B" and [the proposed] "C." A lot of people expressed anopinion of wanting to go further than "B." That would bring us up to"B" at the very best in terms of the compromise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the idea of a compromise based on different opinions expressed.


Passage number 434.
MR. PARTEE. I think you have to isolate the voting members.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  There is no contention or disagreement. This statement is simply stating the opinion that voting members need to be isolated.


Passage number 435.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would like an expression of generalopinion on a mid-course between "A" and "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage is simply requesting a general opinion on a potential middle ground between options "A" and "B." There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage itself.


Passage number 436.
"VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Everybody or the voting members.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions "everybody" or "the voting members" without any indication of disagreement.


Passage number 437.
MR. PARTEE. I agree with Lyle's comment, by the way, on theborrowing level. I think $750 million is too high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, MR. PARTEE expresses agreement with Lyle's comment on the borrowing level being too high.


Passage number 438.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The voting members. I said someplacebetween $700 and $800 million. I don't feel I can judge that with anyaccuracy. I'm not so sure that $800 million couldn't turn out ex postto imply a little easing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their uncertainty and lack of confidence in providing an accurate judgment or prediction.


Passage number 439.
MR. GRAMLEY. I'd agree with you if we could just get thesense of it and split it right down the middle between "A" and "B,"recognizing that we really don't know whether the recent level ofadjustment borrowing has been unusually high and will stay high orwhether it will come back down again. If we had that general sensewithout [being precise]--if we took a range for adjustment borrowingof $600 to $800 million and gave the Desk and Steve Axilrod someflexibility to deal with it depending on what actually happens--Icould live with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing agreement and suggesting a compromise regarding adjustment borrowing. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 440.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Do you want that much flexibility,Peter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking Peter if he wants a lot of flexibility.


Passage number 441.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, it's an important part of theCommittee decision. I wish we were better able to give you guidanceto know what the relationship of the funds rate and borrowings is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Rather, it demonstrates a wish for better communication or clarity.


Passage number 442.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You referred to this borrowing levelbefore, Steve. Do you just want to repeat what you said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking Steve if he wants to reiterate or restate his previous statement about borrowing levels.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 443.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I was assuming that if theCommittee wanted to start off in a posture where in some rough sensethe pressures in the money market weren't terribly different from whatthey have been in the last week or two, I would think an average levelof borrowing of $600 million is way too low. An average level of $800million might just about be consistent, given the fact that borrowinghas been running high in the last week, with not much change in moneymarket pressures. If my interpretation of what the Committee means by-49-9/16/80neutrality to begin with is right--that is, basically money marketpressures about as they have been, taking everything relevant to thatinto account at least initially--then I would think a number between$700 and $800 million would about do it. We would technically writedown $750 million in the path, but if borrowing were coming in high,we'd adjust the nonborrowed reserves down a bit and vice versa. Wecould just as well do that with a $600 to $800 million range. We'dwrite down $700 million and if $750 million looked right, then we'dlower nonborrowed reserves in the course of the week. If $650 millionlooked right to give a money market sense as it has been, we'd raisethem a bit. We can operate with that kind of flexibility, and thatmay be best given this developing uncertainty about what particularlevel of borrowing is "right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, is suggesting a range of borrowing levels between $700 million and $800 million, while also mentioning the possibility of adjusting nonborrowed reserves based on market conditions. This suggests a disagreement or differing opinions on what the "right" level of borrowing should be.


Passage number 444.
"MR. GUFFEY. Are you making those comments based upon aweekly horizon or for the five weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a question asking for clarification about the basis of the comments being made.


Passage number 445.
MR. AXILROD. My memory going back three or four weeks ago--well, I wasn't here but from the discussion I heard--three weeks agothere was an expectation of a rather high funds rate, say, around 11percent, with borrowing around $400 or $500 million. That didn'tdevelop. Banks were much more willing to borrow and the funds rateonly got up to 10-1/2 percent. We expected this week a funds ratebetween 10-1/2 and 11 percent, closer to 11, with borrowing around$750 million. Well, banks very promptly went in and borrowed $1.7billion when the funds rate got to around 10-7/8 percent, againindicating a greater willingness to borrow. So, therefore, we shouldprovide less nonborrowed reserves. I think there is some uncertainty.If I had known the level of borrowing on Friday when we wrote theBluebook, I would have raised both the $600 and the $800 million toget to the point where "A" was a tick toward ease and "B" a ticktoward tightening to start with.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the past expectations and borrowing rates of banks.


Passage number 446.
MR. GUFFEY. My question is: If the Committee decided on a"B" or "B+" target for the aggregates, would you construct the pathbased upon a borrowing assumption of $750 million for five weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 447.
MR. AXILROD. If the Committee decided on "B," no. I wouldassume that borrowing consistent with this discussion of somewherebetween $600 and $800 million is neutrality. I would assume [for "B"]it would be somewhat above $800 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by Mr. Axilrod is a statement of assumption based on a hypothetical situation. He is discussing different scenarios and their potential borrowing amounts, without any conflicting views being presented.


Passage number 448.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's a little confusion, I think,because Steve, if I understand it correctly, has changed his mind fromthe time that the Bluebook was written, given the extra week'sexperience of relatively heavy borrowing with relatively less pressureon the money market than would have been expected.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the speaker's belief that Steve has changed his mind based on new experience.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 449.
MR. AXILROD. With uncertainty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is uncertainty in the passage. This is indicated by the use of the word "uncertainty" itself, which suggests that there is a lack of clarity or agreement on a certain topic.


Passage number 450.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So I'm taking that into account in my owncomments. Let me put the issue to you again in a general way. We'dhave to focus on the borrowing level a bit more precisely and we'dhave to resolve the fractions even if this proposal for roughlyhalfway between "A" and "B" commanded enough general support. But theborrowing level is biased a bit higher than the Bluebook says isconsistent with those alternatives, based upon the comments that werejust made.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is merely discussing the need to focus on the borrowing level and resolve fractions based on previous comments.


Passage number 451.
-50-9/16/80MR. SCHULTZ. You want raised hands on that issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Schultz suggesting a method for addressing a particular issue.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 452.
MR. PARTEE. You want preferences or can live with.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee asks whether the person wants preferences or can live with something, implying that there are different options and the speaker may have a different preference or standpoint.


Passage number 453.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess "can live with.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "can live with" shows acceptance or agreement, indicating no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 454.
"MR. PARTEE. That was a wise decision, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "That was a wise decision, I think" indicates agreement and does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 455.
MR. ALTMANN. Seven, not counting yourself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only offers a statement of fact without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 456.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's pretty clear, without goingthrough any other exercise, that we're not going to get a largerfeeling for any other number. Let me just bear in a little moreclosely. Halfway between is literally 4-1/4, 6-5/8, and 8-3/4 percenton the aggregates, right. The main difficulty with that, as I see it,is the 5/8ths. It looks like a half-size, as they say.SPEAKER(.). You're an awfully small person.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and observations without opposition from anyone else.


Passage number 457.
MR. AXILROD(.). Mr. Chairman, the staff [unintelligible] ifyou adopted 6-1/2 percent [for M-1B].SPEAKER(.). And 8-3/4 percent at least [for M2].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply making a statement in support of adopting certain percentages for M-1B and M2, without any opposing view or disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 458.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we literally wanted to avoid quarters--it would lean a bit toward "B"--I'd take Governor Partee's numbers of4, 6-1/2, and 8-1/2 percent. Let me say a word about the funds raterange. We're right in the middle of [the current range]. As TonySolomon and some others said, why fiddle around with it at this point.SPEAKER(.). Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 459.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm inclined to say 4, 6-1/2, and 8-1/2percent and $750 million. But I have no strong argument against thealternative, which I suppose is 4-1/4, 6-1/2, and 8-3/4 percent. Thatjust puts in quarters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their inclination towards certain percentages and amounts, but also acknowledging the possibility of an alternative option without providing any argument against it.


Passage number 460.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'll go with either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 461.
MR. PARTEE. I don't care. It seems to me that our actualexperience is usually broad enough that it looks rather funny to beputting down quarters as targets. But I would accept the quarters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee expresses his opinion but does not contradict or oppose anyone else's viewpoint.


Passage number 462.
MR. SCHULTZ. I think you're probably right. It looks betterwithout the quarters. And those numbers are a bit more conservative,which seemed to be where people wanted to move to a little.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with the other person's statement and suggests removing the quarters to improve the appearance.


Passage number 463.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's obviously closer to B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 464.
 And with a$750 borrowing assumption--MS. TEETERS. We could round up instead of down, gentlemen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Teeters is suggesting a different approach without any opposition from the other individuals mentioned.


Passage number 465.
MR. SCHULTZ. I hope we don't lose anybody.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Schultz, expresses a hope that nobody is lost, which does not involve any argument or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 466.
MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, I'm disturbed, not so much evenabout the figures as this: I thought we had agreed, and that allthinking that has ever been expressed about targeting aggregates[suggests], that we had to set long-term targets and stick with them.-51-9/16/80Trying to fine-tune, as I think this discussion is demonstrating thatthe majority in this Committee is dedicated to, for 30 days in orderto have some effect on interest rates I think is a reversion back tovery thing that we abandoned last October. It makes intelligentlytargeting on aggregate growth and on reserves an impossibility. Thiswhole conversation reflects, at least as of this moment, that we'vethrown in the towel on our noble expressions and intentions of lastOctober 6th. We're right back to trying to control interest rates andtrying to move from moment to moment, which is what has been happeningin this Committee as long as I've been sitting in these meetings.This is where we have gotten into trouble in the past; whenever we'vebeen faced with a difficult decision we've always said, in effect,let's wait another 30 days or another 60 days. We procrastinate. Andthat is why, I think, we are in the inflationary situation in thisnation that we find ourselves in today. I apologize for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Roos expresses his frustration and disagreement with the majority in the committee who he believes are focusing too much on short-term fine-tuning and not sticking to long-term targets for targeting aggregates. He believes this approach is a reversion to past practices and reflects a lack of commitment to the goals set in October.


Passage number 467.
MR. PARTEE. Larry, we're within the targets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is simply stating a fact or observation to Larry.


Passage number 468.
MR. SCHULTZ. Mr. Roos, I don't want to engage in anargument, but I think we're doing exactly what we said we were goingto do on October 6th. If you recall, we announced that the formerpolicy had been that we looked at the aggregates and at interest ratesand we put more emphasis on interest rates; but now the policy wasgoing to be that we would look at the aggregates and at interest ratesbut we would put more emphasis on the aggregates. At no time did thisCommittee ever say that interest rates would be ignored.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Schultz is simply explaining a shift in policy and clarifying that the committee did not say that interest rates would be ignored.


Passage number 469.
MR. ROOS. Fred, we can't do both at the same time andaccomplish both objectives if they're incompatible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No
Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Roos is expressing a logical statement that it is not possible to do two things at the same time and accomplish both objectives if they are incompatible. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 470.
 I'm being--MR. SCHULTZ. You'll pardon me if I respectfully disagree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is using polite language ("respectfully disagree") to express a differing opinion.


Passage number 471.
MR. PARTEE. And I would point out, Larry, that we're wellwithin the targets that we specified in January and respecified inJuly for three of four aggregates. M2 is a trifle [above]. But Idon't think the concept has been violated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the specified targets for three of the four aggregates have been met, with M2 being slightly above the target. The speaker does not mention any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 472.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the best of all possible worlds, Icould be lowering these targets just for the sake of imagery. But letus not forget that M-1B is obviously specified too low and we chosenot to change it at midyear. But some of that discrepancy betweenM-1B and M-1A is coming out of savings deposits. We don't know howmuch, but it is. I think we can say unambiguously that it's too lowrelative to what we thought we were setting at the beginning of theyear. Well, we have a proposal of 4, 6-1/2, and 8-1/2 percent, with$750 million on borrowing and keeping 8 to 14 percent on the fundsrange.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 473.
MR. GRAMLEY. Do we understand this as halfway between "A"and "B" but with the numbers just rounded to 4 percent and so on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is seeking clarification and asking for confirmation or understanding about a specific concept.


Passage number 474.
MR. SCHULTZ. It's a bit more toward "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or arguments. Instead, Mr. Schultz is providing his own opinion or perspective.


Passage number 475.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just raise one further point. It'sthe point that Mr. Solomon raised earlier, which is a point I don'tthink we can quantify. But we have operated before when we wereeither high or low in a way that implied some tolerance for shortfallsor overshoots. When we were high we said "or somewhat below,"-52-9/16/80implying more tolerance for shortfalls. During the summer, in factfor two months--maybe we shouldn't have but we did--we said if[monetary growth] comes in high, we will be tolerant of an overshoot.I could well see adding a tolerance of an undershoot to some degreehere. I don't know that we can specify that arithmetically. But whatwe would be saying is that if the numbers come in unexpectedly low--that would mean total reserves were coming in low--we would be slowerabout making any adjustment that might otherwise be made in raisingthe nonborrowed reserve path to make up for the shortfall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing potential actions and expressing their uncertainty about how to quantify or specify those actions, but there is no clear disagreement or clash of ideas.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 476.
 That'sjust the opposite of what was done--MS. TEETERS. That is moving very close to "B." You'verounded the numbers down and then tolerate shortfalls.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The statement "That's just the opposite of what was done" indicates a disagreement or contention with a previous action. Additionally, the phrase "moving very close to 'B'" suggests that there is a difference in opinion or perspective on how to handle the issue.


Passage number 477.
MR. PARTEE. I think it's worse than "B" because if whatwe've seen in the economy is a little bubble, we could be very slow tohave an adjustment to it. We are not out of these ranges. I don'tsee the basis that we had last summer for doing that, when we wereclearly below the ranges, or last fall when we were very concernedabout being over the ranges. We are within them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is expressing a personal opinion about the state of the economy and the speaker's concern about a potential bubble. There is no explicit contention or disagreement being presented.


Passage number 478.
MR. CORRIGAN. Yes, but we don't have much room for error.That's my problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Corrigan, acknowledges a problem but does not engage in any argument or disagreement.


Passage number 479.
MS. TEETERS. That's just a function of being in September.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It appears to be a simple statement or observation.


Passage number 480.
We've nailed ourselves down on the end of December and that's--MR. CORRIGAN. Yes, but September to December is a very shortperiod in terms of controlling the aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact about the timeframe from September to December being short in terms of controlling the aggregates. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 481.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, we haven't got a lot of room. We havemore room for undershoots in a purely target sense than forovershoots.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply presents a comparison of available room for undershoots and overshoots without expressing any conflicting viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 482.
MR. PARTEE. But we most recently had a big month, and that'sthe only thing you're saying: That we had a really big month. Whenwe had a small April, the shoe was on the other foot and that droppedus right below our target ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker is expressing disagreement with a previous statement, pointing out that when they had a small April, it had negative consequences and did not meet their targets.


Passage number 483.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But that's when [we did this]; it wasfollowing that very low month that we adopted the opposite [approach].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 484.
MR. PARTEE. But we were below the ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or indications of contention or disagreement. It appears to be a straightforward statement without conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 485.
_CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We were below the ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 486.
MR. MORRIS. But we had a lot more time in April [to reachour annual targets] than we have in October.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states a fact about the amount of time in April compared to October.


Passage number 487.
MS. TEETERS. The fact that there is an end point to thisshouldn't be what decides this. We could change the specifications tothe middle of next year, which I understand the Committee did when ithad a rolling base. But to over-fight to make it in the last fourmonths just for appearance sake, regardless of what happens in thereal economy, seems to me the epitome of foolishness.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is expressing the opinion of the speaker that over-fighting to meet a deadline without considering the real economic situation is foolish.


Passage number 488.
MR. MORRIS. If we're in a position where we don't think theguidelines make sense, I think we ought to change the guidelines.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris is suggesting that if the guidelines are not deemed sensible, they should be modified.


Passage number 489.
-53-9/16/80MS. TEETERS. But we're within them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. 

The passage simply states that "we're within them," indicating that the subject or group being referred to is currently within certain boundaries or limits. There is no indication of disagreement or contention between the parties involved.


Passage number 490.
MR. WALLICH. Yes, but [the aggregates have been growing] athigher rates than compatible with the guidelines. And we're withinthem because we're making up for a large shortfall. So if we continueat this rate of speed, we're going to overshoot. Our question isprecisely: Do we want to get back on track by making a slight bend ora significant bend in the rate of growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit or obvious contention or disagreement.


Passage number 491.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Chuck, my suggestion carries forwardon what Henry just said. I don't understand why you say that a veryminor nuance--that if the opportunity arises, we tolerate anundershoot--is worse than alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is agreement in the passage as the speaker is supporting and building upon Henry's suggestion. They express confusion about Chuck's opinion, indicating that there is no direct disagreement between them.


Passage number 492.
MR. PARTEE. Because it just means that there's a very laggedresponse to an unexpected weakness in market terms. That's what itmeans. And I would point out that for these last four months of theyear we're talking about growth rates of 4, 6-1/2 and 8-1/2 percent;those aren't fast. They are within the ranges, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining the response to unexpected weakness in market terms and highlighting growth rates of 4, 6-1/2, and 8-1/2 percent, which are considered within acceptable ranges.


Passage number 493.
MR. WALLICH. You're not including August.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 494.
MR. PARTEE. No, and I'm not including April either. Augustis water over the dam and April is water over the dam. We're talkingabout the next four months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 495.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. M-1B would be right at the top of therange [for this year], I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement expresses the speaker's personal opinion without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 496.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But Chuck, if there is a weakness inthe figures, the markets will reflect that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no specific contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement expressing a hypothetical scenario where the markets would reflect any weakness in the figures.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 497.
 Therefore, we have asmall delay in not correcting the undershoot but it isn't as thoughwe're going to be pushing up--MR. PARTEE. But we'll take out the reserves and that willmean that the money supply will be low. And there won't be a self-correcting operation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Partee disagrees with the idea that taking out reserves will lead to a self-correcting operation.


Passage number 498.
MR. WALLICH. Even though I would like the consequences ofthat action, I don't think it is a good principle. I didn't think itwas a good principle when we did it [when monetary growth was] on theway up, so I shouldn't like it on the way down. It's really gettingback to a funds rate target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich states his personal opinion about a principle, indicating that he did not think it was a good principle in the past and still holds the same view.


Passage number 499.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought you liked those.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a thought or assumption that the speaker had about someone's preference.


Passage number 500.
MR. WALLICH. Okay, but [unintelligible] a given rule. Giventhat option, I'm not proposing to go back to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It seems to be a continuation of a conversation where the speaker is explaining their plan or suggestion.


Passage number 501.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can always consult, so let's not makethat part of the proposal. I, frankly, would be delighted if themoney supply comes in so weak that it provokes a consultation as towhat to do about it. We'll cross that bridge when and if we come toit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage. The speaker is expressing their delight at a potential situation (the money supply coming in weak) and stating that a consultation will happen if and when necessary. There is no opposing viewpoint or contradictory statement mentioned.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 502.
MR. WALLICH. In that case, wouldn't it be helpful if weraised the lower limit of the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "wouldn't it be helpful" suggests that the speaker is suggesting an alternative course of action, implying that there may be disagreement about whether raising the lower limit of the funds rate would be helpful.


Passage number 503.
-54-9/16/80VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You don't want to target on the fundsrate, you just want to raise it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any clear contention or disagreement. It simply states a statement about not wanting to target the funds rate and instead wanting to raise it.


Passage number 504.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have no great objection to raising thelower limit on the funds rate if that's what the Committee wants todo. It's not accomplishing anything; I'm persuaded by the point thatTony made earlier.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their agreement with raising the lower limit on the funds rate if that is the decision of the committee. They also mention being persuaded by a point made by Tony earlier.


Passage number 505.
 But if that's really important to somebody and itconvinces them to join in this consensus then--MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, the discount rate is 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing the importance of something and suggests that if it convinces someone to join the consensus, then it is significant. The mention of the discount rate is unrelated to any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 506.
In some sense that's a fairly effective lower limit because if[monetary growth] gets weak enough that borrowing gets to zero--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 507.
 No, I don't think it's very substantivewhether we--MR. AXILROD. It's going to be a problem for [a funds rateof] 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about the significance of a certain issue, but there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 508.
MR. PARTEE. You can bet that long before it got down to 8percent we would be consulting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 509.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For that reason, I'm not disturbed byraising [the lower limit of the funds range] to 9 percent either.It's purely a cosmetic question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states their lack of disturbance by raising the lower limit of the funds range to 9 percent, considering it as purely a cosmetic question.


Passage number 510.
MS. TEETERS. I'd like to see the range kept at 8 to 14percent. That gives us the maximum amount of range for it. I'd hateto signal by raising [the lower limit] that we were tightening policy.If it's meaningless, then why do it at this point. I think it will betaken as a signal in the market that we did some tightening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. MS. TEETERS expresses her preference for keeping the range at 8 to 14 percent and explains her concerns about signaling tightening policy. There is no disagreement or contention mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 511.
MR. PARTEE. Technically, it wouldn't be [known to thepublic] until the policy record came out since they never test eitherend of this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of fact.


Passage number 512.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's virtually inconsequentialexcept that somebody is going to read the policy record a month fromnow and see that we raised the lower end of the band by 1 percentagepoint and will wonder what that means, if anything. I'm back to 4,6-1/2, and 8-1/2 percent, 8 to 14 percent with a feeling of virtualindifference on my part about that, and $750 million. Are we ready tovote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is expressing their personal opinion about a policy change and their indifference towards it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 513.
MR. GRAMLEY. Can we again have some interpretation of this.This is almost "B," and I thought we were starting out with some sortof compromise between "A" and "B." Plus you were almost willing toincrease the lower end of the funds rate range and that's even furthertoward "B." And I'm just getting uncomfortable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The mention of being uncomfortable suggests there is disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 514.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess you're uncomfortable about theborrowing. All I'm doing is accepting--because I tend to agree withit--that the borrowing specifications in the Bluebook are a little lowbased upon what we know now. So I'm just adjusting for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply acknowledges that the borrowing specifications in the Bluebook might be low and suggests adjusting for it.


Passage number 515.
MR. AXILROD. When you asked the question, Mr. Chairman, Iwas assuming that $750 million was the midpoint around which therecould be some variation. With nothing else changed--that is, if the-55-9/16/80paths were all working about like this--if the funds rate was going upvery high and if borrowings were $750 million, there would be acertain freedom within the very first week on that interpretation suchthat borrowings would be lowered because that would be an indicationthat the demand for borrowing was not as high as we thought. So Ithink we would be interpreting it along the lines of what you weresaying, Governor Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply offering their interpretation and agreement with what was previously said by Governor Gramley.


Passage number 516.
MR. GRAMLEY. Okay, thank you. That helps me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information. Mr. Gramley expresses gratitude for the information provided.


Passage number 517.
MR. PARTEE. It's really a $700 to $800 million range, orsomething like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee is simply providing an approximation of the range, stating that it is around $700 to $800 million.


Passage number 518.
MR. AXILROD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is yes because the passage indicates that there is some level of contention or disagreement. However, without further context, it is difficult to determine the specific nature or extent of the disagreement.


Passage number 519.
MR. PARTEE. That's a better way to think of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In the given passage, Mr. Partee is suggesting a different perspective or approach to thinking about something, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 520.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ready.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage.


Passage number 521.
MR. ALTMANN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not contain any statements or information that would suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 522.
Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Guffey NoPresident Morris YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesPresident Roos NoGovernor Schultz YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich NoPresident Winn NoMR. ALTMANN. Eight for, four against, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 523.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suppose we ought to eat, and we're goingto eat right here. Oh, one quick thing. We need somebody to besecond in command after Governor Schultz to act on freedom ofinformation requests. Governor Coldwell used to do this and we've hadno alternate since Governor Coldwell left. We have to repair thatoversight. It has not proved to be a heavy responsibility. GovernorPartee, who serves in that function for the Board of Governors, hasagreed to serve in that function for the Open Market Committee, if theCommittee so agrees. Do I have a motion.SPEAKER(.). So moved.SPEAKER(.). Seconded.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 524.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without active dissent, Governor Parteewill be the alternate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that without active dissent, Governor Partee will be the alternate.


Passage number 525.
MR. ALTMANN. Now that that has been accomplished, I mightsay that I have just recently denied a request which is likely toprovoke an appeal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the speaker denying a request.


Passage number 526.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I'm certainly glad that Governor Schultzis here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no mention of any disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker expresses gladness about Governor Schultz's presence, which does not indicate any disagreement.


Passage number 527.
-56-9/16/80 -57-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But that doesn't get to Governor Partee.Do you have a question, Peter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply asks if Peter has a question.


Passage number 528.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I may have missed it, but I don't think youformally approved the Open Market Desk's [intermeeting] operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 529.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we don't want to overlook that.Without objection they are approved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging that they don't want to overlook something and that there are no objections, indicating that approval is granted.


Passage number 530.
MR. PARTEE. What would happen if we didn't. Is it any goodfor a loss or a gain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker poses a question and simply seeks clarification about the potential outcomes of a certain action.


