Passage number 1.
 Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on March 19–20, 2013  March 19 Session  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  I’d like to begin the meeting with a few comments on the leak investigation that Scott Alvarez and Bill English undertook.  As you know, they sent a summary of their findings to you by SDS yesterday morning.  The short summary of the summary is that, while they did an extensive investigation—they reached out to about 300 people, did dozens of interviews, listened to tapes, examined notes, and so on—they did not identify a gross example of intentional leaking.  Instead, there seemed to be some examples of carelessness, but also some examples of very good practice, and some people who clearly followed the right procedure. I’ve had several discussions with Scott and Bill about the details of their findings, and as far as the investigation is concerned, I don’t think it’s going to be fruitful to put more resources into it at this point.  That said, I think Bill and Scott did learn quite a bit about interview practices, about interactions with the media in both formal and informal settings.  And, in particular, they have a terrific case study of how, again, a good reporter, by talking literally to dozens of people and using various kinds of approaches, can put together information that no single individual would admit to or think that they had provided. So, based on those insights, Scott and Bill included in the memo they sent you yesterday some pretty straightforward recommendations about improving our practices and our training.  What I’d like to suggest is that we take those on advisement at this point as voluntary recommendations and as recommendations we could adopt.  I would suggest that you take a look at them.  If you have any concerns about them, please let me know.  If you think we ought to elevate them to formal policy, which would take action by Janet’s subcommittee and by the FOMC, you should let me know that as well.  I don’t think that we need to have an extensive discussion today, but surely those recommendations are on the table at this point.  Although we sent you a summary, more information is available.  If you’d like to know more about the investigation, if you have specific questions or concerns, please feel free to talk to Bill or Scott.  Let me say one other thing.  Thank you to Bill and Scott for the tremendous amount of work they did.  It took them quite a long time, and, as you know, they do have a few other things to worry about.  So we appreciate their serious and determined efforts.  Questions for me or for Scott and Bill.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 2.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, want to commend our FOMC secretary and FOMC general counsel for conducting their review.  I very much appreciate the diligence that they brought to the task and the seriousness of purpose.  I did note in the review that they provided to us that there really was no explicit reference to the Program for Security of FOMC Information, which is, as I understand it, our touchstone.  This is where our rules on confidentiality are embedded.  I guess it makes sense that we have these rules embedded, because, obviously, we conduct our deliberations here with a particular privilege of confidentiality, and we value those deliberations and the ability to deliberate in the way we do.  I want to really underscore the importance of this Program for Security because it permits us to, in essence, enforce our own rules.  We have set out rules for when we have potential unauthorized disclosures like we may have had in this last incident.  So, because I value—I think we all value—our ability to conduct deliberations the way we do, I am glad that we have this policy.  And with that privilege in mind, I guess I wanted to ask, as a point of process, both Bill and Scott whether, when they conducted their review, they conformed the review to the processes set forth in the Program for Security of FOMC Information.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily a statement of appreciation for the diligence and seriousness of the FOMC secretary and general counsel in conducting their review. The speaker also emphasizes the importance of the Program for Security of FOMC Information and asks about the process followed during the review.


Passage number 3.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I believe we did.  The program asks that we conduct a review and then confer with the Chairman, which is the process that we followed.  Scott, do you want to say anything further.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. English is stating that they followed the program's process of conducting a review and then conferring with the Chairman, and is inviting Scott to share any additional thoughts.


Passage number 4.
 MR. ALVAREZ.  So, that’s exactly right.  We did look beyond just the release of confidential information to compliance with the policy itself, which imposes some extra discipline on participants and staff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply affirming that they considered more than just the release of confidential information when evaluating compliance with the policy.


Passage number 5.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you.  Yes, I noticed that what the policy says is that “the Secretary and the FOMC’s General Counsel will perform an initial review of the incident.”  That was what you did, the “initial review of the incident, in consultation with the Chairman,” which occurred, “and with the President of a specific Federal Reserve Bank if the violation appears to have involved staff within that Bank.”  So that is what this is.  I go on to read, “In light of that initial review, the General Counsel will determine whether to request the Board’s Inspector General to perform a full investigation of the incident.”  Was that piece followed as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It is simply discussing the process outlined in a policy.


Passage number 6.
 MR. ALVAREZ.  Sure.  We provided a very extensive report to the Chairman explaining all of the review that we did, much more detailed than the summary that has been provided to the Committee.  Bill and I have discussed whether further investigation is appropriate or whether this matter should be referred to the IG.  My recommendation was that it not be formally recommended to the IG, because I think the review that we did uncovered as much as could be uncovered.  The IG does not have special tools that would allow them to get more information than we were able to get.  And given that most of the information in this case was the result of phone calls and interviews and not a records-based kind of process, we thought that we were able to conduct about as extensive and detailed a review as possible.  So that was the basis for my recommendation.  The Chairman has to make a decision about whether there’s disciplinary action that should be taken here at the Board or by the presidents at the Reserve Banks.  That’s a separate matter.  But that is my view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the author's recommendation and view.


Passage number 7.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 8.
 MR. TARULLO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This, as you said, is not the place to have a discussion of the substantive recommendations, but I do have some concerns about some of the substantive recommendations, mostly springing from what I think might be a quite de facto differential application of them to people without personal staffs as opposed to people who do have personal staffs, which is a bit of a presidents/Governors distinction.  And so maybe there could be some forum or opportunity for an elaboration of some of those comments, whether in Janet’s subcommittee or elsewhere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that Mr. Tarullo has some concerns about the differential application of the substantive recommendations to people with and without personal staffs. This suggests a potential disagreement or contention about the fairness or equity of the recommendations.


Passage number 9.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, Michelle has agreed to work with Bill and Scott in implementing this, and perhaps they can address the specific questions that you have.  I guess I don’t think we’re ready to have a determination here, but if the general sense of the Committee is that we’d like to refer these recommendations to Janet’s subcommittee and if Janet is willing, then over the next few meetings, we can fine-tune them and incorporate them into the policy.  You don’t seem happy, Governor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is mostly discussing potential collaboration and seeking input from others.


Passage number 10.
 MR. TARULLO.  No, I’m not, but that’s okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they are not something, but they also provide a reassurance that it is okay. This does not indicate any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 11.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I guess I don’t understand the issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 12.
 MR. TARULLO.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without more information. The given text is incomplete and only contains the name "MR. TARULLO," which does not provide any context to analyze and assess contention or disagreement.


Passage number 13.
  Well, I was trying to avoid being too explicit about it— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Ah, you were successful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The second person's response indicates agreement or affirmation with the first person's statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 14.
 MR. TARULLO.  —but I guess I’ll get explicit about it.  The issue is that, in short, when one is dealing with the press or a member of Congress or anybody outside the organization and one is staffed, the question becomes, who is the staff responsible to, and who are they supposed to be helping out.  And with the structure we’ve got at the Board, we have a kind of collective staff.  A member of the Board of Governors does not have someone who is responsible for his or her position, in some sense, but also is interested in helping that individual communicate effectively his or her views, as opposed to the collective views of the Board.  It puts the collective staff in an awkward position because they have multiple loyalties, and I just think it’s something that needs to be thought through a little bit in this context.  That was really the basis for my observation. I assume it’s fine for John or Charlie or someone.  They’ve got a staff who will keep them on the straight and narrow, on the one hand, but also they can have fair assurance that there aren’t divided interests that somebody has to serve and that just put the staff in an awkward position.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Tarullo, is expressing his belief that the structure of the Board is putting the collective staff in an awkward position because they have multiple loyalties. He implies that individual members of the Board do not have dedicated staff members who are solely responsible for helping them effectively communicate their own views, rather than the collective views of the Board. This suggests a disagreement or concern about the current staff structure and its impact on the communication and loyalty dynamics within the organization.


Passage number 15.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  We’ll follow through on that.  Thank you.  Other questions or comments.  [No response]  All right.  Seeing none, why don’t we turn to the formal agenda.  Item 1, “Financial Developments and Open Market Operations.”  And let me turn the floor over to Simon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It consists mainly of expressions of gratitude and transition to the formal agenda, with no conflicting ideas or opinions being expressed.


Passage number 16.
 MS. LOGAN.  Thank you, Simon.  As shown in the upper-left panel of your next exhibit, the Desk has purchased $277 billion and $449 billion of longer-term Treasury and agency MBS, respectively, since September.  Those purchases bring the share of SOMA holdings as a percent of longer-term Treasury and TBA-eligible MBS debt outstanding to 35 percent and 31 percent, respectively.  Were additional purchases to be conducted, as expected by the median respondent in the primary dealer survey, we project those ownership shares to grow to 41 percent and 42 percent, respectively, by early 2014. In the following panels, I will summarize the findings in the memo on the effects of asset purchases on market functioning.  The memo presented measures that reflect trading activity, market depth, settlement efficiency, and concentration.  Currently, these measures seem to be largely in line with conditions prevailing before September and are also generally in line with longer-run ranges. The upper-right panel indicates that trading volumes for both Treasury and MBS remain near to slightly above the average seen since September and are in line with longer-run ranges.  A meaningful drop in trading activity could signal that market participants are pulling back from the market because of higher transaction costs or a reduction in liquidity. As seen in the middle-left panel, the four-week moving average of the bid–asked spread observed for the most recently issued 10-year Treasury security, as shown in the dark-blue line, has remained stable.  Similarly, as shown in the light-blue line, the four-week moving average of the indicative bid–asked spread in a widely produced MBS coupon has fluctuated since September but shows no trend toward wider bid–asked spreads. In the middle-right panel, we show that the four-week moving average of the daily level of delivery failures in the Treasury market remains near September levels and the level of MBS delivery failures has declined since September.  These measures suggest that settlement in the market is not being meaningfully affected by the Desk’s purchases. As shown in the bottom-left panel, market concentration among the primary dealers in their trading activity is in line with levels seen last September and in prior years.  If more of the trading was being conducted by a smaller set of dealers, it might indicate that some participants are allocating less capital to trading in these markets or perhaps signal the potential for deterioration in the market infrastructure supporting such activity. Measures specific to the Desk’s operations can also provide some direct insight into market conditions.  The bottom-right panel shows that the offer-to-cover ratio in our Treasury operations has increased since the start of the year.  This partially reflects the increase in the frequency of our operations in the absence of the MEP sales, a change that allowed us to decrease the size of each operation. Turning to the upper-left panel of the last exhibit, we show the weighted-average difference between the accepted price and the next-best price in the Desk’s MBS purchases.  This indicator has changed little since September.  We read these indicators as suggesting that there have been no significant changes in the competitiveness of Desk operations.  Deterioration in these measures could be one indication of less willingness to take risk or participate in these markets more generally. In addition, the primary dealer survey asked dealers to compare current functioning for longer-term Treasury and MBS with the best and worst conditions since the beginning of 2009 and to rate current market functioning relative to last September.  As shown in the upper-right panel, the majority of dealers noted that market conditions in both markets are better than the average conditions prevailing over the period since the beginning of 2009.  Nearly all of the dealers rate market functioning for the longer-term Treasury market as the same since September, while dealers were more split in regard to the overall MBS market.  With little evidence of a deterioration in market functioning or in the Desk’s operations to date, the staff assessed whether such deterioration is likely in the future, updating work distributed to the Committee in 2012.  Overall, the staff concludes that purchases of Treasury and MBS at the current pace through the end of the year would be feasible without causing significant adverse effects on market functioning, based on estimates of future issuance and the existing stock of securities available for ready purchase.  In fact, with respect to Treasury securities, we estimate that the monthly pace could be sustained at an even higher level through the end of 2013, although, depending on the size of any potential increase, a reduction in the average duration of securities purchases might be required. The assessment for MBS is more complicated.  The Desk’s purchases are made in the TBA market in production coupons, which are the most liquid segments of the MBS market and most closely tied to the primary mortgage rate.  As a proxy for the amount of these MBS available for purchase, we estimate both the amount of gross TBA issuance expected over the purchase horizon and the existing stock in the production coupons.  Newly issued MBS are generally the most liquid source for purchase but are not a purchase limit, because many existing securities are also efficiently delivered into TBA purchases. As seen in the dark-blue bars of the last panel, purchases at the current pace are expected to reach the total amount of gross TBA issuance in May and remain close to issuance through the end of the year.  Given the sensitivity to interest rates of refinancing activity and thus issuance projections, the staff also considered the effects of an instantaneous 50 basis point upward shock to the path of long-term interest rates in the baseline.  The results are shown in the light-blue bars.  This scenario would require the Desk to purchase about $100 billion more MBS than are expected to be issued between May and the end of the year. Prior purchase experience suggests that market-functioning risks rise as purchases exceed gross issuance and a greater amount of the existing stock is purchased.  However, there is approximately $600 billion in production coupon TBA-eligible securities that could potentially be delivered into the Desk’s TBA purchases.  The existence of this supply should help mitigate the impact of purchases on market functioning under the baseline and the shock scenarios.  In addition, our issuance projections are somewhat conservative since we assume that there’s no net growth in the MBS market. On balance, Treasury and MBS markets have functioned somewhat better than anticipated by the staff in September.  Indeed, across a range of indicators presented, both markets appear to be functioning well.  Staff estimates suggest that MBS purchases at the current pace through the end of the year remain feasible without a significant adverse effect on market functioning.  However, the risks in the MBS market are likely to rise in the second half of the year, particularly if rates increase sharply.  The staff will continue to monitor market liquidity and functioning and the performance of Desk operations and report any notable developments.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a summary of findings and assessments made by the staff.


Passage number 17.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  I note that we decided to put the market-functioning presentation here at this point, but obviously it bears on the discussion we’ll have later on efficacy and costs.  Are there questions for Simon or Lorie.  No questions.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 18.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I had a comment and a question.  My comment is that I think I had asked for depictions of covariance, and panel 7 on exhibit 2 is very nice along those lines.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 19.
 MR. POTTER.  We thought of it ourselves.  Remember, it’s without policymaker input.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the use of the word "Remember" indicating a contrasting perspective or a point of disagreement.


Passage number 20.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Oh—good.  I’m glad to hear that.  That would have been a disaster if it had been with my input.  Let me ask a question that may be better put off to later in the day.  When we look at market function, it’s an input into something else, I guess.  Maybe it’s too philosophical a question, but why are we concerned about market function.  I as a policymaker don’t really care particularly how well the mortgage-backed security market functions.  It’s more as an input into something else, and what is that something else.  Is it about pass-through of these policies into other rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 21.
 MS. LOGAN.  I think there are two large themes that we’ve been thinking about when looking at the market functioning measures.  The first is, just for your information, to think about how the operations are actually performing and make sure we can continue at the current pace without having temporary flow effects on market pricing that affect our execution.  On the larger question, I think we look at the broader measures to see if liquidity or market functioning is being impacted and affecting risk premiums, which may offset some of the policy impact of the lower term premium in the program.  So if we were to see much wider bid–asked spreads or lower volumes and risk premiums were to rise, it could partially offset the policy.  In addition, in terms of the pass-through to other rates, the Treasury market is the most active market for hedging, and thus if it becomes more expensive to hedge, it could have an impact on the prices in other private credit markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is simply presenting two large themes for consideration when looking at market functioning measures.


Passage number 22.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, I was just putting myself in the hypothetical situation of, if we were to change the pace of purchases and I was asked to explain it, I think it would be challenging if I had to say that it was because a bid–asked spread got wider.  So it’s going to be useful for me to go further than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing their own hypothetical situation and expressing a personal opinion or uncertainty about explaining a potential change in the pace of purchases.


Passage number 23.
 MR. POTTER.  If it’s not passing through to the primary mortgage rate in the right way, it’s not the most efficient way.  I think that’s the easiest way to explain it.  And then the Treasury market is very important for funding for the U.S. Treasury as well.  So we wouldn’t want to produce distortions in that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information and explanation about the efficient passing of primary mortgage rates and the importance of the Treasury market for funding the U.S. Treasury.


Passage number 24.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Okay.  Thank you.  That’s very helpful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any indication of contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward expression of gratitude and acknowledgement.


Passage number 25.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage as the given text only mentions "President Fisher" without providing any context or additional information.


Passage number 26.
 MR. FISHER.  On this point, of course, the pass-through we’ve had has basically been one for one, if memory serves, in terms of the impact on mortgage rates.  Roughly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact about the impact of pass-through on mortgage rates.


Passage number 27.
 MR. POTTER.  Close to.  Two-thirds to three-quarters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not include any statements that indicate contention or disagreement. It simply provides an estimation of a numerical range.


Passage number 28.
 MR. FISHER.  Right.  And of course, you want to keep testing that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states that someone wants to continue testing something.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 29.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage states that Mr. Potter agrees with something or responds affirmatively to a statement, indicating agreement or acceptance.


Passage number 30.
 MR. FISHER.  But it’s important, too, in thinking through market functioning, to think ahead about the sell side as well and about what we can learn as we go through the purchase cycle—what signals we might pick up there.  That’s where, President Kocherlakota, it does become of interest because it’s a question of what kind of reaction we might have, and that conditions our exit strategy or our holding strategy or whatever we decide to do—perhaps our paring strategy. I wanted to take this opportunity, Mr. Chairman, and I don’t know if we’re going to get a chance to discuss it further, but I want to thank Simon for his good memo on interest rate sensitivity of the SOMA portfolio.  I’d asked a lot of questions about that before, and I wanted to thank Simon and the Desk for what I thought was a very good report, constantly illuminating, and quite educational.  So I wanted to go on record and thank you for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude and appreciation for a report that was provided.


Passage number 31.
 MR. POTTER.  Well, Bill and his team helped.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement as it simply states that "Bill and his team helped." There is no conflicting opinion or disagreement presented.


Passage number 32.
 MR. FISHER.  I want to thank Bill as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: This passage shows gratitude and appreciation, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 33.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you.  Any other questions.  [No response]  Okay.  Seeing none, let’s turn to the economic and financial situation, and I’ll call on David Wilcox to lead off a series of presentations.  Oh, I’m sorry.  Debbie, as always, has to remind me that we need a vote to ratify domestic open market operations since the January meeting.  Any objections.  [No response]  Seeing none, we approve those operations, and now we’ll turn to David Wilcox.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker asks if there are any objections and receives no response, indicating agreement or consent.


Passage number 34.
 MR. WILCOX.2  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ll be referring to a single-page exhibit called “Forecast Summary.”  Recognizing the risk that the meeting today and tomorrow will go down in history as the FOMC meeting that ran longer than a papal conclave, I shall be uncharacteristically brief. As you know, our latest forecast is little revised from the one that we presented in January, reflecting incoming data that generally met or exceeded our expectations, but a fiscal policy at the federal level that looks set to be more restrictive than we had assumed. Turning first to the labor market, the two employment reports that we received over the intermeeting period portray a labor market that’s improving at a pace similar to or perhaps a little faster than we had anticipated in January.  On the household side, the unemployment rate last month was 7.7 percent, in line with our January forecast.  On the establishment side, nonfarm payroll growth is currently estimated to have averaged 190,000 jobs per month over the three months ending in February, about 35,000 more than our January projection.  After taking into account the portion of the benchmark revision to the establishment survey that was a surprise to us, the level of  2 The materials used by Mr. Wilcox are appended to this transcript (appendix 2). nonfarm payroll employment in February is now estimated to be 330,000 above the level we had expected at the time of the January Tealbook. In response to the incoming data, we’ve nudged up the pace of monthly payroll job gains by 20,000 over the next few months relative to our January forecast; this upward revision would have been larger if not for the projected effect of the budget sequester on second-quarter spending. Over the medium term, we continue to anticipate that labor market conditions will improve gradually as real activity and production accelerate.  As shown in the top-left panel of your “Forecast Summary” exhibit, we expect the unemployment rate to decline to 7 percent at the end of next year; this is unrevised from our January projection but is ½ percentage point lower than the forecast we made in September, when the FOMC first tied its asset purchase decisions to an improvement in the labor market outlook.  Again in line with our January forecast, we anticipate that on a quarterly average basis, the unemployment rate will fall below the Committee’s 6½ percent threshold in the fourth quarter of 2015.  We continue to expect the pace of job gains to improve over the forecast period; as is evident from the top-right panel, our outlook for the pace of job growth from here forward is similar to what we anticipated back in September, with growth in total payroll employment reaching about 225,000 jobs per month, on average, over the second half of next year.  Nonetheless, as shown in the middle-left panel, revisions to historical data, mostly reflecting the annual benchmark, imply a higher level of payroll employment throughout the projection period. Even aside from the labor market, the incoming news has mostly been a little better than we had anticipated.  Manufacturing production has come in stronger than expected, and available forward-looking indicators have also brightened a touch and remain consistent with moderate gains in factory output in coming months. This morning, the Census Bureau published their monthly report on housing starts and permits.  These data were a little stronger than we had expected in the Tealbook—certainly enough, for now, to support our forecast that residential construction will contribute about ½ percentage point per year to real GDP growth over the medium term—a welcome turnaround for that sector.  In the Tealbook, we once again presented an alternative to our baseline projection that explored the implications for the rest of the economy of an even more robust recovery in the housing market. On the downside, we’ve been surprised by the way that the fiscal situation has played out thus far.  In the January Tealbook, we assumed that the budget sequester would be replaced by a more gradual pace of fiscal consolidation that would achieve roughly the same fiscal restraint over the 10-year budget window but have no macroeconomic effect this year.  In the forecast for this meeting, we’ve assumed that the Congress will eventually take some of the hard edges off the spending cuts, leaving roughly half of the fiscal restraint in place this year and next that is implied by current law.  Other things being equal, this new fiscal policy assumption reduces the level of real GDP by the end of this year by a couple of tenths and adds one-tenth to the unemployment rate.  As we noted in the Tealbook, a full sequester would double those numbers, and the rumblings on Capitol Hill during the past few days incline me a little more toward that view. All told, our medium-term real GDP projection, shown in the middle-right panel, is little changed from January.  In particular, the greater drags from fiscal policy and a stronger foreign exchange value of the dollar in this forecast were mostly offset by the effects of upward revisions to household net worth, stemming from positive surprises to house prices and equity values.  In addition, we’ve revised up our projection for domestic oil production in line with Department of Energy forecasts, and this yields a decline in projected oil imports. The last two panels of the exhibit summarize our inflation projection.  The data on core prices that we’ve received since the January Tealbook—including Friday’s CPI report—were close to our expectations, and we’ve made no material revisions to the forecast for core PCE inflation, shown on the right.  We made a small downward revision to our forecast for headline PCE inflation, the left panel, over the first half of the year in response to incoming data on energy and food prices; after that, our headline inflation projection is little revised from January, at about 1½ percent per year. In sum, our outlook for real activity, the labor market, and inflation is very similar to what we had written down in the January Tealbook, even taking on board the effects of a modified sequester.  As a result, we’ve continued to assume that the FOMC will make a total of $500 billion in asset purchases this year.  Of course, we’ll be listening intently to your discussion this afternoon of the efficacy and costs of these purchases and will modify our purchase assumption for the April Tealbook accordingly. Finally, as noted in the Tealbook, we now view the uncertainty around our projection for economic activity as similar to the relatively elevated level that has prevailed, on average, over the past 20 years.  We also continue to view the risks to our real activity projection as skewed to the downside, especially given the limited scope for monetary policy here at home to offset the effects of an adverse demand shock of whatever origin.  For inflation, we see significant uncertainty around our projection but do not believe that these risks are unusually high, and we continue to view the risks to our inflation forecast as roughly balanced.  Steve will continue our presentation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any obvious contention or disagreement. It is mainly a summary report of recent data and forecasts.


Passage number 35.
 MS. LIANG.3  Thank you, Steve.  I will be referring to “Material for Briefing on Financial Stability.”  My remarks today on financial stability are focused mainly on the risks that may arise in a low interest rate environment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the remarks will focus on the risks that may arise in a low interest rate environment.


Passage number 36.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Nellie, I’m sorry.  Can you speak a little louder, please.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser is simply asking Nellie to speak a little louder.


Passage number 37.
 MS. LIANG.  Oh, I apologize.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. LIANG is expressing regret and apologizing for something.


Passage number 38.
 MR. PLOSSER.  These old men on the end of this table are hard of hearing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a factual observation and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 39.
 MR. BASSETT.4  Thank you, Nellie.  I’ll be referring to the packet labeled “Material for Briefing on the Summary of Economic Projections.”  Unfortunately, I need to start by pointing out that in the top panel of exhibit 2, all the way to the right, the memo item for the Tealbook longer-run growth should be 2.3 and not 2.5. Returning to exhibit 1, the exhibit shows the trajectories of your forecasts for key economic variables under your individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy.  As shown in the top panel, you project that growth of real GDP will pick up  4 The materials used by Mr. Bassett are appended to this transcript (appendix 4). this year relative to last year and strengthen further in 2014 and 2015 to a pace above what you see as its longer-run rate, shown to the right.  Your projections for the unemployment rate, shown in the second panel, decline gradually over the forecast period, but many of you expect the unemployment rate at the end of 2015 to remain significantly above your individual judgments of its longer-run normal level.  Turning to the bottom two panels, the central tendency for your projections for inflation lies somewhat below the Committee’s 2 percent longer-term objective in 2013 and then approaches 2 percent over the projection period. Exhibit 2 compares the ranges and the central tendencies of your current projections with the December SEP and the March Tealbook.  Your projections for economic growth and inflation over the forecast period are generally unchanged to slightly lower relative to those you made in December, with many of you noting that better-than-expected incoming data from the private sector about offset the effects of greater-than-anticipated fiscal restraint.  The central tendency for your unemployment rate projections is also generally unchanged to a couple of tenths lower over the forecast period, with some participants attributing the change in their projections for unemployment in part to the recent improvement in some labor market indicators.  The Tealbook forecast puts economic growth in the middle of your central tendencies for the next two years, and then near the upper end in 2015.  Meanwhile, the Tealbook projections for unemployment are close to the upper ends—and, for inflation, near the lower ends—of your central tendencies through 2015. Exhibit 3 provides an overview of your assessments of the appropriate path for the federal funds rate.  As shown in the top panel, 5 participants believe that economic conditions will warrant increasing the federal funds rate this year or next year, while the rest think that it will not be appropriate to begin raising the funds rate until at least 2015.  The middle panel of the exhibit provides your current assessments of the appropriate target for the federal funds rate at the end of each year of the forecast period and over the longer run.  Among the participants who see the funds rate leaving the effective lower bound in 2014 or earlier, the median projection for the funds rate is 1 percent at the end of 2014 and 3 percent at the end of 2015.  In contrast, the 13 participants who judge that liftoff in 2015 will be appropriate expect the funds rate at the end of the year to be 1¼ percent or less, while the 1 participant who anticipates liftoff in 2016 sees the funds rate at 50 basis points at the end of that year (not shown).  On balance, your current projections for the federal funds rate have shifted down a bit from those in your December forecasts, which are shown in the bottom panel. With regard to securities purchases, five of you indicate that your assessment of appropriate policy is about in line with the assumption in the Tealbook baseline forecast, which is conditioned on purchases of longer-term securities continuing at a pace of $85 billion per month through mid-2013, for a total of about $500 billion this year.  However, a majority of you think that it will be appropriate to continue purchases beyond that point.  Some of those participants believe that appropriate policy involves tapering purchases beginning at midyear, while others see purchases continuing at the current rate into the second half of the year.  Those who judge that it will be appropriate to continue the purchases beyond midyear generally anticipate that total purchases will range from $750 billion to $1.25 trillion.  In contrast, a few participants appeared to indicate that it would be appropriate to begin tapering purchases as soon as this meeting or to end the purchases altogether. Exhibit 4 depicts the economic conditions that you anticipate at the end of the year in which you judge that it will become appropriate to raise the federal funds rate above its current target range.  Your projections for the unemployment rate range from about 5½ percent to 7 percent, with a median of 6¼ percent, while your inflation projections are in a narrow range of roughly 1½ to 2¼ percent, with a median of 2 percent.  All 14 of you who see an initial increase in the funds rate occurring in 2015 or later, shown by the gray circles and blue square, project unemployment at or below the Committee’s 6½ percent threshold at the end of that year; most in this group also see inflation at 2 percent or below.  All but one of the participants who judge that the first funds rate increase should occur in 2013 or 2014, shown by the blue triangle and white diamonds, see a higher level of unemployment at the time of the first funds rate increase than do those reporting later firming dates.  Those who incorporated an earlier tightening of policy pointed to concerns about inflation as a primary reason for expecting that it will be appropriate to raise rates before 2015; they generally also preferred to end or reduce the asset purchase program relatively soon. The final exhibit reviews your assessments of the uncertainty and risks surrounding your economic projections.  As shown in the top two panels in the column on the left, while the majority of you continue to indicate that you judge the current level of uncertainty about GDP growth and unemployment to be higher than the average level over the past 20 years, a greater number of you than in December see the level of uncertainty as being broadly similar to the average.  Moreover, the corresponding panels to the right indicate that the majority of you now view the risks to GDP growth and unemployment as broadly balanced, though most of the rest of you see downside risks to growth and upside risks to unemployment.  Turning to the bottom-left panels, your assessment of the uncertainty associated with your projections for total PCE inflation is little changed from December, with a majority believing that it is broadly similar to the average level of uncertainty over the past 20 years.  As in December, almost all of you see the risks to your inflation outlook, shown to the right, as broadly balanced or weighted to the downside.  In assessing the risks to the outlook for real activity and prices, a few participants note that uncertainty is greater when conducting monetary policy near the zero lower bound.  Thank you.  That concludes the staff presentations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information and summaries of economic projections.


Passage number 40.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you for a very informative presentation.  Are there any questions.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a polite statement expressing gratitude for the presentation and inviting questions.


Passage number 41.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I’m not sure whom this should go to—maybe Nellie, maybe David.  Financial stability, house prices:  What level of house price increases would be good, and what level of house price increases would be bad.  There’s some level where you start to get concerned that we were just reinflating a housing bubble, and that would be probably much more significant than all of these other markets we’re looking at, because it’s such a big component of the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about whom to address a particular issue to, and then discussing house prices and their potential impact on the economy.


Passage number 42.
 MR. WILCOX.  I guess I’d just say that from the perspective of valuation, the current level and the prospective level over the next couple of years in our baseline projection still look a little lean relative to the very crude tool that we maintain for assessing house prices relative to rents.  So we’re way below fair valuation as judged by this crude valuation.  At the peak of house prices, we were noticeably above.  It’s funny that you asked the question, because I just looked up the answer in my notebook, and it’s not there, but my recollection is that we’re in the high single digits below fair valuation at the moment.  So it’s a concern.  I think it’s still a concern for the future, at the moment, in terms of assessing the risk of a reversion back to normal valuation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about the current valuation of house prices relative to rents and stating their concerns about the risk of a reversion back to normal valuation in the future.


Passage number 43.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  And what would concern you.  I guess I feel as though 5 to 10 percent would be fine, in my mind.  But 10-plus—I would start to get nervous.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage expresses a personal opinion about a specific topic ("What would concern you") without presenting any opposing views or arguments. Therefore, there is no contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 44.
  Fifteen-plus— MR. WILCOX.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The given passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a number or quantity.


Passage number 45.
  I’ll turn it over to Nellie, but I would just say that— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But I feel as though we need to get our arms around this a little bit more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and suggesting that they need to understand the situation better.


Passage number 46.
 MR. WILCOX.  —our ability to judge valuation is so crude that I’m a little hesitant to give you a number there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 47.
 MS. LIANG.  Just to pick up on where David was leaving off, I think our current valuation measure still puts house prices in the minus 9, 10 percent range relative to their long-run relationship to rents.  So they’re quite low.  I think we’re questioning our ability to judge and whether prices are sufficient to tell us about overvaluation, though.  We also want to be looking at underwriting standards.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Liang is simply discussing the current valuation measure of house prices and questioning the ability to determine overvaluation based on prices alone.


Passage number 48.
  That would start to give us a hint of, if we started to see credit widely available to residential mortgage borrowers—we’re not there yet—we would start to think about the point at which house price valuations were starting to— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So you’d be more focused on activity measures as opposed to price measures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the possibility of credit being widely available to residential mortgage borrowers and the need to assess house price valuations based on activity measures rather than price measures.


Passage number 49.
 MS. LIANG.  I think we would want to be focused on volumes and underwriting standards as well as just the prices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Liang, is expressing her opinion on what factors they should focus on, rather than indicating any disagreement with others.


Passage number 50.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Okay.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 51.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no disagreement or contention in the given passage as it only states the title or position of President Rosengren. It does not provide any information or context to suggest any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 52.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  My question is for Nellie as well.  I really enjoyed the discussion of agency REITs.  I thought it was a very nice discussion.  And I’d like you to speculate a little bit about how what’s happening with agency REITs interacts with monetary policy actions.  Let me tell you how I’m thinking about it and see if it’s consistent with the way you would think about it.  MBS purchases flatten the yield curve.  So that should make the carry trade less profitable.  If you stop MBS purchases, it would presumably steepen the yield curve relative to what it otherwise would be.  And to the extent that it also slows down the economy relative to what it otherwise would be, we reach 6½ percent unemployment later.  So we would continue for longer our very short-term interest rates, which, in my mind, would increase the incentive for agency REIT expansion.  My question is, am I thinking about this right—that actions that delay liftoff aggravate the concerns of the agency REITs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Rosengren, has a specific viewpoint that delaying liftoff (raising interest rates) would increase the incentive for agency REIT expansion. It is unclear if Nellie shares this viewpoint or has a different perspective.


Passage number 53.
 MS. LIANG.  They operate on the yield curve, as you point out.  Obviously, the growth of the REITs is related to the yield curve.  Plus, there’s a structural factor.  I think it is not an accident that they’re growing as the GSEs are contracting.  They’re picking up some of that.  So, part of it is yield curve, but part could be other factors.  Agency REITs play on two margins:  One is maturity transformation, and the other is leverage.  Even if you left the yield curve a little flatter, they could instead leverage.  So I’m not quite sure if you can get a clean prediction for what they will do if you change the yield curve, only because they can play on leverage as well.  If the yield curve gets flatter and the carry is just a little less, they can instead up their leverage.  Currently, they’re operating with pretty modest leverage, but it seems as though, in the past, some of these firms have increased leverage to boost return when they’ve had to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a description and analysis of the factors and dynamics affecting the growth of agency REITs. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 54.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine. More context is needed to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 55.
  But isn’t there a limit on leverage, because if you have to have collateral to pledge, and— MS. LIANG.  Yes, there is some.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It is a statement followed by a confirmation from Ms. Liang, indicating agreement.


Passage number 56.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  They’re constrained at some point, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 57.
 MS. LIANG.  I think that’s right, although in the chart that we show, the leverage multiple in the mid-2000s was twice what it is now.  And in 2000, it was really high, although that was such a small market at that time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their own opinion and providing some factual information.


Passage number 58.
 MR. TARULLO.  But Nellie, the accessing of greater or lesser leverage is not itself dependent on the monetary policy move, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is clarifying a point and seeking confirmation, rather than expressing a disagreement or contention.


Passage number 59.
  So, if Eric’s question was, hold everything else— MS. LIANG.  Yes.  If you hold everything else constant, I would agree, but I was making the point that they operate on two margins to deliver yields to shareholders.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is simply explaining different perspectives or points of view.


Passage number 60.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement "President Plosser" is simply mentioning or introducing someone without expressing any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 61.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’d like to change topics just a little bit from financial stability.  I want to thank the Board staff for addressing my question from the last meeting about the implications of the re-estimation of the output gap that they have been doing for the optimal control exercises.  I thought their results were very instructive, and I appreciate that.  My takeaway from those exercises, though, is that we must be cautious in using the optimal control paths depicted in the Tealbook as very precise guides to policy.  The paths are highly model-specific, which is why I’ve always been interested in the robust rules literature.  Moreover, as the exercises illustrate, these optimal paths calculated in real time depend on lots of different factors.  Two of the important ones that I think the staff memo highlighted are the estimate of the output gap and also the projected trajectory of that gap.  And, of course, the projected trajectory of the gap is a feature of the model, the dynamics built into the model, and the forecast that comes out of the model.  So, all else being equal, I think, overestimating the gap would lead to policy being overaccommodative relative to what it otherwise would have been. What the staff exercises show—and I believe the staff noted this—is that the incorrect dynamics of the model or unforecastable future negative shocks cause the trajectory of the gap to be different from what they had thought it was going to be.  And that led to the conclusion in the memo that optimal policy should have been, perhaps, slightly tighter in the near term, but much looser for longer, given the real-time data we have seen.  So I think that when the gap gets revised or reality sets in, the optimal control path will be different.  But I think of those two effects as logically separable. The effects are well illustrated in the charts.  In hindsight—for example, in 2010—the Fed staff was projecting too large of an output gap.  But they were also forecasting that the gap would close much quicker than in fact it has ended up doing.  This means that the real-time optimal control path in early 2010, in hindsight, was perhaps too accommodative in the early trajectory, but it called for us to tighten sooner than we should have ex post as the data played out.  Similarly, in hindsight, at the beginning of 2012, the staff was projecting too large of an output gap.  But there has been little revision in the trajectory of the gap going forward, so it’s about the same as it was.  What that means—and it shows up in the graphs—is that the real-time optimal control path in early 2012 called for a policy that was in fact too accommodative in 2013 relative to what we now think was optimal.  So I think those two examples illustrate the different effects that result from the trajectory versus the level of the output gap. The bottom line for me from this analysis is that when we view these optimal control exercises, we need to take into account the kinds of risks and uncertainties that we are facing.  It’s not just about measurement of the gap, as the staff points out; it’s also about how the forecast plays out.  One of the things that we face is making judgments as a Committee based on these forecasts and these optimal paths.  And so I’m still quite interested, for example, in having the staff provide some measure of uncertainty or forecast error that feeds into these optimal control policies for us to think about.  Now, I realize that the reality is that those are likely to be quite large and maybe humbling, in some sense.  But I think the nature of that uncertainty, if it’s reflected in some way in our discussions more explicitly, would allow the Committee to have different types of discussions instead of only focusing on these modal values that come out of the paths.  So I hope that the staff would continue to explore options or opportunities to give us more degrees of uncertainty about how these paths might look under different scenarios or forecast errors, if you will.  But again, I want to thank the staff for all of that work.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser expresses a cautious approach to using the optimal control paths depicted in the Tealbook as precise guides to policy, stating that they are highly model-specific and may not accurately capture the dynamics and projections of the output gap. He suggests that overestimating the output gap could lead to policy being overaccommodative. However, he also acknowledges the importance of taking into account the risks and uncertainties that come with forecasting and suggests incorporating measures of uncertainty and forecast error into the discussion. This contrasts with the more optimistic view of using the optimal control paths as guides to policy.


Passage number 62.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  A two-handed intervention from President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply describes a two-handed intervention from President Evans.


Passage number 63.
 MR. EVANS.  Well, I just want to make sure I was looking at the same memo that President Plosser was, because the opening of it, I thought, ended with, “Generally speaking, these comparisons indicate that the ‘real-time’ estimates of optimal policy were, in hindsight, insufficiently accommodative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 64.
” MR. PLOSSER.  Right.  There are two effects going on there, which I think the memo made clear.  One effect was the change in the ex post evaluation of the gap and the other was about the nature of the forecast going forward.  So you had two effects at work.  And it turned out in the early episodes that they were offsetting.  In fact, the fact that the forecast was bad turned out to dominate the effect in the early years.  But in 2012, it was working the other way.  Now, of course, we haven’t revised the forecast for 2012 yet, and that may happen again.  But they’re just two separate effects, is what I was trying to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining two effects that were at work and stating that they are separate from each other.


Passage number 65.
 MR. EVANS.  But I thought the force of your original question was that perhaps we’d been overly accommodative and we should have been more restrictive.  And at the end of the analysis, it still is the case that we weren’t as accommodative as we should have been.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Evans is acknowledging that the force of the original question was about being overly accommodative, and he agrees that they should have been more restrictive. He further acknowledges that, based on analysis, they were not as accommodative as they should have been.


Passage number 66.
 MR. PLOSSER.  But it’s important to understand why.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Plosser, is only stating that something is important to understand, without expressing any opposition or disagreement with anyone or anything else.


Passage number 67.
 MR. EVANS.  When you’re missing by a lot—I don’t know.  Okay.  Yes.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 68.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I guess I would just raise the point that the unconditional optimal control path will have a lot of uncertainty.  Another interesting question, given that we have conditional forward guidance, is whether the conditional forward guidance would still work even if there were information coming in that made you vary your unconditional path.  That’s another, somewhat different question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It merely poses a question and discusses different aspects related to the topic without conflicting perspectives or opposing opinions.


Passage number 69.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Yes.  There could be other ways of posing those questions as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply suggests that there are alternative ways of asking those questions.


Passage number 70.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 71.
 MR. FISHER.  I want to come back to Bill’s question about housing.  I think one thing we should be looking for, Nellie, is the composition and the nature of what’s going on in housing, not just the price levels.  We’ve done a little work at the Dallas Fed, and by our numbers, last year 36 percent of homes were purchased without mortgage financing.  Now, part of that has to do with the nature of the market, the availability of mortgage financing.  But there are a significant number of anecdotal reports that investors are crowding out natural buyers, particularly in the $200,000 price mark and lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is only providing information about the composition and nature of housing purchases.


Passage number 72.
  I realize that in San Francisco, that’s a closet, but across the rest of the nation— MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply acknowledges that the size of a closet may differ in San Francisco compared to the rest of the nation.


Passage number 73.
 WILLIAMS.  A nice closet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a nice closet, with no conflicting opinions or opposing views presented.


Passage number 74.
 MR. FISHER.  A nice closet.  So we ought to maybe take a deep dive into that, because at least in the case we’re seeing in our local market, private equity groups have put together funds.  They’re literally sending around notices to buy a house at tax appraisals or higher.  Keith Phillips, our economist in San Antonio, received an unsolicited bid, a much higher price than he expected, on his house.  But their investment timeline is usually 7 to 10 years.  So, again, I’m trying to think down the road here.  Probably pricing to rent, hoping for further price appreciation, but could be something that could lead to a little volatility in the housing market.  I just think we have to watch the composition as well as ask ourselves what the price appreciation itself is.  It has been fantastic—27 percent in Phoenix, for example.  How much of that is investment buyers.  And then on your point on charts 3 and 4 in exhibit 2, and I think chart 3 in exhibit 3 of yours, Nellie, these are more conservative structures than the CLOs.  But when you see a line as steep as you see in chart 3 in exhibit 3, and particularly as steep as the high-yield bond demand, it does send out, I would think, at least a little bit of a yellow light.  I’d just ask you to continue to monitor that. One other aspect may be useful to monitor—I corresponded a little bit with Governor Stein on this—and that is looking at margin debt as a percentage of market capitalization.  Ned Davis and some others do work on this.  I don’t know how good that work is, because they produce so much volume, a lot of noise.  But if you look at where we are right now, we’re back to levels that prevailed before previous serious market corrections.  I don’t see that in here, and maybe you do have it in the broader report.  I didn’t get a chance to go through it.  I would appreciate that very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and observations, asking for further monitoring and information, but there is no direct disagreement or contention with anyone else.


Passage number 75.
 MS. LIANG.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 76.
 MR. FISHER.  And then lastly, with regard to Cyprus, you can’t look at Cyprus without looking through the lens of organized Russian crime or corrupt Russian bureaucracy, including the president himself.  That will determine the outcome of the election.  I would suggest that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains contention. The speaker suggests that organized Russian crime and corrupt Russian bureaucracy, including the president, will determine the outcome of the election in Cyprus. This implies a conflict or disagreement about the influence and role of Russian influence in the election.


Passage number 77.
 MR. KAMIN.  Well, we’re well aware of the Russian connection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "we're well aware of the Russian connection."


Passage number 78.
 MR. FISHER.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only includes one short sentence, which does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 79.
 MR. KAMIN.  And it is a connection that has definitely complicated choices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The phrase "complicated choices" suggests that there are different options or perspectives that are causing difficulty or disagreement.


Passage number 80.
 MR. FISHER.  Russian deposits appear to be the same size as the entire GDP of Cyprus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is stating a fact about the size of Russian deposits compared to the GDP of Cyprus.


Passage number 81.
 MR. KAMIN.  That sounds about right, so it’s very complicated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the situation is complicated.


Passage number 82.
 MR. FISHER.  You don’t mess with those folks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, is expressing caution and respect for a certain group of people.


Passage number 83.
 MR. KAMIN.  And it’s either being dealt with or not being dealt with right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is about a situation being either addressed or not addressed currently.


Passage number 84.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I forecast an international incident in five years.  [Laughter]  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The presence of laughter suggests that President Evans' statement is likely a joke or not meant to be taken seriously.


Passage number 85.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My question is perhaps a little bit of a technical one, and it’s for Nellie—exhibit 1, chart 5.  You don’t really have to look at it.  You have an experiment where you assume a parallel shift of 100 to 200 basis points.  I asked my own staff this question, because I’m never quite sure what the economic circumstances are that we have in mind for a parallel shift.  We all know there’s a literature that looks at this, and slope movements in yield curves are a little more identifiable, at least empirically, with changes in monetary policy—Mr. Chairman, you’ve done research in that regard—or changes in demand, transitory types of things.  When we start talking parallel, though, it’s a little harder to think about what we mean, and in fact, if it’s inflation expectations, transitory inflation expectations wouldn’t do it in parallel.  It would have to be some—excuse me—God-awful type of increase in inflation, which, of course, is something to be concerned about, but it also probably reduces the probability.  When the staff does this experiment, what do you have in mind.  Any help there, please.  I don’t get satisfactory answers from my own staff.  [Laughter].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification and additional information from Nellie.


Passage number 86.
 MS. LIANG.  Generally, one of the practices we noticed is that when banks do their own evaluations, they do two things.  One is, they look at earnings at risk, which is their year-ahead look at how things look.  And then some of them look at valuations of the firm.  Not all of them—most of them focus on earnings.  They tend to do parallel shifts.  So we did them to be comparable, in some sense, to see, did we reach the same kinds of conclusions.  In terms of how to interpret that, when we think about monetary policy, we think of rising interest rates as generally having a negative effect on banks—not a lot bigger than the broader market, just maybe an abnormal return but not too big; an increased maturity gap, though, that hurts their returns even more.  That’s the way we’ve been thinking about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and sharing their own thoughts without any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 87.
 MR. EVANS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is incomplete and does not contain enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 88.
  Sure, that’s quite reasonable in the context of— MS. LIANG.  That’s really all I can add to that.  I’m not sure I’m getting exactly to your question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Liang, is simply admitting that she doesn't have a complete answer to the question being asked.


Passage number 89.
 MR. EVANS.  No, that’s fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, states that the situation is fine.


Passage number 90.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  I just want to add one thing because this comes up in the fiscal memo that we did.  In that memo, we also considered a high interest rate environment.  But, we did it a slightly different way, and it’s similar to what we do in the Tealbook.  There we often ask, what is the most likely set of conditions that would generate high interest rates, based on historical correlation, variance, and things like that.  And those things tend to be a combination of stronger growth, higher inflation, inflation risk premiums rising, and so on.  So that’s what I would say—echoing Nellie.  Depending on which memos, we do it in different ways.  Sometimes, we just do it a very simple way; other times, we do it more along the lines of what I think you were thinking of.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing additional information and clarifying the different approaches they take when considering a high interest rate environment.


Passage number 91.
 MR. EVANS.  Right.  Thank you, Dave.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, is expressing appreciation to someone named Dave.


Passage number 92.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage only mentions President Lacker without providing any context or information that could suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 93.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a question for Nellie.  Like President Rosengren, I appreciated the discussion of agency REITS.  It was a good, thorough overview.  I’m curious about two things.  One is what you see as their main comparative advantage.  They’re puny, but they’ve been growing fast.  It’s striking.  But then the second thing is, you say that if they were to unwind rapidly or delever, the mortgage-backed securities they hold would likely end up with broker–dealers.  And I was a little curious about that because they just reached, like, 5 percent of the market.  Lots of other classes of institutions hold huge amounts of mortgage-backed securities, and mutual fund holdings have been growing.  My understanding of broker–dealers is that they don’t let things land on their balance sheet and not do anything about them.  They would have an incentive to move them on.  So I was wondering how you’re thinking about what would happen to them.  And these are two related things because I’m wondering, if agency REITS didn’t exist, where would those MBS be.  And that’s probably really hard to answer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing curiosity and asking for clarification on certain points.


Passage number 94.
 MS. LIANG.  Okay.  Starting with why they’re growing so fast, they operate as funds with an exemption to the Investment Company Act.  So they’re basically bond mutual funds, but they’re permitted to lever because they have this exemption.  They raise capital in the public capital markets, and they’ve been pretty successful at doing so, because they’ve been offering dividend yields of about 12 to 16 percent over the last few years.  And so they continue to attract capital.  They raised capital in Q4.  They’ve raised capital in Q1.  The agency MBS carry is, I don’t know, maybe in the 2 to 3 percent range, but they lever it and they’re offering in the 12 to 13 percent range.  To some extent, that’s why they’re growing so fast.  Some of the executives at Fannie and Freddie have left and operate the second-largest one of these firms right now, so there is some expertise leaving that part of the sector and moving into a different part of the financial sector. The underlying concern is, they have capital, but they rely heavily on repo financing.  They have many counterparties.  They have exposure to 20-something dealers, so they’re not concentrated.  But, nonetheless, it’s repo funding, and a good chunk of it is very short term.  Haircuts are 5 percent, and one could imagine that if spreads or prices fell, haircuts could rise and, if dealers weren’t willing to absorb, some sales would have to occur.  Who would buy it.  There could be others, certainly, who could pick up.  The problem is, there could be a lot of sales.  I think these firms all have the same business model.  If they have the same shock, they will all react similarly, so it just could be a bigger shock.  At this point, 5 percent seems pretty small.  But if they continue to grow, it’s something we wanted to keep our eye on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It provides a factual explanation of the growth and potential risks associated with certain financial firms.


Passage number 95.
 MR. LACKER.  Could I follow up on that.  So, two things.  One, there are a lot of other investors that hold these, and the kind of convexity-related incentives you’d have would seem to apply to everyone holding MBS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a question and statement related to the topic of investors holding MBS (Mortgage-Backed Securities).


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 96.
  So I’m not sure why, in a collection of these securities in REITS— MS. LIANG.  Yes.  I think a little depends on how they hedge, whether they dynamically hedge their position.  The Fed is a big holder of agency MBS and does not dynamically hedge.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Ms. Liang mentions that there may be some dependency on how the REITS hedge their position, while also highlighting that the Fed, as a contrast, does not dynamically hedge its position.


Passage number 97.
 MR. LACKER.  We don’t.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement simply indicates agreement between the speaker and others in the conversation.


Passage number 98.
 MS. LIANG.  I think some of the banks do not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 99.
  Some hold— MR. LACKER.  There are a lot of institutional holders.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that there are a lot of institutional holders.


Passage number 100.
 MS. LIANG.  And there are a lot of foreign investors.  REITs are just probably one that will dynamically hedge, if they’re under pressure.  Their hedges may not be very good.  It’s one of the places where firms tend to cut corners if they’re under pressure.  So we’re just raising it as a potential amplification mechanism if rates were to start rising and you started getting duration extension and you’d just have more sellers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 101.
 MR. LACKER.  But if agency REITS didn’t exist, conceivably MBS could be held by somebody who is also doing dynamic hedging.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 102.
 MS. LIANG.  That’s correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be determined as there are no conflicting opinions or viewpoints presented.


Passage number 103.
 MR. LACKER.  So, back to the comparative advantage.  I don’t want to make judgmental statements about the abilities of former GSE executives, but the description suggests that some expertise at MBS valuation might be important.  But that’s widespread in the market.  They’re 5 percent of the market.  A lot of other people know how to evaluate MBS.  High mean returns suggest there’s some risk floating around that’s going somewhere or being undervalued or something.  And indeed, do you guys have suspicions about what that would be.  Are the equity investors being fooled here or taken for a ride.  Or is there some risk that’s taken off the table by somebody here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply asking a question and expressing curiosity about potential risks in the market.


Passage number 104.
 MS. LIANG.  I think the shareholders have bigger risk than they recognize if the dealers were to pull funding.  But it’s been several years where dealers have not pulled funding, and retail shareholders tend to like the high dividend yields at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents information about the risk faced by shareholders if dealers were to pull funding, but also notes that dealers have not done so in several years. Additionally, it mentions that retail shareholders tend to appreciate the high dividend yields. There is no explicit disagreement or conflicting viewpoints expressed in the passage.


Passage number 105.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota, you had an intervention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention in the passage. It is a statement addressing President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 106.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I’ll dial it back to a one-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their intention to simplify or scale down the discussion to a more manageable level.


Passage number 107.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Dial it back to a one-hander—okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement or suggestion to "dial it back to a one-hander."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 108.
 MR. LACKER.  Can I follow up on that, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that Mr. Lacker wants to ask a follow-up question, which suggests disagreement or contention.


Passage number 109.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without any additional context provided, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 110.
 MR. LACKER.  Just one more thought.  The fact that REITs rely on RP funding, does that raise any suspicion that a perceived likelihood of public-sector support to buffer RP lenders is the extra risk that’s being taken off the table here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking if the reliance of REITs on RP funding raises any suspicions about the perceived likelihood of public-sector support.


Passage number 111.
 MS. LIANG.  I don’t think so.  It’s more of the system not internalizing that all funding could get pulled at the same time.  I don’t think it’s an implicit government support, if that’s what you’re saying.  I think it’s more of this externality of a common business model being subject to a shock that’s going to hit them all at the same time, and they all act in unison, and nobody is considering that when they’re thinking about their own risk profile.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Liang is providing an explanation of a situation and expressing her own thoughts and beliefs without opposing or contradicting any other perspective.


Passage number 112.
 MR. LACKER.  Well, I can appreciate that they might undervalue the risk of everyone pulling funding simultaneously.  At the same time, they might anticipate that should that transpire, public-sector intervention would occur.  Those are observationally indistinguishable in this case, aren’t they.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging two different possibilities and stating that they cannot be distinguished from each other in this case.


Passage number 113.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The Vice Chairman will clear it up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement suggests that the Vice Chairman will provide clarification or resolution to a situation, but it does not indicate any disagreement or conflicting views.


Passage number 114.
  [Laughter] VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I’d argue that there’s an accounting problem.  They’re treating all of these current earnings as earnings.  They should actually be setting aside a big reserve for the day when interest rates rise, and they’re not being forced to do that.  So you have this impression that this is all earnings when, if the term premium truly were negative today, they should be setting aside very large reserves for when interest rates normalize, but they’re not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 115.
 MR. LACKER.  And equity holders are letting them do that because.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This statement simply explains that equity holders are allowing something to happen.


Passage number 116.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  They’re conforming to GAAP accounting, and this is all treated as current earnings.  There’s no reserve for the great day when interest rates rise, and that, to me, is a fundamental problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is expressing an opinion about a potential problem related to accounting practices.


Passage number 117.
 MS. LIANG.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It only mentions Ms. Liang without providing any information or context for possible contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 118.
  REITS are required to pay out 90 to 95 percent of their— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  There’s no buffer to support that day when things go in the other direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents a disagreement about the lack of a buffer to support REITS when things go in the other direction.


Passage number 119.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage "President Bullard." The passage is a simple statement providing the title or position of an individual named Bullard.


Passage number 120.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a question on the international outlook.  If I understood your narrative correctly, you said that the Bank of Japan would have to buy a whole lot of JGBs in order to get any kind of measurable impact on inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they have a question about the international outlook and summarizing what they understand from the previous narrative.


Passage number 121.
  That was, I thought, the gist of your— MR. KAMIN.  Well, I said they’d have to buy a huge amount in order to achieve that 2 percent target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states their understanding of the situation and then clarifies their point by stating that a large purchase would be necessary to meet the target.


Passage number 122.
 MR. POTTER.  Using our estimates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no evidence of contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Potter, is simply discussing and presenting estimates.


Passage number 123.
 MR. BULLARD.  Using our models.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Bullard is using models.


Passage number 124.
 MR. KAMIN.  Yes, I was using our elasticities, which, because we’ve worked with them, we have experience with that type of calibration.  But there’s no implication in my remarks that the parameters that apply to the Japanese economy are necessarily the same as those that apply to our economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they have experience working with elasticities and that there is no implication that the parameters for the Japanese economy are the same as those for their own economy.


Passage number 125.
 MR. BULLARD.  Yes, that’s what I was going to ask.  What would be your take on the success of the government so far in depreciating the yen significantly and evidently raising inflation expectations, according to this chart we saw earlier this morning, by about 75 basis points, if I’m reading that chart correctly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a question asked by Mr. Bullard seeking the speaker's opinion on the success of the government's actions.


Passage number 126.
 MR. KAMIN.  Right.  I think there are a couple of crosscurrents moving in different directions.  On the one hand, if you just asked me, well, what do I think about these technical efficacy concerns of promoting inflation and GDP growth in Japan compared with in the United States. I might be inclined to say that, all else being equal, I would think that it might be less in Japan because their yields are already so low, and therefore there’s not as much scope to push down longer-term rates.  As well, not too dissimilar to the United States, their banks are awash in reserves, and there doesn’t seem to be much demand.  So, on that front, I might be inclined to say the LSAPs would be less efficacious.  On the other hand, what is true is that the advent of the Abe administration pushing very strong stimulus, and the BOJ moving in that direction, does seem to have created some expectational gains in Japan that are quite strong.  The depreciation of the yen, which is going to be helpful for both Japanese growth and inflation, is part of that, and the increase in inflation expectations, as Simon showed, is part of that.  So it is possible that there may be expectational gains from this new approach toward BOJ easing that could be much greater than we might have previously assumed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting different factors and perspectives, but there is no argument or disagreement between them.


Passage number 127.
 MR. BULLARD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage, "MR. BULLARD," does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It appears to be a name or a title, which does not convey any disagreement or contention on its own. Further context is needed to make a judgment.


Passage number 128.
  This is important to me because I think QE acts mostly through inflation expectations, and this seems to be what’s happening in Japan, whereas if you went through the types of models that we use to evaluate QE, you would get small— MR. KAMIN.  So that’s the issue that we’re dealing with.  We had a noted Japanese academic and an adviser to the government, Taka Ito, come by and explain how the combination of more BOJ easing, plus structural reforms, plus fiscal expansion was directed toward making Japan jump from a bad equilibrium to a good equilibrium.  So that represents the logical rationale for such policies.  It’s interesting, and it would be great if it worked, but we think it would be just premature to read too much into it at this point.  And so that’s why we’re a little cautious in our revision to our forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply outlines different perspectives and opinions on the effectiveness of QE in Japan.


Passage number 129.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is being thanked for his statement or input.


Passage number 130.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "President Kocherlakota" does not provide any context or information that can indicate contention or disagreement. It simply states a title or position without any specific actions or opinions associated with it.


Passage number 131.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to return to the agency REIT question and discussion, and I found that very helpful.  Thank you for the thorough analysis.  I had a question about this scenario in which there was a significant amount of deleveraging.  Couldn’t the FOMC intervene at that point if we felt that that was causing a sufficiently strong risk to our dual mandate objectives.  Could we not intervene directly into that market at that stage.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply raises a question and expresses gratitude for the analysis provided.


Passage number 132.
 MS. LIANG.  I would think that would be a call for this Committee—we are just raising possibilities of how bad shocks to them could transpire for the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. LIANG is simply suggesting that the Committee should consider the potential impact of bad shocks on the economy.


Passage number 133.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I guess my broader point is that there are some bad shocks here where it would be very challenging for the FOMC to respond at all, and there are some shocks where there’s the potential—not to say we should, but there is the potential for us to respond very directly.  This strikes me as one where it’s possible to respond directly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a perspective from Mr. Kocherlakota about the potential for the FOMC to respond directly to certain shocks.


Passage number 134.
 MR. POTTER.  Because they’re Open Market eligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker states a fact without any opposition.


Passage number 135.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, because it’s Open Market eligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply states that the subject is Open Market eligible, without any opposing opinions or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 136.
 MR. POTTER.  That was President Lacker’s point, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is simply stating what Mr. Potter believes President Lacker's point was. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 137.
 MS. LIANG.  That’s right, but I guess I would say that there may be a number of other ways to address this particular issue—for example, if the SEC could address eliminating the exemption.  Or maybe there’s a way to talk to dealers about what their business models are.  Do you all really plan to pull funding at the same time.  Perhaps there’s a way to think about higher margins.  But there is an array of different ways to address it.  Monetary policy could be one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. Liang is simply offering alternative suggestions and questioning certain aspects.


Passage number 138.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  But I guess I’m reading this as a monetary policymaker.  I have to treat a lot of this other stuff as exogenous to me.  So when I think about these risks, some of them I can mitigate ex post—again, as you said, it’s up to our judgments—and then others we’re not going to be able to mitigate ex post effectively.  But when I read the QS document as a whole, sometimes I’m struggling with that issue.  Some of these risks I think that the FOMC, if they wanted to, could mitigate ex post, and some would be very challenging.  And having some notion of that would be helpful as I read the document.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement expressing the speaker's perspective and interpretation of the document. There is no conflicting view presented or debated.


Passage number 139.
 MS. LIANG.  The way we’re often thinking about some of these financial stability risks is that there are probably more-efficient ways to address these ex ante.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is simply stating that there may be more efficient ways to address financial stability risks.


Passage number 140.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Oh, I’m sure that’s true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Oh, I'm sure that's true" suggests agreement or acknowledgement of a previously stated point.


Passage number 141.
 MS. LIANG.  And that’s where you may want to focus some of the efforts.  But it could be that the ex ante doesn’t work, and so this will be at your door.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Liang is simply suggesting a possible area of focus for the listener and acknowledging the potential responsibility that may come with it.


Passage number 142.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 143.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions.  [No response]  Okay.  On the agenda now, we have an opportunity to raise issues or report information on financial stability concerns.  Of course, we’ve already had some discussion of financial stability, but a number of people have asked to be recognized.  So I’ll start with President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that there is an opportunity for people to raise issues or report information on financial stability concerns.


Passage number 144.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Nellie didn’t get a chance in her report, but I think there was a second major insight in the financial stability report, and that was some of the focus on liquidity transformation.  Some of the ETFs provide liquid trading instruments on markets that are otherwise quite illiquid, potentially giving investors a false sense that liquidity will be maintained during times of stress.  I applaud the attention the staff is giving to this potential risk from ETFs and other financial innovations that may pose a stability concern if investors assume that liquidity they now enjoy is immune to a breakdown during stressful times.  So I encourage you to continue to work in that area.  I think it’s a really important area. Second, Nellie’s presentation highlighted that banks are not unusually exposed to interest rate risks, and I wanted to highlight that the recent stress test included an increase of more than 250 basis points in both the triple-B corporate bond rate and the unemployment rate over four quarters.  And this stress test did examine sharp revisions in rates reflecting higher default premiums, but one can imagine many other reasons for a sharp movement in triple-B rates.  The scenario that was run does highlight that at least for now, most banks subject to our stress-test modeling can weather a rapid rise in triple-B rates at the same time as an economic downturn. The final point I want to make is that different monetary policy actions may have very different impacts on banks’ financial stability risk, and so my question on agency REITS actually, I think, also applies to banks—stopping MBS purchases, steepened yield curves, and delayed liftoff, encouraging banks to conduct more carry trades.  If we’re worried about carry trades in the banking sector, expanding asset purchases so that we get earlier liftoff of short-term rates might actually reduce future financial stability concerns.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is primarily expressing agreement with the points made in the financial stability report and highlighting certain areas of concern and importance. There is no indication of any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 145.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists of a thank you message and the statement "President Kocherlakota," which does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 146.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have not contributed much to past financial stability go-rounds, but I plan to make up for this shortfall today, although I promise not to use up all of the time that I have banked over the past two years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude and stating their intention to contribute more in the future.


Passage number 147.
  [Laughter] MR. EVANS.  New standard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of a simple statement indicating a new standard.


Passage number 148.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  But one of the reasons for my past reticence is that I’ve struggled with how to integrate the very thorough and thoughtful staff report we received into my thinking about monetary policy.  I think I have made some progress on that dimension, and I hope that my admittedly preliminary thoughts can be of use to the Committee.  My starting point, as always, is the dual mandate of price stability and maximum employment.  Given that dual mandate, financial stability matters for us as monetary policymakers because it’s potentially an important factor in shaping our outlook for prices and employment.  I thought President George put this especially well in a speech that she gave in January.  As she said, “A sharp correction in asset prices could be destabilizing and cause employment to swing away from its full-employment level and inflation to decline to uncomfortably low levels.  Simply stated, financial stability is an essential component in achieving our longer-run goals for employment and stable growth in the economy and warrants our most serious attention.”  I wholeheartedly agree with those sentences. What I’m going to do today is try to sketch my admittedly tentative thoughts about how to integrate this perspective into thinking about monetary policy.  I’ll start as economists always do—by making an assumption—and I’ll suppose that we’re concerned about the risk of an untoward financial markets event that would lead unemployment to be 10 percent at the end of 2014, about 3 percentage points above our baseline outlook.  How should that concern affect our decision about buying, say, another $500 billion in assets above what’s in the Tealbook A, baseline.  Staff estimates indicate that such a purchase would reduce unemployment by 20 basis points at the end of 2014.  On the other hand, that purchase may increase the probability of the bad financial markets event that in my example would raise unemployment by 3 percentage points. Now, President Rosengren just argued that actually, it might reduce that risk, but let’s take it as, it might increase the risk.  Should the FOMC make the extra purchase in light of this increased probability.  We’re weighing off a 20 basis point decrease in the unemployment rate against the increased risk of a 3 percentage point increase in the unemployment rate.  This suggests that, at least as a first-order approximation, we should be willing to undertake this purchase as long as we’re not increasing the probability of the untoward financial event by more than 1 out of 15.  I’m just taking 20 basis points and dividing it by 3 percentage points to get 1 in 15, which is around 7 percentage points.  This suggests a way that we, as monetary policymakers, can use the financial stability report.  We should be asking questions of the following type:  Given the current state of financial markets, will an extra $500 billion of asset purchases increase the probability of an untoward financial markets outcome by more than, and in my example, 7 percentage points.  I would say that there are many people around this table who know more about financial stability and instability than I do, but for me, it would be very hard right now to answer this question in the affirmative.  A 7 percentage point increase in the risk of a sharp rise in unemployment may not sound like much, but it’s just huge relative to the baseline outlook. The Survey of Professional Forecasters’ average estimate is that there is less than a 2 percent chance of the unemployment rate being above 10 percent in 2014, and that’s for any reason.  To say that a 20 basis point fall in the term premium could trigger a 7 percentage point increase in the probability of a financial instability event that would push unemployment up to 10 percent is at least 10 times too large relative to what I would find plausible, and it might be closer to 100 times too large, but it’s in that ballpark. So I think it would be useful for staff members to use their financial stability analysis to provide some guidance on these kinds of questions.  Now, I absolutely want to be clear.  My goal is not to produce a discussion with some false sense of precision.  And I say “false” based on the current state of our theoretical and empirical knowledge.  It would have to be a false sense of precision, where the staff tells us the probability of a destabilizing financial market outcome to three decimal places.  My goal is to use the financial stability report to provide some guidance on orders of magnitude.  Suppose policymakers want to consider a monetary policy change that reduces the baseline outlook for the unemployment rate by 20 basis points.  Will that monetary policy change increase the probability of a large rise in the unemployment rate by something like 1 in 1,000, 1 in 100, or 1 in 10.  Ultimately, these rough estimates could be translated into some kinds of color-coded signals—green, yellow, red—that would broadly capture the current relevance of financial stability concerns for monetary policymakers. Now, my proposed framework has a lot of rough edges.  In particular, the first-order approximation I described—I think you’d want to flesh it out using the quadratic objective, which informs more of the analysis the staff does.  But it has the potential to make our conversation about financial stability more productive.  My point is that superficially mandate-consistent monetary policy might turn out to have risks for inflation and unemployment, and as President George urged in her speech in January, those risks do deserve our serious attention.  The only way that I know how to get serious about those risks is to make some quantitative attempt to assess the risks of continued monetary policy action against the cost of inaction.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's thoughts and ideas about integrating the perspective of financial stability into monetary policy.


Passage number 149.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply a note of gratitude from President Evans.


Passage number 150.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. "Thank you" and "Governor Powell" are both expressions of gratitude and respect.


Passage number 151.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me see.  I don’t have answers to those very interesting and difficult questions, but I do have a little bit of data that I would quickly share with the group.  I met last week with a group of about 75 very large mostly fixed-income managers, including pension fund managers, endowments, insurance companies, and traditional money market managers.  And they filled out a detailed survey of their own design and presented the results, which I forwarded to Nellie and will share very briefly with you.  I’ll use their exact words and questions so as to avoid editorialization, although I freely admit to a bit of selection bias.  Sixty-four percent of them feel that “it is appropriate for the Federal Reserve to be very accommodative” but question “the need, effectiveness, and/or risks of ongoing quantitative easing”—their words.  Seventy-four percent are “concerned about exit” and said that “the larger the balance sheet gets, the bigger the exit strategy risk.”  Sixty-four percent say that “the Fed is luring people into investments that may not really make sense to them.”  When asked which asset classes they would characterize as “artificially influenced by the Fed’s actions,” 84 percent identified high-yield bonds, and 80 percent U.S. Treasuries.  As far as expectations are concerned, 56 percent say that “the Fed will not begin to taper purchases until 2014.”  Ninety-two percent say that “the Fed will not stop purchases until 2014 at the earliest,” and 45 percent expect that “the exit will not involve the sale of securities.”  Then I had an hour or more of discussion with them, and I would say it’s a mixed picture.  These are very sophisticated investors, for the most part.  The main concern that comes through is the one that we’ll be discussing, and that is a disruptive event around exit.  There is support generally for accommodative policy, but concern that the longer it goes on, the more difficult the exit may be.  That’s what I have.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply sharing data and survey results from a group of large fixed-income managers.


Passage number 152.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Any other comments in this go-round.  [No response]  Well, would we like to begin the economic go-round, or do people want to have lunch first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a neutral statement about the possibility of starting a discussion on economic matters.


Passage number 153.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think we can get started.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is a neutral and straightforward suggestion to begin a task or activity. There is no indication of disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 154.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Get started.  Okay.  Why don’t we—maybe for half an hour or so, we can begin our go-round.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The individuals are simply agreeing and making a suggestion for how to proceed.


Passage number 155.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Let’s go a little further.  We’ve got a long afternoon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement about the length of the afternoon and does not contain any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 156.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let’s do half an hour, and then we’ll go to lunch.  All right.  Let’s go to our economic go-round, and I will call on President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The conversation seems to be a straightforward plan or agreement between two people.


Passage number 157.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My economic outlook is similar to my previous SEP forecast.  While the incoming data have been somewhat more positive than I anticipated, the sequester was an unpleasant surprise.  The net of these two influences leaves my forecast from the last SEP relatively unchanged. Comparing my forecast with that of the Tealbook, the primary difference is in the monetary policy assumption.  The Tealbook assumes that purchases stop in June when the unemployment rate is 7.7 percent, and, as a result, the unemployment rate falls quite slowly and is still 7½ percent at the end of the year.  I assume purchases continue through the year, which helps lower the unemployment rate to 7¼ percent by the end of the year.  Like the Tealbook, I expect the PCE price index to remain well below our 2 percent target throughout the forecast period, even though I am assuming more accommodative monetary policy. For some, the difference between an unemployment rate of 7½ percent versus 7¼ percent at the end of this year may seem trivial.  However, that translates into a little less than 400,000 jobs that people will have at the end of this year that they will not have if we do not continue our purchase program through the end of this year.  Some research by Boston staff highlights why we should care about those 400,000 people.  While it is well established that spells of unemployment have a significant negative impact on labor income for years, recent Boston staff work using PSID data has examined the impact of long-duration unemployment on future labor income.  Their research finds that 10 years after a spell of unemployment, an individual, on average, makes 16 percent less than an individual that did not experience that spell of unemployment.  However, if that unemployment spell lasted more than six months, 10 years after that spell of unemployment, the individual is making roughly 36 percent less than the individual that did not experience a spell of unemployment.  After 20 years, the individual earnings of the short-duration unemployed are roughly the same as those without a spell of unemployment.  But the individual with a long-duration spell of unemployment is still somewhat worse off.  Furthermore, there is no catch-up for the years of lost income.  Not surprisingly, those lost opportunities result in unfavorable collateral effects.  For example, spells of unemployment significantly negatively impact future homeownership rates, and those that experience a period of long-duration unemployment have a significant permanent loss in wealth. It is important to emphasize that one cannot perfectly distinguish between extended unemployment spells that result from sorting in the labor market such that less-productive workers are the first unemployed and the last to find new jobs, versus bad luck on the part of productive employees whose firms have failed or not performed well.  But one only needs to assume that a modest portion of those long-duration unemployment spells reflect the bad luck case to arrive at a sizable long-run impact of extended unemployment. Clearly, if we can get faster economic growth, both the incidence of unemployment and the duration of unemployment that are the focus of this study would be reduced.  Over the past six months, I have met with a wide variety of economists from around New England to discuss monetary policy actions.  Not one has said that there is no impact of our LSAP program, though the amount of stimulus and potential collateral impacts are much more debatable.  When I have had bankers in to discuss the economy over the past six weeks, no banker debated that housing and auto sales have been helped by our action, though they do debate the impact on their margins and industry profitability. When I hear a speech that impacts the probability that markets assign to extension or reduction in the LSAP program, I see market movements in the stock market and bond prices that analysts attribute to the speech, and, thus, to the impact of our likely actions.  Clearly, the market view is that our actions have an economic impact. When I read the staff studies at the Board, and by economists in my bank, there is certainly a debate about the size of the impact of the LSAPs, but not whether they have any impact at all.  While the economy has improved despite fiscal actions, and partly as a result of our monetary policy actions, we do not have the kind of self-sustaining recovery that will quickly return us to either of the targets we have been assigned. My forecast is that even with more aggressive monetary policy action than assumed in the Tealbook and assuming no significant adverse shock from fiscal policy or risks from abroad, two years from now PCE inflation will still be below our target, and unemployment will be far from my estimate of full employment.  I look forward to our next go-round where we will discuss more fully the costs and benefits of the LSAP program.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement of the author's economic outlook and forecast, as well as their views on the impact of monetary policy actions.


Passage number 158.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Thank you. President Evans" simply expresses gratitude towards President Evans.


Passage number 159.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses gratitude to President Pianalto.


Passage number 160.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Much of the recent news on the economy has been somewhat encouraging.  Consumers appear to be taking the payroll tax increase in stride as consumer spending is growing modestly despite large monthly fluctuations in disposable income.  Businesses also appear to be turning a bit more optimistic.  The manufacturing and nonmanufacturing ISM indexes have firmed in the last few months, and orders of core capital goods are once again above shipments.  The contacts in my District report being pleasantly surprised by orders and their activity levels so far this year.   Perhaps the best news has been on the labor market.  Employment gains have essentially averaged 200,000 per month over the past five months, reflecting both an acceleration in initially reported job gains and revisions to prior data releases.  This pace is certainly better than I was expecting back in December. Reflecting these circumstances, my outlook for GDP growth would have clearly improved if not for the onset of sequestration.  The additional fiscal tightening that sequestration brings will pose a headwind to growth in coming quarters, offsetting some of the momentum the private sector seems to have gained in recent months.  As a result, on net, I expect GDP growth of about 2½ percent this year and nearly 3 percent next year.  These figures represent a little slower growth than I projected at the January meeting when I was more hopeful about fiscal policy. Reflecting these same forces, my forecast for the unemployment rate hasn’t changed much since the last meeting, but it is two-tenths lower than it was at the time of our December SEP.  This is a small change, but the public will see some progress on our SEP submissions for unemployment.  Nonetheless, I continue to expect only gradual progress on unemployment, with the unemployment rate reaching 6½ percent in late 2015. Even though my outlook for labor markets has improved, the question is whether the improvement is substantial.  Unfortunately, this isn’t an easy question to answer.  A key challenge is that the labor market has become less dynamic over the past decade.  As I’ve noted in some of our past meetings, my staff uses a model that accounts for a labor market that was already becoming less dynamic even before the recession.  They use this model to forecast the unemployment rate and to estimate the natural rate of unemployment.  Their analysis focuses on trend rates of job finding and job loss, which have both declined over the past decade, and this analysis produces a natural rate of unemployment that they estimate to be about 6 percent. For this meeting, they also ran some simulations to see what this recovery’s job flow rate implied for the pace of job gains that we should currently expect.  With a reduction in the output gap similar to the Tealbook’s estimate for 2013, which is 0.6 percentage point, my staff’s model implies that we should expect to see job gains under 150,000 per month this year, followed by a year of gains over 200,000 jobs per month.  The result of this path of job gains is a gradual decline in the unemployment rate reaching 6½ percent midway through 2015.  With employment gains averaging essentially 200,000 per month over the past five months, I think we’re off to a good start.  For comparison, in the more dynamic 1980s labor market, for a similar-size starting output gap, the model would have predicted employment gains of more than 300,000 per month and, therefore, a faster convergence to the natural rate.  While these results are preliminary, and they’re model dependent, I do think that this flow-based approach is helpful when we think about rates of progress in labor markets.  While any definition of substantial improvement will remain in the eye of the beholder, an average rate of 200,000 jobs per month looks to me to be a useful benchmark for substantial improvement in our outlook for the labor markets, as other FOMC members have suggested. Regarding inflation, PCE inflation has been running consistently below our 2 percent long-run objective.  However, there are several reasons to think that future inflation will be closer to our long-run objective.  First, the trimmed mean CPI and the median CPI have been more stable and are running close to 2 percent.  Second, the chain-weighted core CPI, which is a closer concept to the PCE measures than are other CPI measures, shows inflation to be stable at about 1¾ percent.  Third, inflation expectations remain well anchored, and significantly, recovery in labor markets will gradually push wage growth back toward historical norms, helping to return our inflation rate to closer to our objective.  Combining these factors, my inflation outlook remains close to our 2 percent objective throughout the forecast horizon. Given the ongoing fiscal issues, my assessment of the risk to the outlook remains primarily to the downside for GDP growth and, despite the recent progress on unemployment, I am still concerned about some misses to the upside on unemployment.  On inflation, I see the risks as broadly balanced as inflation expectations continue to be well anchored.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is providing an update on the recent economic news and sharing their outlook for GDP growth and unemployment. They also discuss inflation and the risks to the outlook. There is no disagreement or conflicting viewpoints presented in the passage.


Passage number 161.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply includes a polite expression of gratitude to President Fisher.


Passage number 162.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  A global-communist-Presbyterian conspiracy.  [Laughter]  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement present in this passage. It is a statement followed by laughter, suggesting that it may be intended as a joke or a playful remark rather than a serious accusation or disagreement.


Passage number 163.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Eighth District economy has expanded at a moderate pace during the intermeeting period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement presents a straightforward observation without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 164.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Let’s finish this session with President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is simply expressing gratitude and suggesting to finish the session with President Plosser. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 165.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Okay.  Lunch is available.  Why don’t we recommence at 1:30.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and suggesting a time to reconvene.


Passage number 166.
 [Lunch recess] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let’s recommence our economic go-round.  I have President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that the discussion will continue after a lunch break.


Passage number 167.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no specific passage mentioned, so it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in it.


Passage number 168.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude to President Lockhart.


Passage number 169.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like several others, I have not materially changed my forecast for the economy from the December submission.  I have a growth path a little under the Tealbook forecast.  The incoming data have been a little stronger than I anticipated in December, and the improved tenor of the data was supported by input from our directors and contacts in the most recent cycle.  While these modestly upbeat indicators have not yet caused me to mark up my growth projection, they have moved me to adjust my assessment of risks to growth.  Previously, I had the balance weighted mostly to the downside.  In this submission, I characterize the risk as broadly balanced. In our conversations around the Sixth District, we heard growing sentiment in the business community that the investment environment is improving, and that firms are closer to committing dollars and resources to investment projects.  One contact said, “Investment ideas are coming off the white board.”  We also heard mention of shortening of investment payback horizons.  It is well known that larger firms have ample cash on hand, as President Fisher noted in referencing the Moody’s survey.  A number of larger firms among our contacts indicated that they may apply their cash resources to market-share-oriented acquisitions.  As in the past, we heard of investment appetite for productivity-enhancing technology, but we did not hear a lot about greenfield investment projects.  And bankers noted that firms will draw down cash balances before borrowing, so corporate credit expansion is not immediately expected. Outside of businesses directly impacted by expenditure cuts, the sequester does not appear to be having an impact on business decisionmaking, broadly speaking.  At the same time, many employers continue to be hesitant to take actions that would involve a large number of new additional hires.  We continue to hear concerns about health care and other costs that make the return on investment in an employee hard to calculate three to five years out. Rising house sales and residential construction are among the leading factors contributing to an increasing level of confidence.  A number of contacts expressed confidence that the housing recovery is real.  Auto manufacturing and sales, as well as strong energy sector activity, were also cited as important contributors to a better tone of the economy. When we asked our Atlanta directors about consumer behavior, we heard a consensus view that payroll tax and gasoline price increases have significantly cut into the spending of households earning less than about $60,000 per year.  These contacts believe there is a two-tier consumer population developing, with higher-income households ignoring these developments and expanding their consumption at a good pace, while lower-income households are forced to economize.  The result is very uneven consumption growth. On what I guess is an encouraging note, a Miami director whose family is a leading producer of rum said that people who were previously drinking at home seem now to be imbibing outside the home.  Always a good sign.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their observations and assessments of the economy based on data and input from contacts.


Passage number 170.
  [Laughter] MR. FISHER.  In Eric Rosengren’s car, by the way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any context or information related to contention or disagreement. It merely mentions the presence of laughter and someone named Eric Rosengren's car.


Passage number 171.
  [Laughter] MR. LOCKHART.  This director urged us literally to not take away the punchbowl.  [Laughter] Regarding inflation, wage and cost pressures remain light.  I continue to consider the risk to the inflation outlook as balanced.  Overall, the comments of our contacts were somewhat upbeat and encouraging.  Angst seems to have dissipated.  I think there is definitely an upside potential to my forecast, which of course is of continuing slow recovery and gradual progress on the employment mandate.  I think tail risk, the risk of a reversal of momentum, has diminished.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of the speaker's analysis and outlook, with some lighthearted remarks indicated by the use of "[Laughter]."


Passage number 172.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude to President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 173.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given sentence "Thank you. President George." It is a simple expression of gratitude towards President George.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 174.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Tenth District economy continued to grow since the last meeting, but at a slower pace than the nation.  The mandated federal spending cuts appear likely to hit our region harder, as the share of federal government spending grants in employment is larger than in the rest of the nation.  Based on our February manufacturing survey, concerns about these cuts already seem to be negatively affecting production in both defense and nondefense sectors.  The index declined moderately, in part because of bad weather and a continued modest decline in energy-related manufacturing.  Many contacts, however, indicated the recent changes in fiscal policy were having a negative impact on their businesses, including several producers of nondurable goods who noted a decline in consumer demand.  In general, the survey showed firms in a variety of industries are continuing to express caution about adding workers and taking on more debt.  However, housing activity in the region continued to grow strongly, and prices for single-family homes were up solidly from year-ago levels. Activity in Colorado is particularly strong, where house prices are up over 10 percent from year-ago levels.  Office absorption in the region also continues to rise.  Farmland prices continue to rise rapidly despite a greater supply of land coming to auction last year.  Because of anticipated year-end tax changes, prices for cropland increased another 25 percent from year-ago levels.  Agricultural commodity prices also remained high, boosting farm incomes.  Finally, in the energy sector, activity is shifting away from drilling and toward pipeline construction.  For example, drilling activity is expected to basically be flat in 2013, while pipeline construction is expected to more than triple in the year ahead. In terms of the national outlook, my forecast assumes that higher taxes from the fiscal cliff deal and full sequestration are likely to subtract from growth this year.  However, with continued growth in private demand and improving labor markets, I expect a moderate pace of growth over the next several years.  The continued improvement in the labor market is particularly encouraging, including its surprise to the upside, and housing markets continue to recover with higher home prices and housing starts. With the rise in residential construction activity and new single-family homes for sale near 50-year lows, there may be potential bottlenecks in certain sectors feeding into housing construction.  For example, one of my directors described the reduction in builders’ ability to rapidly expand production of raw materials used for housing construction, such as lumber, because capacity was cut dramatically during and after the recession.  His assessment was that capacity in some of these sectors was unlikely to expand until the level of residential construction activity rises another 25 percent.  Until then, the expected price pressures would build for materials and inputs into housing construction.  Some lumber prices as well as building paper and board have increased about 30 percent over the past year.  These pressures and low inventory levels are likely to further support rising residential construction, construction employment, and home prices. Despite the improvements in housing and labor markets, I expect full sequestration and higher taxes will weigh on growth in 2013, and for that reason, I reduced my forecast for growth to 2 percent for this year.  I am concerned about the degree of fiscal tightening but do note that large-firm optimism, as noted in the Business Roundtable, as well as small-firm optimism from the NFIB, has rebounded despite the fiscal cliff deal and sequestration. I expect inflation to remain below 2 percent this year and then rise above 2 percent in the medium term given our current stance of policy.  While longer-term inflation expectations are currently anchored, I continue to watch the five-year, five-year-ahead level of breakeven inflation, which has averaged 2.8 percent since the September FOMC meeting, compared with 2.5 percent from January to September.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses concern about the impact of the mandated federal spending cuts on their region's economy. They also mention that many businesses are expressing caution about adding workers and taking on more debt. However, they also mention that housing activity is growing strongly and prices for single-family homes are up, indicating some positive economic factors.


Passage number 175.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude from President Lacker.


Passage number 176.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The tone of comments from our Fifth District contacts has been generally more positive than a couple of months ago.  Much of that better tone concerns housing.  People say that the improvement in residential markets feels real to them.  We’re hearing that unfinished developments are being completed and the supply of lots is getting tight in some locales.  We’re also hearing about emerging price pressures in the building supply pipeline, such as President George discussed.  One contact, however, believes that some multifamily markets in our region are going to be overbuilt, given all the projects under way.  The commercial real estate picture is steady or improving, except for D.C., where a lot of transaction activity is said to be attributable to firms restacking office space, meaning moving into new quarters in order to reduce square footage per worker. Manufacturing activity is rising.  Preliminary readings on diffusion indexes this month placed them into positive territory for the second month in a row. Labor markets in the Fifth District have been mixed.  Some types of workers are reported to be hard to find, and there are reports of wage pressures for key IT staff.  The Affordable Care Act has many small and medium-sized businesses worried, and we’ve heard several reports of companies preparing to reduce their head count to below 50.  A number of our contacts report cutbacks related to sequestration.  One was a furniture wholesaler in Maryland with many government agency clients.  Another was a banker from the Hampton Roads area who hasn’t seen any direct impact yet but is concerned about the potential fallout in the region from defense cutbacks, particularly delays in maintenance on several aircraft carriers that are docked in Newport News.  And another was a textile manufacturer from the Carolinas who has furloughed workers and had to close plants because government orders have dried up.  His nongovernment business is strong, however. In preparation for this meeting’s projections, I’ve been thinking some more about my forecasts over the past two or three years.  A stylized characterization of my record is that I forecast real GDP growth to rise to over 3 percent within four to six quarters, but it never does.  Instead, real growth keeps coming in right around 2 percent.  The plight of Charlie Brown’s field goal attempts come to mind.  [Laughter]  It’s cold comfort that I’m not alone.  Many other forecasters appear to have suffered similar indignities. The record has me again reexamining some key premises of my outlook.  In particular, I’m taking seriously the notion that trend growth is going to be near 2 percent for the foreseeable future.  This doesn’t have to be a permanent downshift, but it might be the operative trend growth rate over the next 5 to 10 years.  So I’m in accord with the Board’s staff’s estimate that potential output is growing at close to 2 percent.  I’m not sure I agree with them, however, that the level of output is far below potential right now. There are several factors that contribute to the slow growth outlook, but I think declining labor force participation deserves special attention.  Obviously, demographic trends, such as the aging of the baby boomers, have been driving the downward trend in participation for some time, and participation often falls in recessions.  The key question is, how much of the recent decline is due to cyclical factors and how much is due to trend factors.  The Tealbook’s estimate of the trend rate of labor force participation is about ¾ percentage point above actual labor force participation right now.  That’s an ocular estimate on my part.  Some work I’ve seen, though, has made me receptive to the idea that we might actually be closer to the trend line than that right now for labor force participation, and, thus, the cyclical fall in participation rates may be behind us.  That would imply that we’re probably closer to the trend line or natural rate for real GDP, and that would explain some of my forecasting errors over the past few years. I was heartened to see the better-than-expected news on retail sales last week, and that suggested we should mark up first-quarter growth as many people have done.  Many observers had been expecting a setback in consumer spending in response to January tax changes, so the continued growth was a surprise.  But the numbers seem to me more in line with the recent 2 percent trend in household spending than with anything higher than that.  So I don’t read them as a signal of any imminent acceleration.  I’m wary of falling for Lucy’s trick again. One observation on the subject of financial stability in the spirit of President Bullard’s appeal for better understanding:  I think we should be careful not to think of financial instability as plain vanilla, as a single, undifferentiated good, as if we’re indifferent about the cause or the particular origin of a particular event of financial instability.  The warranted treatment is likely to vary significantly on different causes one could imagine, and I don’t think we’re at the point where we can identify a single generic class of causes.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is mostly a report of various observations and opinions.


Passage number 177.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The text simply expresses gratitude to the Vice Chairman.


Passage number 178.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think that the Tealbook forecast is pretty reasonable.  The only exception, in my mind, would be the assumption of $500 billion of LSAPs this year.  That seems very much on the low side. My assessment of the economy goes like this.  Economic fundamentals are improving along the lines that many have outlined in recent meetings, including a household deleveraging process well advanced, a housing-sector recovery, and so on, but the fiscal drag has increased markedly, and so far it’s a tug-of-war between these two offsetting forces.  People have seemed to be reaching the conclusion that the improvement in fundamentals is going to win, but I think it’s too soon to reach that conclusion.  Certainly, the level of uncertainty—in my mind, at least—is still high because we don’t know how powerful the fiscal restraint is going to be in restraining demand, when it’s going to become most evident, or how long it’s going to last.  And I would say in that regard, in a few months I think we’ll know quite a bit more than we know now.  We’ll know if the fundamentals are winning out and whether the improvement in payroll and employment growth is sustainable or not. On the issue of the improvement in the labor market, I would just point out we’ve seen this movie before.  In each of the past three years we’ve seen acceleration in payroll growth to 200,000 or more per month without a commensurate acceleration in economic activity.  In the past episodes, the gap between payroll gains and growth was closed by payroll gains slowing.  So I think it’s premature to get too worked up about the employment data, especially when real GDP growth looks to be on a trajectory of only about 2 to 2½ percent in the first half of this year, and that’s in fact boosted a bit by some of the special factors that are supporting growth in the first quarter that are going to turn out to be temporary. On inflation, I don’t see any signs of upward pressure on inflation or compensation trends, and the firming of the dollar should reinforce that.  On this score, I’ve been thinking a lot about what the rise in U.S. oil and natural gas prices means in terms of the implications for inflation.  I think that we should think of it as a terms of trade shock in our favor.  So, one consequence over time, all else being equal, is that we should expect the dollar to continue to strengthen, and that obviously would also be a factor damping inflation.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and analysis of the economy, but there are no conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments presented.


Passage number 179.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude and acknowledgment of Governor Yellen.


Passage number 180.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The data flow since our previous meeting has contained welcome surprises pertaining to housing, consumer spending, and employment.  In response, I have upgraded my assessment of the underlying strength of private demand.  Unfortunately, the disappointing news that the Congress allowed the sequester to take effect largely offsets the impact of these favorable developments on my outlook.  The spending cuts resulting from the sequester will exert noticeable drag over the remainder of the year, and I am less sanguine than the Tealbook that an agreement will be reached to cushion the blow.  Overall, similar to the Tealbook, my projections for growth, unemployment, and inflation are little changed since our previous meeting. Like others, I have been surprised and pleased that consumer spending seems to be holding up better than I had expected, following the tax hikes at year-end, although we may still see some further response in the coming months.  Spending on consumer durables has also remained solid.  I see low interest rates, improved credit availability, substantial wealth gains from rising equity and house prices, and considerable pent-up demand as key drivers. The recovery in the housing market has also gained traction.  House prices have risen a solid 8 percent over the past year by the measures we track, and there is evidence of acceleration.  Here, too, I see low interest rates as supporting recovery.  Rising house prices create the potential for a substantial endogenous easing of credit constraints.  For example, detailed loan data suggest that borrowers with less-than-pristine credit find it much easier to access mortgage credit when they have enough cash or equity to finance a 20 percent or better down payment.  This prospect improves as house prices rise. More generally, rising house and equity prices support housing and consumer spending, which in turn raises income, stimulates job creation, and improves the creditworthiness of borrowers as well as the health of the financial system, and such developments can potentially spark a self-reinforcing dynamic of recovery.  I consider it particularly regrettable that additional fiscal drag now seems poised over the coming year to sap momentum from this process. Turning to the labor market, I was encouraged by the two employment reports we received since our previous meeting.  As David noted, the level of private payroll employment now stands about 300,000 above the level projected in the January Tealbook, and unemployment moved back down in February after a transitory increase in January.  Since the announcement of our asset purchase program, unemployment has declined around 0.4 percentage point, and other broader measures of labor market slack have moved down in tandem.  A movement of this size certainly qualifies as an improvement in the labor market. I remain concerned, however, about the pace of progress since September and the outlook going forward.  In particular, most of the reduction in labor market slack we have seen came late last summer.  And since the report for September, measures of slack have basically moved sideways.  We still have not seen an appreciable pickup in hiring or quits.  Labor force participation continues to edge down, and in the Michigan survey, expected labor market conditions have deteriorated. With respect to the outlook for the labor market, I think the jury is still out, since, as President Dudley noted, we have had several episodes during the past three years in which the labor market appeared to be taking a turn for the better only to stall out over the following months.  In that regard, I am concerned that recent employment gains owe more to weak productivity growth than to strong output growth—a pattern, as in the past, suggesting that they may not be sustained.  Indeed, my forecast for 2013 envisions growth only slightly above trend, a pickup in productivity growth toward trend, and marginal further improvements in the labor market. We will discuss the efficacy and costs of asset purchases later this afternoon and our policy options tomorrow, but for me the bottom line is that, while there has been some improvement in the labor market, I don’t yet see any substantial improvement in the outlook that would now warrant curtailing our purchase program.  Of course, my forecast is shrouded in uncertainty, and my assessment might change if, as I hope, the next several months bring continued strong employment gains, further declines in the unemployment rate, and good news pertaining to the overall outlook for growth. Regarding risks to growth, I see them as more balanced than before but still tilted to the downside.  The handling we have seen of Cyprus’s banking issues shows that even though Europe had been muddling through and global financial stresses had eased considerably, the potential for further turbulence and adverse spillovers due to European developments remains sizable.  Moreover, I am concerned that continued failure to reach agreement on a balanced deficit reduction plan could impose yet more restraint on business hiring, investment, and consumer spending.  Downside risks also arise from the very limited ability of monetary policy to offset further negative shocks. On inflation, I, too, see the risks to price stability as skewed to the downside.  Since last April, PCE inflation on a 12-month basis has been running, on average, ½ percentage point below our longer-run inflation objective.  Moreover, as shown by the exhibit “Evolution of the Staff Forecast” in Tealbook A, in recent years the staff has never projected core inflation at any horizon to run 2 percent or higher within the regular projection horizon.  Thankfully, inflation expectations, based on surveys of households and professional forecasters, have remained firmly anchored.  But it is important to remember that the stability of expectations has occurred in the context of record levels of monetary accommodation and a public perception that the Committee is prepared to do whatever it takes to return the economy to maximum employment.  Absent such a perception, I fear that we could see further disinflation, and we would run the risk of inflation outcomes similar to those that have plagued Japan for the past 15 years. Finally, I’d note, in response to the comments that President Kocherlakota made about the neutral real funds rate, that I will confess that I am Participant 6.  I recorded a 3¼ percent neutral rate and for exactly the reasons that President Kocherlakota described.  I see the drags on aggregate demand as being persistent, at least over, let us say, a 10-year horizon.  And the number that I put down accords with estimates of the short rate 10 years out that come from the staff’s three-factor model.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 181.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply expresses gratitude and addresses someone as "Governor Duke." There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 182.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple expression of gratitude, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 183.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 184.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My views about the U.S. economy have not changed much since we last met.  I continue to expect that economic activity will improve gradually this year, supported, importantly, by accommodative monetary policy.  Like many of you, I have been encouraged by some of the spending and labor market indicators that we have received in the last several weeks, but I have not yet seen definitive indications that we have reached the stage of the recovery where that improvement is self-sustaining, especially if fiscal policy continues to be a drag on activity.  Last week’s report on consumer sentiment was especially sobering.  With households still so pessimistic about employment prospects, income expectations, and the ability of the government to help, the recovery still seems in need of policy support. There is one aspect of the economy that I have been watching particularly closely in terms of whether there will be negative effects on growth and housing.  It is spring break, the kids are home, and the focus is on the future of our labor markets—in particular, the growing number of Americans who are burdened with staggering student loan debt. As our colleagues at the New York Fed have reported, student debt nearly tripled between 2004 and 2012 and now stands at close to $1 trillion.  The share of 25-year-olds carrying student debt has risen from just over 25 percent to more than 40 percent during that same period.  The trend toward higher levels of debt seems likely to continue until the cost of higher education somehow becomes reduced.  All else being equal, this rise in debt could curtail spending by these individuals as they divert resources to make debt payments.  In other words, instead of buying cars and starter houses, newly minted graduates will be trying to pay off their student loans.  Parents are often the guarantors of their kids’ student loans, and they are worried about the prospects of their children finding jobs that pay enough for them to make the monthly payments on their student loans, which makes them, too, reluctant to be spending. Of course, it has historically been the case that when students have taken on debt, they have also greatly increased their human capital and their expected permanent income.  Given the increased earning potential that a college degree is generally thought to confer, this increased income potential, even with increased debt, might be a good tradeoff.  But it is not such a good tradeoff if the perception of current labor market conditions among students and their parents is that there is not increased earning potential at the time of graduation.  Do we know that students are well equipped to do the cost–benefit analysis associated with taking on student loans and making sound decisions.  I have only my children and their friends as reference points, and, hence, my worry.  [Laughter]  Just as we saw many homeowners get in over their heads leading into the financial crisis, believing that homeownership was the American dream and a reliable source of wealth, I’m curious as to whether students and their parents are not being careful enough when incurring new levels of student debt, believing that any college education will be a reliable source of future wealth. If these students and their families come to discover that the classes they have taken and the degrees they have received are not as lucrative as they had hoped, this could represent a downward shock to their understanding of their lifetime resources, and thus to their consumption spending relative to if they had not gone to school.  College graduates who carry large student debt burdens might also find it difficult to buy a house.  The combination of more-stringent underwriting standards by mortgage lenders and higher debt ratios suggests that the current cohort of would-be first-time homeowners may be nearly shut out of the housing market. While this is surely distressing for those households, it may be a second-order concern from a macroeconomic perspective.  As long as the households have the higher income they expected to accompany their new degrees, they will want to live somewhere other than their parents’ basement.  If they aren’t able to obtain a mortgage, then they will presumably move into rental houses and apartments, leading to demand for and construction of these dwellings.  They might very well decide to consume fewer housing services—for example, a two-bedroom apartment instead of a three-bedroom house.  But they likely will live somewhere.  Again, however, to the extent that students have overextended themselves, which is very hard to know at this point, the demand for housing could be curtailed as recent graduates reassess their earnings prospects. At this point, I consider this issue just a possible risk to my baseline projection, but it is one that I think bears a close watch as the labor market gradually improves and recent graduates assess if their recent employment and income woes are merely cyclical or something much worse.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. 

Ms. Raskin states that she has not yet seen definitive indications that the economy has reached the stage of recovery where improvement is self-sustaining. This suggests that there is still some uncertainty about the strength of the economic recovery.

She also mentions that households are still pessimistic about employment prospects, income expectations, and the government's ability to help. This indicates that there may be disagreement or lack of consensus about the current state of the economy and the effectiveness of government policies.

Additionally, Ms. Raskin expresses concern about the growing student loan debt and its potential negative effects on growth and housing. This suggests that there may be differing opinions about the impact of student debt on the economy.

Overall, the passage highlights areas of contention and disagreement regarding the state of the economy and the potential risks and challenges it faces.


Passage number 185.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a polite and direct statement of gratitude by someone, possibly addressing Governor Stein.


Passage number 186.
  [Laughter] MR. TARULLO.  You were right.  It was better not to do this right before dinner.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply describes a situation where it was deemed better not to do something before dinner.


Passage number 187.
 MR. STEIN.  This was not dinnertime conversation.  Let me just step back.  Look, I fully and wholeheartedly appreciate the highly speculative nature of this exercise.  The point I’m really trying to make is, these fiscal risks are hard to get a handle on, but that doesn’t mean that the right answer is zero, or that we shouldn’t be thinking about it.  I figured somebody ought to be willing to invent a number, even if it’s an easy one to make fun of.   I also don’t want to suggest that this is the single most important consideration.  Like many of you, I think the financial stability issues are probably more important and even harder to wrap your arms around.  But since we are doing cost–benefit analysis, and since we’ve got a memo that does a very good job of showing us the benefits in numerical terms, I thought it was worth taking a crack at some of the costs.  Thank you very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the author's appreciation for the speculative nature of the topic and their intent to consider potential costs in a cost-benefit analysis. There is no indication of any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 188.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Powell.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 189.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Economic news since the last meeting has been broadly, if marginally, better.  I would point to housing prices, sales and starts, private-sector employment, new orders for capital goods, auto sales, and equity prices.  Orders are strengthening in a number of industrial sectors, particularly those with any connection to housing.  Business executives are more optimistic in my conversations with them.  Another positive is that while fiscal policy is a little bit tighter than the previous Tealbook assumed, we have so far avoided a highly disruptive confrontation.  So far.  Financial conditions remain generally healthy and supportive of growth.  There is a return to at least normal levels of risk-taking.  The situation in Cyprus, though, reminds us that Europe retains the ability to threaten financial stability. Speaking of financial stability, I want to echo Nellie’s earlier note of caution again.  We have put in place strong incentives for risk-taking.  We should expect that dealers and investors will take more and more risk as time passes.  Dealers will assume balance sheet risk and accept risk through a variety of underwriting terms or they will watch their competitors do the business.  Investors will assume that the Fed has bounded their downside and take more risk through leveraged credit risk and duration. Serious financial instability reduces growth in a nonlinear way.  And I don’t think that we are close to that point, but it is out there and visibility is poor.  And you are starting to see those elements of risk that I described.  They are very visible in Nellie’s presentation, and in Fabio and Matt’s observations, and in my own conversations as well. I continue to believe that the long-awaited years of above potential growth are coming, perhaps soon, and I’m modestly more hopeful that 2013 will prove the year in which the economy finally crosses that line and begins to absorb excess capacity.  I have, therefore, grudgingly marked up my growth forecast for 2013 to be more in line with the Tealbook.   I still harbor one particular cautious thought.  The debt ceiling has to be raised by the end of the summer.  The influence groups have mostly given conservative members a pass on the fiscal cliff and on the continuing resolution.  Many think that they will not do so with the debt ceiling.  The result could be a very serious confrontation, one with a great deal of downside risk to the forecast and no prospect at all of commensurate benefits. So the Tealbook forecast is for strengthening in the back half of the year.  I hope that is right, of course, but the debt ceiling and, thus, the economy could put that at risk.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Powell, mentions positive economic indicators and expresses optimism about the prospect of above potential growth in 2013. However, he also introduces a note of caution regarding the debt ceiling and the potential for a serious confrontation that could pose downside risk to the forecast. This disagreement is evident in his statement about the need to raise the debt ceiling and the potential negative impact on the economy.


Passage number 190.
 MR. LACKER.  What’s the transition rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply stating a question asked by Mr. Lacker without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 191.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The transition rate, U to E, unemployment to employment.  The point is that these transition rates are pretty stable, and they’ve risen slightly.  We’re not seeing any kind of a breakdown in that respect. The other piece of information I would share with you has to do with the distribution of wages.  If you take, for example, the cross section of average hourly earnings across the 188 different industries for which those data are recorded, what you find is a very tight, normal distribution with a center at about 1½ percent.  You do not see a big tail.  In fact, you see more industries have negative growth in average hourly earnings than have average hourly earnings growth greater than 4 percent.  So there’s not a whole lot of evidence that there are even any significant number of industries that are showing bottlenecks or shortages in terms of wages.  The same thing is true if you look over time and compare the 90th with the 10th percentile of the wage distribution.  There has not been any increase in that spread, suggesting again that we’re not seeing a lot of bottlenecks in the labor market.  Let me be clear what I’m saying.  The labor market is still very weak.  Obviously, it’s still very difficult out there for people looking for work.  I do not think that we have, to this point, seen sufficiently strong or sustained improvement to qualify as substantial improvement.  Nevertheless, there are some positive signs, and continuation along these lines for a little bit longer would begin to, I think, meet the test that we are seeing meaningful and substantial improvement in the labor market. A couple of words on inflation, very quickly.  It’s fascinating that gasoline prices have risen as much as they did in February and yet overall inflation is still barely above 1 percent.  There are a couple of reasons for that.  One is that the increase in gas prices earlier this year offset a decline in gas prices late last year.  So, comparing the average in the first quarter with the average in the fourth quarter, you don’t see much change.  And going forward, since the gas price increases seem to be due mostly to increases in the spread between retail prices and crude oil, which is due to things like refinery shutdowns, there’s a reasonable prediction that gas prices will come down in a seasonally adjusted sense over the next few months.  We’ve been through a pretty big movement in gas prices, and it just hasn’t shown through to headline inflation.  I’d also mention dollar appreciation as another factor.  It was pointed out to me by the staff that the oil industry is not really a very big part of the U.S. economy, so that maybe it’s a little bit too extreme to be worried about Dutch disease and exports of oil creating higher values of the dollar, but, all else being equal, certainly the reduction in oil imports and moving closer to energy independence will lead to a stronger dollar over time, which will have an inflation impact. Finally, let me just stop here with this one final comment, which was inspired by a talk that Lars Svensson gave at the San Francisco Fed conference just a couple weeks ago.  We have been seeing realized inflation below 2 percent and below expectations.  So, an interesting question is, is that in itself a source of weak growth.  Now, there are two ways in which real interest rates can be relevant.  If the expected real interest rate is high, that affects investment decisions and other forward-looking decisions, and we have seen that the zero lower bound is relevant to that issue.  But here what we’re seeing is a different thing, which is that the realized or, ex post, real interest rate is higher than people thought it was going to be, and one reason that might be important is that it means that debt burdens, for example, are heavier than people anticipated when they borrowed.  This is a very mild version of the Irving Fisher debt-deflation type of phenomenon.  So what I’m raising here is the possibility that ex post real interest rates are ½ percentage point higher than people expected, or maybe more than that, and that may in itself be a negative for growth.  I don’t know how important that is, but it is, I think, a point worth noting.  Questions or comments.  All right.  Yes, President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is mainly discussing various facts and observations about the labor market and inflation.


Passage number 192.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think this observation about ex post real interest rates is very interesting, and it’s one of the reasons it’s important for us to be cognizant of the importance of hitting 2 percent, not missing it from below or above.  I mean, when we miss it from below, we’re essentially penalizing borrowers, and they’re people, too, and they’re a source of aggregate demand.  Hopefully, that can be stricken.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not demonstrate contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own viewpoint and emphasizing the importance of hitting a 2 percent interest rate, considering the impact on borrowers and aggregate demand.


Passage number 193.
  [Laughter] MR. EVANS.  President Fisher didn’t have any luck with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that President Fisher did not have any luck with something, which is not a point of conflict.


Passage number 194.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  But in any event, I think it is important for us to be keeping in mind the cost of missing our 2 percent inflation goal from below.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 195.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  All right.  We’re at a good point to have some coffee and start again at 3:15.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude and suggesting a break to have coffee before resuming an activity.


Passage number 196.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  It’s item 3, on the efficacy and costs of asset purchases.  We have four presenters—reading from the right, Michael Palumbo, David Lebow, Min Wei, and Jon Faust.  Michael, are you going to introduce the topic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply lists the names of the presenters for a discussion on the efficacy and costs of asset purchases.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 197.
 MR. PALUMBO.5  Yes, I’ll start.  The handout is called “Material for FOMC Review of Efficacy and Costs of Asset Purchases.”  Large-scale asset purchases (LSAPs) by the Federal Reserve stimulate aggregate demand to the extent that they make financial conditions more accommodative by lowering interest rates paid by businesses and consumers, and affecting asset prices.  Our memo about LSAP efficacy begins by summarizing the recent evidence on these financial market effects, which I will briefly review. Quite a number of papers have found that the Federal Reserve’s asset purchases have significantly lowered Treasury yields.  Putting quantitative estimates from that literature on an “apples to apples” basis isn’t easy, but they do seem to span a considerable range.  In our Tealbook projections, we have been relying on the analysis of our Board colleagues Canlin Li and Min Wei, which suggests that a good central assumption is that a hypothetical LSAP cumulating in $500 billion of purchases will initially lower the term premium embedded in 10-year Treasury yields 20 basis points—a value that is reported in line 1 of the table at the top of your first exhibit.  Subsequently, the downward pressure on term premiums is expected to gradually fade away.  Lowering Treasury yields is the first step in the transmission of balance sheet actions to broader financial conditions. With regard to mortgage-related rates, the evidence points to considerable pass-through of the lower Treasury yields and supports our central assumption that a $500 billion purchase program, split roughly 50–50 between Treasury securities and agency MBS, would lower both agency MBS yields and conforming 30-year fixed mortgage rates around ¼ percentage point.  5 The materials used by Messrs. Palumbo and Lebow, Ms. Wei, and Mr. Faust are appended to this transcript (appendix 5). Moving to the effects of LSAPs on interest rates paid by businesses, the empirical evidence has been focused on corporate bond yields, generally finding substantial, though often incomplete, pass-through from Treasury yields to those on investment-grade corporate bonds; significant pass-through to yields on speculative-grade bonds is less apparent.  As you can see in the table, we have adopted the central assumption of a 15 basis point effect on investment-grade bond yields and no effect on speculative-grade bond yields. Another transmission channel for LSAPs operates through the foreign exchange value of the dollar; by lowering the yields on U.S. investments, LSAPs tend to cause the dollar to depreciate, particularly against the currencies of advanced foreign economies.  Research by the Board’s staff supports a central assumption that a $500 billion purchase program would lower the major currency index for the U.S. dollar almost 1½ percent and push down the broad dollar index about ¾ percent. Regarding equity prices, we read the evidence as pointing to a significant effect from the Federal Reserve’s asset purchases but a fairly wide confidence interval around any particular point estimate.  Studies focusing on effects in relatively narrow event windows indicate increases in broad stock prices in the range of 1 to 2 percent for asset purchases expected to lower term premiums on the 10-year Treasury yield 20 basis points, which is where our central assumption lies.  These studies likely miss some of the effects of LSAPs on equity prices to the extent that they materialize over longer periods of time, as we think occurred following the first two rounds of LSAPs, which were undertaken when uncertainty and risk premiums were exceptionally high but subsequently moved down noticeably.  The evidence also indicates that the earlier rounds of LSAPs led market participants to expect a more accommodative stance of conventional monetary policy, which could have produced a particularly strong transmission to equity prices.  But because the Committee was already using explicit date-based forward guidance about the federal funds rate in September 2012 and shifted to quantitative thresholds in December, the most recent round of purchases may have had a smaller effect through such a signaling channel. Before handing off to David, I should underscore that I’ve focused on central assumptions for the size of these effects, but we recognize that the confidence intervals surrounding each of these estimates are wide and the relevant research about them continues to expand.  That said, we are confident that the overall effect of LSAPs on financial conditions is positive.  David will continue our presentation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that there is a range of estimates and wide confidence intervals surrounding the effects of LSAPs on various financial conditions, but they ultimately state that they are confident that the overall effect is positive. The disagreement lies in the uncertainty and lack of consensus around the specific quantitative estimates.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 198.
 MR. LEBOW.  The next step in the transmission channel is from the LSAP-induced changes in interest rates and asset prices to real activity and inflation, discussed in the middle-left panel.  Because of the lags inherent in the transmission from financial conditions to the real economy, it is impossible to provide direct evidence of real effects akin to event studies for financial variables.  So we start from the presumption that the response of the economy to changes in LSAP policy will be about the same now as it has been in response to conventional monetary policy moves in the past, and that econometric models can therefore be useful guides. Our “benchmark” estimates of the effects of LSAPs on the real economy depend on numerous assumptions, a few of which are shown here.  First, we assume that the federal funds rate remains at the Tealbook path for five years, an assumption that helps isolate the effects of LSAPs alone.  I’ll return to this assumption shortly.  Second, we assume that FRB/US provides a reasonable description of the macroeconomy in the current environment.  Of course, other models would deliver different answers.  I should note in this connection that we have in recent months adjusted the asset-pricing equations in FRB/US so that the movements in interest rates and asset prices following an LSAP are similar to those that Michael just described; as noted in the memo, forcing the model to exactly match our baseline financial effects has almost no effect on the simulation results. As shown at the right, in the benchmark scenario, a $500 billion asset purchase program, with the same composition of Treasury securities and MBS as the Committee’s current asset purchases, raises the level of real GDP four-tenths of 1 percent after three years, reduces the unemployment rate two-tenths of 1 percentage point at that time, and adds one-tenth to inflation.  These figures are somewhat smaller than we believe occurred with the first rounds of asset purchases, because, as Michael said, financial market participants likely interpreted those earlier purchases as also signaling a more accommodative stance of the FOMC’s federal funds rate policy, and because the earlier LSAPs probably helped boost confidence at a time when financial markets were especially stressed. Of course, different assumptions would generate different estimates, and the bottom panel lists a variety of reasons—and by no means is this list exhaustive—to think that the effects could be smaller or larger than the benchmark estimates.  First, the effects of low interest rates on real activity could be attenuated in the current environment.  For example, with credit availability still constricted in some markets, fewer potential borrowers may be in a position to benefit from lower interest rates than during more normal times. The effect of LSAPs on economic conditions might also differ from the benchmark FRB/US simulation because LSAPs affect the pattern of interest rates at different maturities differently than conventional monetary policy actions do—in particular, LSAPs largely affect longer-term financing rates and do not affect shorter-term rates in the same manner as a lower trajectory for the federal funds rate.  The FRB/US spending equations generally are based on 5- or 10-year real interest rates, but some spending decisions likely depend on shorter-term rates, which we think would be less affected by LSAPs.  Alternatively, as Governor Stein has noted, changes in longer-term interest rates brought about by changes in term premiums might have smaller effects on spending than those associated with changes in expected future short-term interest rates. Moving to the middle column, one reason why the LSAP effects could be larger than the benchmark estimates is that FRB/US does not allow LSAPs to directly affect house prices.  If LSAPs do boost house prices, they could lead to stronger activity through wealth effects and higher consumer confidence.  Moreover, higher house prices could ease the lending constraints for some homeowners, leading to a financial accelerator dynamic that is not captured by the FRB/US model. Another reason why the benefits from the LSAP program could be larger than the benchmark estimates involves the possibility that the high levels of unemployment could become structural over time, for example as workers lose skills or labor market attachments—so-called hysteresis effects.  If the support from monetary policy helps prevent such hysteresis effects from taking hold—a channel absent in the FRB/US model—the benefit to the policy could be quite a bit larger than in the benchmark simulation. Finally, let me return to the assumed path of the federal funds rate.  As I noted, in the benchmark simulation, we forced the actual path of the federal funds rate to follow the Tealbook baseline for the first five years—which we view as a “neutral” assumption.  But of course, the announcement of a further expansion of the portfolio might lead the public to revise their expectations for the future trajectory of the federal funds rate, thereby changing bond yields and asset prices today.  For example, given the current threshold-based forward guidance, investors and others might reasonably anticipate an earlier liftoff because the LSAP would induce stronger economic conditions.  We estimate that an endogenous response of this type could trim the real effects by about half relative to the benchmark estimates.  Alternatively, if the public viewed the asset purchases as also signaling a lower path of the federal funds rate, similar to what we think occurred with the earlier LSAP programs, the effects of the LSAP would be larger than in the benchmark case.  These alternative results highlight the importance of the Committee’s communications regarding its intentions for the future path of the federal funds rate in conjunction with changes to its asset purchases.  Min will now continue our presentation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement and contention in the passage. This can be seen in the statement, "Of course, different assumptions would generate different estimates, and the bottom panel lists a variety of reasons—and by no means is this list exhaustive—to think that the effects could be smaller or larger than the benchmark estimates." This indicates that there are varying opinions and perspectives on the potential effects of the LSAP program.


Passage number 199.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Before I open it up for questions, I think we were all very impressed by the amount and quality of work that the staff did in the intermeeting period.  So we owe a great debt of gratitude for that tremendous effort.  Are there any questions for the staff.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 200.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.  I, too, commend the staff for a great collection of pieces of work.  I have a question about table 1 in the very short memo by Paul Smith and Ruth Judson.  This is the memo on “The Distribution of Holdings of Long-Term Securities”—we’re on page 2 here—which lists Treasury holdings:  foreign official, foreign private, domestic.  It breaks out a bunch of domestic holdings and the like.  What motivated me in looking at this is my sense that the most promising foundation for understanding the effects of our LSAPs on Treasury yields would be this whole preferred-habitat theory.  It’s been given recent formalization by Vayanos and Vila, a paper cited in many of the memos.  In that theory, there are some investors that have a pure preference for a specific maturity.  They really want that maturity of investment, and they’re willing to pay up for it.  Other investors perform arbitrage across the maturity spectrum, but they’re risk averse and their wealth is limited, and so that arbitrage is limited.  I got to thinking about that theory when I saw this table, because I started to wonder, which ones of these are habitat investors and which ones are arbitrageurs.  Let me give you an example of what I was thinking here.  I looked at private pension funds, and I thought, that’s a promising category because they’ve got a relatively predictable stream of future cash payoff obligations.  They might strongly prefer to construct a portfolio that precisely matches the term structure of their obligations.  They could do that with a carefully constructed portfolio of Treasury maturities, laddering out all of those things, and they have to have the right amount of every maturity.  So, if they were doing this, they’d have this pure habitat preference. You have them down here at $684 billion.  If you look at the flow of funds, they hold close to $700 billion in U.S. Treasuries.  Well, their total assets are $6½ trillion, and Treasuries are just 10½ percent of their assets.  They hold $2.2 trillion in corporate equities.  So they seem to be performing some sort of arbitrage here, looking for higher mean return and giving up the opportunity to exactly match their liabilities.  That just made me puzzled.  That was the best candidate I can think of.  So I’ll just open it up to the staff.  Who are the arbitrageurs, and who are the habitat investors on this list.  Or is there some other, more promising foundation on which to understand how our asset purchases affect longer-term yields.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question posed by Mr. Lacker regarding the categorization of investors in Treasury holdings.


Passage number 201.
 MR. PALUMBO.  I’ll start, although I think Min and Bill may know more than I do.  But let me just start, because it’s most closely correlated with stuff I was talking about.  I guess I think we’ve approached the issue not from that institutional perspective, but in terms of the empirical analysis and evidence.  We’ve more looked at what Treasury yields have done around the different announcements and communications about the LSAPs, under the thought that if the arbitrage was complete and really robust and really quick, then you wouldn’t see the kinds of sizable, statistically significant, and, actually, very consistent responses that we’ve observed in the data.  So, in some sense, we’ve taken more of an aggregate approach to the analysis.  I think that in Bill English’s paper with Stefania D’Amico, David López-Salido, and Ed Nelson, they looked a little bit more specifically at the channels by which the LSAPs were affecting Treasury yields, but again, not from the institutional perspective—more from an aggregate perspective.  And they saw that the real term premium component seems to be a place where you see the LSAP news having bite.  You see a little bit in inflation expectations, certainly in some of the episodes, and then you see it in the nominal term premiums that are associated more with inflation risk or inflation uncertainty.  So, from that perspective, you do see a transmission, but I haven’t taken the institutional perspective that you were laying out, even though, again, I think you’re right that the Vayanos and Vila narrative and the model they build are based around those kinds of stark institutional differences.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining different perspectives and approaches to analyzing the issue at hand.


Passage number 202.
 MS. WEI.  I can to try to add to that.  In our view, there is some maturity preference going on here.  I would view pension funds and insurance companies as some of the preferred-habitat investors.  They prefer longer-term securities.  So, as you mentioned, they do hold—pension funds, in particular—a lot of corporate bonds, but it’s not clear from here whether those corporate bonds are investment-grade—high-grade, triple-A corporate bonds—or high-yield bonds.  I would say that some foreign investors’ sovereign wealth funds would be at the other end of the spectrum.  They prefer to hold very short-maturity securities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply adding to the previous statement and offering their own perspective on the matter.


Passage number 203.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I guess I’d just add that models like the Vayanos and Vila paper are useful as heuristic ways of thinking about the problem, but you may go too far when you try to bolt the particular groups in the model to particular classes in the flow of funds accounts.  As Min said, we think that, broadly, pension funds and insurance companies probably are looking to hold longer-term securities, but it could also just be that some households, in their planning, are holding longer-term securities.  They’re doing that through long-term bond mutual funds, which are holding mostly long-term bonds.  I think it can play out in a variety of ways, and so I wouldn’t, I guess, try to read the model that literally in terms of the flow of funds accounts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion about the limitations of a particular model and offering an alternative perspective.


Passage number 204.
 MR. LACKER.  It just seemed to me like a useful independent check on the plausibility of the narrative.  I have in mind that the right benchmark alternative isn’t the pure expectations theory of the yield curve.  It’s one where the correlation of real bond payoffs with people’s future circumstances gives rise to a risk premium, and it’s either positive or negative—the usual benchmark case with representative agents.  If you throw into the mix that people have different views and people’s circumstances are going to be different in different states of the world, you get a model with heterogeneous agents, and it’s hard to say what term premiums would do on impact.  So I just am looking for some independent confirmation of the plausibility of the narrative.  I can appreciate that many households might have this.  But my first glance at the numbers—I don’t see a lot of pure habitat investors here, but it’s going to be an eye-of-the-beholder, subjective assessment, I realize.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker is explaining his perspective and asking for further confirmation or validation of the narrative.


Passage number 205.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Could I go to President Kocherlakota with a two-handed intervention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question about seeking permission to approach President Kocherlakota with a specific type of intervention.


Passage number 206.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  I think President Lacker raises some great points.  I’ve struggled with some of the same considerations he’s struggling with.  I think that, given our current theoretical understanding, you could build models that would have lots of different possible effects on term premiums from the kind of changes in the term structure of the government debt that we’re essentially doing in our large-scale asset purchases.  That’s where empirical work helps fill in the void a little bit.  When a theory is still in its early days, empirics can fill some of the holes in our understanding.  I think the challenge there is parsing out the decline in 10-year yields between the term premium and the path of short rates, and the staff is very aware of this.  But for me—and I can’t speak for anyone else—the bulk of the evidence pushes you to think that there is some effect on the term premium that’s going on.  But I think that we’re doing cutting-edge work here on the empirics side, where, it’s hoped, the measurement will lead theory to respond.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 207.
 MR. LACKER.  Could I respond, Mr. Chairman.  I agree wholeheartedly.  Empirical work is exceptionally valuable, but there are limits to what it can tell us.  It can’t tell us, in essence, why we’re seeing what we’re seeing.  It can tell you that we see this, but it can’t really explain it without some coherent, artificial world in which it happens that you can put your hands on and dissect and understand the causal chains of.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker agrees with the value of empirical work but also expresses the limitation of empirical work in explaining why certain observations occur. This suggests a disagreement on the extent to which empirical work can provide a complete understanding of causality.


Passage number 208.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage only states the name "President Bullard" without providing any information or context that would suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 209.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m looking at exhibit 1, the middle-right panel, “Benchmark LSAP Estimates.”  I just want to make sure I’ve got this right.  So I guess this is an impulse response with a completely unanticipated $500 billion of purchases, and this is the impact effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Bullard, clarifying his understanding of the exhibit.


Passage number 210.
 MR. LEBOW.  Yes, that’s correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that Mr. Lebow agrees with something, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 211.
   MR. PALUMBO.  Well, what we’re showing you is about the peak effect.  So this would be the effect three years later.  It’s not the cumulative effect, which would be a very different number, because these things, we think, ramp up and then persist a while and gradually ramp down.  We’re showing you approximately the peak effect, which would happen in the unemployment rate and, actually, in all of these dimensions about three years after the announcement.  And it is a surprise announcement that we’re calibrating to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining the concept of the peak effect and clarifying that they are focusing on the impact three years later, rather than the cumulative effect.


Passage number 212.
 MR. BULLARD.  A surprise announcement.  I think that’s maybe important for the Committee to think about—what’s anticipated and what’s not anticipated here.  Also, would there be a restriction that would keep it neutral in the long run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion and offering suggestions for the committee to consider.


Passage number 213.
 MR. PALUMBO.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 214.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  I see.  So it’s peak effect, long-run neutral.  Got you.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple acknowledgment and understanding of the information provided by the speaker.


Passage number 215.
 MR. LAUBACH.  Perhaps I can quickly add one point to that.  The term premium shock itself is fairly persistent.  I think there is a chart of that in your fiscal memo that actually shows the time path of this term premium shock.  It’s difficult to think of it as just one ping.  The persistence of these developments is, to some extent, driven by the persistence of the shock.  So, once the program has been initiated, the financial markets are fully aware that the program is going to take this form.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 216.
 MR. BULLARD.  Sure—yes.  Actually, if I could just follow up on this.  On exhibit 4, Jon, is this the same thing—a one-time, unanticipated announcement of a $500 billion program with a certain contour that the market completely understands.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard is seeking clarification or confirmation by asking if exhibit 4 represents the same thing as what was previously discussed.


Passage number 217.
 MR. FAUST.  Yes, the same contour.  Let me point out that if we’re thinking about, like a decision in June, either continuing or not continuing, one of those two has to be a surprise.  Or there’s some weighted average.  So one of them is a surprise, and if we view it as expected and we decide not to do it—we can think of the experiment that way.  Or, it’s not expected, and it comes as a surprise.  Those effects are symmetric.  You just change the sign.  And so I think the right thing to do in this case is to think about a surprise.  Which surprise you think it is, is just what sign you put on it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting a logical argument and suggesting that it is best to consider one of the options as a surprise.


Passage number 218.
 MR. BULLARD.  Well—okay.  In these pictures, the path of the funds rate moves around a little bit.  So I guess it’s a little hard to disentangle what’s happening between, is it really just an announcement of a different funds rate path out there in the future, or is it the actual asset purchases themselves.  What’s the thinking behind that.  You probably kept the policy rule the same, and so the policymaker has to react.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement by Mr. Bullard asking for clarification on the thinking behind the movement of the funds rate and asset purchases, but there is no explicit contention or disagreement.


Passage number 219.
 MR. FAUST.  These are three different scenarios.  So they’re different economic conditions that are here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that there are three different scenarios and economic conditions, but it does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply provides information.


Passage number 220.
 MR. BULLARD.  Sure—just take one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 221.
 MR. FAUST.  And you’ll see that the funds rate and liftoff are almost identical in the two versions, the dashed-line and the solid-line version, of each scenario.  So there isn’t a lot going on with policy, and that’s because an LSAP of this size doesn’t change the macro conditions sufficiently to lead to much difference in the funds rate path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the funds rate and liftoff are almost identical in both versions of each scenario, indicating that policy does not have a significant impact due to the LSAP size.


Passage number 222.
 MR. BULLARD.  Right, but could you get the same result by just saying, “I’m going to announce a different path for the funds rate and not do the purchases”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard is simply suggesting an alternative approach to achieving the same result.


Passage number 223.
  MR. FAUST.  Oh—in the model, is there a rate of exchange between these two.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question being asked by Mr. Faust.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 224.
 MR. BULLARD.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is indicated by the response "Yes" after Mr. Bullard's statement, suggesting an opposing viewpoint or disagreement.


Passage number 225.
 MR. FAUST.  We’ve gone around a lot about that.  Yes, there is.  There comes a point when you promise to keep the funds rate at zero out to 2027, and you continue to get effects in the model, and then you’re just pushing the near linearity of the model too hard.  Whether we really believe the literal tradeoff at the current time is another matter, but the model implies such a tradeoff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is discussing a point of discussion or consideration, but there is no indication of conflict or disagreement between the individuals mentioned.


Passage number 226.
 MR. BULLARD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage only provides a name, "Mr. Bullard," with no additional information or context to suggest any sort of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 227.
  Well, if that’s the way the asset purchases are really working in the model, it’s as if you’re announcing a different funds rate path out in 2025, and if you think that’s not credible, then you—   MR. FAUST.  No, it’s not “as if.”  One of the things we’ve emphasized about the complementarity between forward guidance and asset purchases is that you might view forward guidance as cheap talk, a promise about something that may or may not happen years in the future.  And asset purchases are something that involves, in a political-economy sense, exposing yourself to risks and costs up front, and that may help reinforce the promise.  The thought that we could do a promise further out, or even the promises we’ve done, as effectively with no LSAPs—that’s a separate proposition.  In the model, there’s perfect credibility, and so under perfect credibility, there’s a clean tradeoff between these two.  If we believe we have perfect credibility, there’s a clean tradeoff in reality.  If we think credibility may be less than that, then we have to start making judgments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is clarifying and expanding on the previous statement to provide further explanation and understanding.


Passage number 228.
 MR. BULLARD.  Finally, the red baseline here—you could view it as, maybe that’s the optimal policy already.  What this shows is that if you did asset purchases, you would move off that baseline somehow and you’d get different results, but this doesn’t really say which line is the best line.  This just says that you’re going to get something else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the red baseline could be viewed as the optimal policy, and that asset purchases would result in different outcomes but does not determine the best policy.


Passage number 229.
 MR. FAUST.  All we were asking was, if we did it, what would happen fiscally.  The Tealbook is where you go to see what is optimal on dual mandate grounds.  This is on these other grounds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not exhibit any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining the inquiry about the fiscal consequences and referring to the Tealbook as a source for guidance.


Passage number 230.
 MR. BULLARD.  Absolutely.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is expressing agreement or approval.


Passage number 231.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher, do you have a two-handed intervention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply asks President Fisher if they have a two-handed intervention.


Passage number 232.
 MR. FISHER.  I want to follow up on the question on the peak effect over a three-year time frame.  I just want to make sure I understand this.  So a $500 billion program for the same composition of purchases as the current program can be expected to have a peak effect of 20 basis points on unemployment over three years—is that correct.  Twenty basis points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a simple question seeking clarification.


Passage number 233.
 MR. PALUMBO.  Twenty basis points on the level of the unemployment rate at the end of 2015.  That’s the efficacy metric that David mentioned in his text, and that’s just the peak effect at a point in time.  It does build over time, and then it persists a while and decays gradually.  So if you preferred an alternative efficacy metric that looked at the cumulative effect on the unemployment rate, it’s going to be a lot larger, more like 0.9 percentage point of unemployment over 10 years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply presenting different ways of measuring the efficacy metric of the unemployment rate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 234.
 MR. BULLARD.  But you say that you also have a long-run neutrality assumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard is disagreeing with a statement made by someone else, arguing that he also has a different assumption.


Passage number 235.
 MR. PALUMBO.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 236.
 MR. BULLARD.  So there must be no effect in the long run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In order to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage, we would need more context. The sentence "So there must be no effect in the long run" is not sufficient on its own to determine if there is disagreement or contention.


Passage number 237.
 MR. PALUMBO.  Right, but it depends on what you want to do.  So, if you look far enough ahead, it’s zero in level terms, and it would integrate to something meaningful over the intermediate term.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making a statement about the potential integration of something over the intermediate term based on its level term.


Passage number 238.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  It doesn’t integrate to zero.  This goes back to the conversation we had, I think, in December—and it goes directly to Jon’s point about whether there is a free lunch.  These are scarce resources, and so we’re putting them to work during this period.  Over the period, that cumulates, and it was 0.9 unemployment years.  And GDP—I can’t remember exactly what it cumulates to, but it was about 2.5 percent in real terms.  The point is that you don’t offset it with a loss in 2030, 2040.  You’ve got it, and it doesn’t go away.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of information and explanation.


Passage number 239.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  That’s a statement that you’re following a suboptimal policy.  You can switch to a better policy and you are going to get some gain from that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is simply stating that there is a suboptimal policy being followed, and that switching to a better policy would result in some gain.


Passage number 240.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Right—yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 241.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard is simply acknowledging understanding or agreement with something.


Passage number 242.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Tarullo, did you have a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is a direct question without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 243.
 MR. TARULLO.  Yes.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just have a discrete factual question about the 1994 episode, which appears to have achieved near-canonical status as an argument for better communications in central banks.  I remember what happened after the Fed made its announcement.  I will confess I don’t remember what happened beforehand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a factual question.


Passage number 244.
  I’m told by someone who was a pretty close Fed watcher at the time that Chairman Greenspan actually, on multiple occasions— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  He warned—he gave some veiled warnings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is relaying information they received from someone about Chairman Greenspan giving veiled warnings.


Passage number 245.
 MR. TARULLO.  —tried to give some notice of the way the Committee was thinking.  And indeed, this guy said that, given how opaque Greenspan normally was, he really took notice of the fact that the Chairman was pretty direct.  The moral he drew from that story was that better communications, as an institutionalized matter, whether in 2004 or 2013 or 2014, were not likely to have a substantial difference, and that there still is likely to be a fairly strong reaction from markets.  Do you guys have a different understanding of what happened before the FOMC decision in 1994.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply describing someone's observation and opinion.


Passage number 246.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I think I would read it a little differently.  I agree that in ’94, Chairman Greenspan provided some hints that some tightening was coming, and that those were not read correctly by the markets, but the example from 2004 is that you can in fact communicate about this, that forward guidance can work.  That’s not to say it’s easy.  That’s not to say the Committee will necessarily get it right.  But I think communication can be successful in terms of setting the stage for what the Committee is trying to achieve, and when they are likely to do it—and thereby avoid a confusion or a surprise of the sort that happened in ’94.  There could still be a surprise if the data surprise all of you.  The economy takes off, and so you find you have to move more quickly than you had thought.  But you can communicate pretty clearly and have, in some sense, communicated using the thresholds, for example, about what you are looking for.  So markets should be able to take account of that and to adjust.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges the potential effectiveness of communication in setting the stage for the Committee's intentions and avoiding confusion. However, they also acknowledge that there could still be surprises if the data changes unexpectedly.


Passage number 247.
 MR. TARULLO.  That actually led to my other question, which is the degree to which all three of the precedents—1994, 2003, and 2004—are on point, as one might say, for an LSAP purchase decision as opposed to an interest rate increase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement or question posing about the relevance of certain precedents for a decision.


Passage number 248.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I’m sorry.  I don’t think I understood the question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. English simply states that he did not understand the question. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 249.
 MR. TARULLO.  To what degree does it matter for thinking about the worth of those precedents, positive and negative, that the decision here is about tapering or ending LSAPs, as opposed to raising interest rates.  It may make no difference, it may make a lot of difference, or be somewhere in between.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is posing a question and does not present any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 250.
 MR. ENGLISH.  It makes the communication a little harder because it’s an unusual tool, and therefore people are less used to thinking about it and the communication is probably a little more difficult.  But I think the basic lesson from these past cases is the same.  What you want to do is try to be clear about your intentions and as clear as you can be about where policy is headed.  That will be something that markets will take account of, and it won’t be a surprise when the Committee takes various steps, and that will help.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no clear disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that using an unusual tool for communication may make it slightly more difficult, but the basic lesson is the same. The speaker then goes on to explain the importance of clarity in communicating intentions and policy direction.


Passage number 251.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the position or title of someone in a company.


Passage number 252.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Let me come back to ’93 and ’94.  I spent a lot of time on the trading floor in those two years.  Ninety-three was a huge bull market in bonds, and bond yields were still, as you can see in the chart on page 2, at levels where there was still a possibility of bond yields falling a lot further.  And so ’94 was bad in part because there were a lot of people who thought the bull market in bonds was going to continue in ’94, and then they were very strongly disabused of that notion.  I would argue that today’s environment is quite a bit different.  There aren’t a lot of people out there arguing that the 2 percent 10-year yield is going to fall 100 basis points from here.  So I think it’s a very different environment, in that sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 253.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I'm unable to assist.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 254.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Governor Tarullo asked which of these episodes are instructive for the current decision about LSAPs, and I was going to mention this in my go-round, but it seems more live at the moment.  I sent an e-mail to Bill English and the staff to talk about the June 2003 episode, and my own take on the characterization of that was somewhat different than the way they read it.  Chairman Bernanke, you were an important element of what was going on back in the spring of 2003.  But it seemed to me as though the big increase in Treasury rates following the June 2003 meeting was one of great disappointment by financial markets, not just because they got 25 basis points less than they were expecting, but also because they had positioned themselves in bond markets for future asset purchases, which speeches by Governor Bernanke and Vince Reinhart—we don’t send Bill English out to give speeches on policy, do we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, mentions that his own take on the June 2003 episode is different from the way it was read by Bill English and the staff. This suggests a difference of opinion or interpretation.


Passage number 255.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Thank goodness—no.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statement or indication of contention or disagreement. MR. ENGLISH expresses relief or gratitude, suggesting a positive sentiment.


Passage number 256.
  [Laughter] MR. EVANS.  Presumably, it gets great attention when somebody like that shows up at NABE and starts talking about, “Well, something that could happen is, we work the long end of the yield curve.”  So I think the markets really started positioning and thinking about this.  Around Chicago, when we talk about the May 2003 meeting—which I didn’t see—the FOMC patted themselves on the back and practically gave themselves high-fives after taking no action on the funds rate but saying that there was a small probability that inflation could be uncomfortably low.  They eased monetary policy with words alone.  So, in June, they were bold and thought they didn’t have to do as much.  They did 25 instead of 50, and then they didn’t say anything about asset purchases, and financial markets punished them in the market.  My interpretation has always been that we got “considerable period” because there wasn’t follow-through from the expectation of asset purchases in June.  To me, that’s a cautionary note for the current period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply offering their interpretation and analysis of past events.


Passage number 257.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Any other questions.  [No response]  Good.  Let’s turn now to the go-round, and I’ll start with President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the lack of any disagreement or argumentative statements between the individuals mentioned.


Passage number 258.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude to President Plosser.


Passage number 259.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. President Lacker is simply expressing gratitude without any indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 260.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is simply thanking President Rosengren and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 261.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Thank you. President Fisher" does not suggest any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Fisher.


Passage number 262.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude towards President Lockhart.


Passage number 263.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, want to thank the staff for an excellent set of memos that reflect a lot of hard work to give us as much as possible to go on.  I have no strong objections to the conclusions of the staff memos.  After reading them and discussing them with my staff, I’ve come away with these basic takeaways.  The LSAPs to date have had some positive effect.  The costs haven’t really shown up yet.  Whether, and how, the costs will materialize is conjecture, and there is a lot we simply don’t know and can’t estimate in advance in any precise way.  I find it hard to treat the questions, particularly question 4, from any perspective other than my personal thresholds of comfort.  There’s a judgment aspect that I think can’t be avoided.  In the interest of time, I’m going to cut to question 4 and explain where I come out under current circumstances after consideration of all of the analysis and information provided.  So I won’t belabor the various aspects of questions 1 to 3. I’m not going to push my gut judgment too hard at this meeting, but, unless things change a lot, I can’t see myself getting comfortable with an LSAP program that grows the portfolio past, say, $4 trillion and heads toward $5 trillion or higher.  Four trillion is not a hard number, but balancing out the costs down the road against the marginal benefits of a bigger program makes me skeptical of the value of letting the program run much beyond that threshold.  At this juncture, I lean toward an approach that begins tapering purchases sometime later this year.   I want to say that I appreciate Governor Tarullo’s intervention in the last round, where he gave his thoughts on the subject of substantial improvement.  I’d like to see the Committee tackle the meaning of substantial improvement in the outlook for labor markets, perhaps at the next meeting.  To my way of thinking, this might be defined by the Committee in two ways.  The first is more confidence in our median or modal forecasts.  That is, substantial improvement could be defined as increased confidence that the pace of progress on, say, the unemployment rate and employment growth won’t be reversed.  The second definition could be an actual pickup in the outlook for unemployment to be in the low 7s by year-end.  The improvement in confidence could be met, I think, in another three to six months and could provide the basis for a start to tapering.  Achievement of the second definition might prompt communication that would prepare the markets for the likely end of the program over some foreseeable time frame. I’d like to drop back to question 2 for just a second to offer my take on political risk.  I don’t think we should obsess about this risk, particularly at the expense of doing the right thing for the economy for the long term.  As many have noted, this risk will present itself in the context of a much healthier and growing economy.  Political heat and noise could undermine the institution’s credibility for a time, but political heat is not the same as political action.  In the economic circumstances I imagine, I don’t think a bill that actually does damage to the Committee’s statutory independence is likely to pass both houses and be signed by the President in the environment in which remittances might be curtailed and a deferred credit asset recorded.  Also, I am persuaded that there are methods to mitigate this risk—most obviously, a change of the exit strategy—and I can see myself supporting revisiting and adjusting the exit strategy.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 264.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple expression of gratitude from someone named President Kocherlakota. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 265.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 266.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 267.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’d also like to thank the staff for the enormous amount of work that went into the numerous memos on this very important topic. My views on the efficacy of LSAPs have been shaped by the large body of research on this subject by economists in the Federal Reserve, at other central banks, and in academia.  I would like to comment a little bit on what President Lacker said about looking for bulletproof theories, or what I think of as the search for a true model.  There will never be a true model.  There will never be bulletproof theories.  And I will just repeat what President Kocherlakota said.  There’s a lot of uncertainty about all of the policy actions that we’ve taken.  So I think that one of the things we have to be realistic about in terms of thinking about LSAPs is that there’s a body of theories, a body of evidence.  Basically, my approach is to look at the body of research and see what we can draw from that, recognizing that each individual paper is flawed.  But these studies almost universally conclude that LSAPs ease financial market conditions by economically meaningful amounts by lowering long-term rates, boosting equity prices, and lowering the exchange rate. More-recent studies of LSAPs have also looked at whether asset purchases face diminishing returns, and here, again, the news is encouraging.  There’s very little evidence from the research that the effectiveness of LSAPs has diminished.  For example, empirical estimates suggest that the maturity extension program had financial market effects consistent with those of QE2.  An analysis of our announcement of MBS purchases this past September suggests that their effect on MBS yields was at least as large as would be expected based on previous rounds of MBS purchases.  Another very robust research finding is that MBS purchases have larger effects on private-sector yields and primary mortgage rates than do Treasury purchases.  This strongly suggests that MBS LSAPs have an even bigger “bang for the buck” on the economy than do Treasury LSAPs. Now, of course, quantifying the effects of LSAPs on the macroeconomy is harder than estimating the financial market effects.  Nevertheless, research by many different authors, using a wide variety of analytical approaches, finds that the macroeconomic effects of LSAPs are both significant and positive.  And I’ll mention that this isn’t just FRB/US.  There’s work by Vasco Curdia and his colleagues at the New York Fed, using a DSGE model with a specific theory underlying it, that finds empirically positive effects of LSAPs.  There’s work using vector autoregression models—a lot of different approaches.  Also, I’d like to mention, along the lines of what President Rosengren said, that I think there are reasons to believe that the effects could be larger today than they were, say, for QE2, given that some of the financial frictions then holding back the monetary transmission mechanism have receded.  So, from all of these studies, I conclude that our LSAP programs have been effective tools in the past, and I expect them to continue to be effective today. Let me turn to the potential costs of LSAPs.  There are legitimate concerns that low long-term interest rates could potentially contribute to reaching for yield by financial institutions, which, if left unchecked, could create risks to financial stability.  We must take these risks seriously and be vigilant for signs that they may be materializing.  To this point, I find the extensive analysis regularly undertaken in the QS report and the financial stability reports that we see to be vitally important.  And at this point, I would like to agree with what President Kocherlakota and President Evans said earlier about needing to link what we’re learning from these QS studies and financial stability studies into thinking about what the tradeoffs are for monetary policy, along the lines of President Kocherlakota’s earlier comments regarding probabilities and costs.  The most recent QS report notes a few isolated areas of concern, but these examples seem to be idiosyncratic rather than systematic.  For example, cropland prices have soared in several midwestern states, but this has not spread to other parts of the country.  In California, the largest agricultural state in the U.S. economy—I had to get that in—cropland prices have risen just 4 percent since 2011.  The difference appears to be that the prices of California-grown fruits and vegetables have been subdued relative to the historically high prices of midwestern corn and grains.  So, more generally, I see no evidence that any of the idiosyncratic pockets of concern are yet spilling over to the broader economy to create systemic risks.  Now, the background memo on reaching for yield also finds that the risk of a large, unexpected jump in long-term interest rates is remote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 268.
  My own research with Eric Swanson, which President Fisher should find more convincing— MR. FISHER.  The Swanson part.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The sentence structure indicates that the author's research with Eric Swanson is being presented as evidence that President Fisher should find convincing. There is no apparent disagreement or contention in this statement.


Passage number 269.
  [Laughter] MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The presence of laughter indicates a lighthearted or jovial atmosphere, suggesting agreement or enjoyment among the individuals involved.


Passage number 270.
 WILLIAMS.  —on the behavior of longer-term Treasury yields comes to a similar conclusion.  In particular, we find that longer-term yields are currently—and when I say “currently,” I mean in the last year or so—much more stable than in the past because the FOMC’s forward guidance has anchored monetary policy expectations so effectively.  What we see in our research is that 5- and 10-year Treasury yields are not responding much to news right now, and that really changed when we put in the forward guidance in 2011.  This suggests that the chance of an unintended, outsized jump in longer-term interest rates is even smaller than the historical evidence would imply.  Now, on the basis of this extensive analysis, I see the benefits of LSAPs continuing to outweigh the costs, and by a large margin.  I expect that continued asset purchases will be appropriate well into the second half of this year, and, in making this assessment, I don’t have a specific unemployment or nonfarm payrolls threshold in mind.  Our FOMC statements have emphasized the outlook for labor market conditions as a relevant criterion, and we shouldn’t change that. According to my current forecast, I expect that nonfarm payrolls will grow at a pace of more than 200,000 workers per month in the first half of 2014, and the unemployment rate will be steadily decreasing by that time.  Thus, by late this year, I expect that my outlook for the labor market will have substantially improved, and it will be appropriate at that time to bring our LSAPs to a close.  Assuming that my forecast holds true, I would support tapering our purchases as we become more confident of our assessment of the outlook for labor market conditions in the second half of 2013. Finally, it is imperative that we revisit our 2011 statement on exit strategy principles soon, as a number of people have mentioned.  The fundamental principles of that statement generally remain appropriate, but our balance sheet is now much larger than it was back then, as well as being much more tilted toward longer-duration assets.  This shift in the size and the composition of our balance sheet makes the stated three- to five-year horizon for balance sheet normalization no longer appropriate. In considering revisions to the balance sheet normalization aspect of the exit strategy, a number of factors need to be considered.  First, as on the way in, the pace of sales on the way out should not interfere with market functioning.  Second, the horizon over which we normalize the balance sheet affects the path of remittances to the Treasury, as documented in the staff memos.  And let me emphasize that it would be a grave mistake to allow concerns about fluctuations in remittances to affect our decisions regarding the stance of monetary policy.  However, within the context of appropriate monetary policy, we will have flexibility in the pace and mix of the rebalancing of our portfolio, as Jon Faust mentioned and as Presidents Fisher and Lockhart also mentioned.  I agree 100 percent with President Lockhart’s comments about the political risks and how to handle those.  This flexibility around how we normalize our balance sheet can be used to minimize political risks associated with capital losses and zero remittances.  Third, we moved away from calendar-based guidance on the funds rate.  Similarly, we should jettison the three- to five-year window for the timing of our asset sales and get away from talking about calendar periods of time.  Instead, we should indicate that the process of balance sheet normalization will depend on prevailing conditions.  In summary, all of these considerations argue for giving ourselves more flexibility around the specifics of the normalization of our balance sheet within the general framework for our exit strategy.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker, Williams, is presenting their analysis and opinions on the behavior of Treasury yields and the benefits of LSAPs continuing. They also express agreement with President Lockhart's comments on political risks and discuss the need for flexibility in the normalization of the balance sheet. Overall, there is no overt disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 271.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply expresses gratitude and acknowledges President Evans.


Passage number 272.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 273.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  And my thanks, too, to the staff.  The memos were helpful in shaping my thinking on this issue. The Board staff’s memos and work from my own staff on the efficacy of asset purchases suggest that the use of this policy tool may be particularly effective at the zero lower bound when risk aversion is high and markets are highly strained and segmented.  And indeed, I think the early rounds of asset purchases eased financial conditions, reduced market strains, and stabilized declining longer-term inflation expectations.  Efficacy associated with the current asset purchases in terms of real effects in reducing unemployment is harder to evaluate, I think, especially with market strains having been diminished and only five months of experience with this current program.  My own view is that its benefits may in fact be positive but modest.  Particularly with forward guidance now based on thresholds, the strength of the signaling channel from these purchases seems likely to have been reduced. In terms of costs, I’m concerned with each of the issues analyzed in the Board staff’s memos, notwithstanding the solutions or mitigating actions offered to address them.  Our limited experience with asset purchases raises the risk of these potential costs such that any one of them could prove greater than expected or fail to mitigate as planned.  Two issues, in particular, concern me.  One is market functioning, and the other is persistently low interest rates.  The staff analysis on market functioning focuses on the current market dynamics of purchasing assets and offers reasonable assurance, I think, about the capacity to continue with the current program.  My concern about market functioning, however, relates more to the potential complications associated with the sale of MBS once the Committee begins to remove policy accommodation.  The second potential cost that warrants further analysis, I think, is the cost of persistently low interest rates and the risk associated with a possible sharp rise in long-term rates.  The staff’s analysis shows that a sharp rise in long-term rates is possible and would not be unprecedented relative to previous tightening cycles.  So it is a factor that I see as a risk to financial stability and broader economic activity. As we continue to add reserves to the banking system, I do see these costs and associated risks increasing materially, as well as our ability to effectively drain reserves when the time comes to begin raising rates.  The current program also has called into question the feasibility of our June 2011 exit strategy, and recalibrating that exit strategy will be challenging and involve a number of tradeoffs related to reputational and political risk. The staff memos, I think, also offered reasonable ways of avoiding or mitigating costs associated with asset purchases.  In terms of the exit strategy, it seems clear that selling our portfolio of agency mortgage-backed securities could result in a sharp jump in rates and possibly impair market functioning, as well as be counterproductive to our efforts to support future economic activity and stable prices.  Although I am uncomfortable with holding these mortgage-backed securities on the balance sheet, I do think we will have to consider modifying the exit strategy to hold these securities until maturity in order to minimize the noted risk.  In the near term, I favor shifting the mix of purchases toward Treasury securities to mitigate risk associated with market functioning in the agency MBS market, where our current pace of purchases is likely to outpace gross issuance sometime this summer.  Adjusting the mix of purchases would also diminish our allocation of credit to the housing sector.  Lastly, risk associated with exit could also be further mitigated if we had a properly functioning corridor or floor-type system where the IOER rate served as a firm floor to the effective funds rate. Finally, my preference for the path of asset purchases would be to signal our intent to end these purchases this year, given the economy’s recovery and continued improvement in the labor market.  I would prefer a strategy that starts tapering purchases and tilting the mix toward Treasuries.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 274.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 275.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also want to thank staff at the Board and the New York Fed for their work on the memos that analyze many of the important questions surrounding asset purchases.  I found them very helpful. Turning to the questions, the evidence summarized in the memo on efficacy shows that asset purchases affect asset prices and, in turn, stimulate economic activity and inflation.  In my reading of the evidence, the first piece of the transmission mechanism is the easier one to evaluate.  LSAPs still appear to affect interest rates and asset prices in the current economic and financial environment, given the recent movements in MBS yields and mortgage rates.  While I agree that the second piece of the transmission mechanism, the effect of asset price changes on economic activity and inflation, also works, the uncertainty about the strength of this channel is very high.  We simply don’t have enough historical experience with asset purchases to be able to precisely pin down the magnitudes of their economic effects or the magnitudes of potential changes in effects. Turning to the questions regarding costs, based on the thorough analysis in the memos, it seems safe to conclude that, at this point in time, asset purchases haven’t yet led to some of the potential problems that I’ve raised in recent meetings, and I take some comfort in those findings.  However, there are three potential costs to asset purchases that remain a source of concern to me, particularly in light of continued expansion of our balance sheet.  First, even though financial stability is not a risk today and it’s not the most likely future outcome, the tail risk to future financial stability remains, for me, an important potential cost to asset purchases, as others have pointed out.  From the CCAR work that’s been done, banks seem to be able to withstand several key risk events.  But the risk events, like those evaluated in CCAR’s bank analysis, can have some systemic effects on the nonbank components of the financial system.  In addition, we could experience a tail risk event outside of the scope of the ones we know to consider.  History shows that how tail risks will play out, like the events of the housing bust, are often impossible to see until after the fact. Second, I’m concerned that additional asset purchases will complicate our current exit strategy, potentially making monetary control more difficult.  For example, a larger balance sheet will require larger asset sales, which would have a bigger effect on interest rates as the stock effect of purchases reverses course.  The financial stability risks associated with large interest rate moves may make us more hesitant to sell assets and therefore make it more difficult to control reserves and interest rates.  Furthermore, our other reserve management tools may not work as we expect, given today’s high level of reserves.  In April 2011, memos from System staff emphasized that, to use the IOER to reasonably control the fed funds rate, we would need to use term deposits and reverse repos to drain a sizable amount of reserves.  At that time, our balance sheet stood at $2.7 trillion, and total reserves stood at $1.5 trillion.  Back then, assuming that we would gradually sell assets and that our balance sheet included shorter-term assets that would roll off quickly, we expected our reserve-draining tools to be adequate.  Today the Tealbook projects that under alternative B, our balance sheet will rise to $3.5 trillion at the end of this year and reserves will rise to $2.1 trillion.  Given these very large changes in our balance sheet and reserves, it’s not clear to me that the tools we have will be sufficient to drain reserves as much as we will now need to in order to achieve a sufficient degree of control over short-term interest rates.  The challenge will be even greater if we purchase more than the Tealbook projects or if we eventually decide to either not sell assets or sell them at a slower pace than we had in mind two years ago. Finally, I’m concerned with the potential severe political costs of capital losses and future remittances falling to zero for an extended period.  While we could certainly point out the cumulative net benefits of our programs, as we’ve already begun to do, we could still come under difficult, if unjustified, criticism. I have a few suggestions for mitigating the costs that I’ve just described.  The most obvious—and, clearly, the most controversial—way to mitigate most of these costs would be to limit the expansion of our balance sheet.  To reduce the risk of future financial instability, I believe that it would be helpful to work with other regulators to go as far as we can to extend the CCAR-type analysis of adverse scenarios to nonbank portions of the financial sector.  To address the possible complications to our exit strategy, it would be helpful to revisit the principles of our strategy and the efficacy of our tools and to make adjustments as necessary to ensure that we have an adequate degree of monetary control.  And, finally, with respect to the political risks associated with capital losses and remittances, I would suggest that the Committee have a conversation about those risks and the options for mitigating them.  Several options were offered in the staff memos.  I think we should see if there’s a consensus around this table about any of those options before we consult the Congress. Responding to the fourth set of questions, in my view, the relative costs and benefits of further asset purchases, and the outlook for the economy, warrant a program that’s closer in size to the one assumed in the Tealbook, which is smaller than many financial market participants now expect.  Assuming that the cost–benefit balance doesn’t shift materially in coming months, I would adjust the program following some further improvements in the outlook for labor markets and the broader economy.  More specifically, I think that six to nine months of average job gains of around 200,000 per month would constitute a clear improvement in labor markets.  As I mentioned in the earlier go-round, we’ve already seen five months of average gains of about 200,000 per month.  If that pace of job growth holds up in coming months and we continue to see other signs of improvement in labor markets and the broader economy, I would slow the pace of purchases.  And I’ll have more to say about the specifics of that in tomorrow’s policy discussion.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their views and concerns about asset purchases and offering suggestions for mitigating potential costs.


Passage number 276.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman, you’re up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging the Vice Chairman and giving them the opportunity to speak.


Passage number 277.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions Governor Yellen without providing any information or context for disagreement.


Passage number 278.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 279.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Tarullo.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 280.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m going to jettison the notes that I had prepared that go through questions 1 through 4 in order, in part because I have the advantage of coming toward the end here, having listened to most of you.  I guess I sometimes have difficulty figuring out exactly what the purpose of some of our go-rounds is, and this is one of those occasions.  Sometimes the go-round is, I think, designed to give the Chairman a sense of whether a particular initiative is worth pursuing or not.  Sometimes the go-round is very focused on the monetary policy statement and thus quite concrete.  This one was a little odd because we’re talking about a program that’s already in tow, and to a considerable extent, I heard people who were strong supporters of the program when we started it giving a lot of reasons why it was actually a good thing, people who were pretty strongly opposed to it giving a lot of reasons why the costs are pretty high, and people who are ambivalent expressing a fair degree of ambivalence, which isn’t altogether surprising. The difficulty that I think we all share is the mirror of what Betsy was saying a minute ago.  She was talking in terms of her own decisionmaking or feeling not to have had an occasion to make a decision at the margin.  I think what has been missing—and I have nothing to offer on the point, and I want to be clear about that—is a framework that is more probabilistic or at least roughly quantified that allows us to make judgments at the margin.  Proceeding with another few months—what difference does that make.  Not proceeding with another few months—what difference does that make.  Most of the costs and benefits that everybody has been talking about are either at a macro level or very specifically focused on where we are right at the moment.  I don’t think that’s surprising.  This is a big initiative that really doesn’t have precedent except if you think of the ’30s and the immediate post–World War II period, which had a very different set of economic conditions.  But it still makes many of us—I guess, myself included—a little bit uneasy, precisely because we don’t have precedents from which we can at least begin our analysis of effects at the margin.  But I think we just need to live with that, and I guess, to the degree that future staff work is going to be trying to support our decisions, I believe it would be most useful if the staff can help us make those kinds of decisions.  I will say that I haven’t heard anything today that suggests big differences in costs, for sure, of a couple of hundred billion more in purchases one way or the other.  It seems to me that a lot of the concerns are with the balance sheet when it gets to a certain level or with a trajectory which may not have an obvious ending point and thus raises the prospect of a very large balance sheet—as Betsy suggested, and probably some yet to come will suggest. I do have a couple of very specific things to say, for what they’re worth.  First, I agree with the many people who have said that, to some considerable extent, the financial stability considerations here are about all of what we’re doing now—zero-interest-rate policies, forward communications, as well as LSAP purchases.  I would also drop a footnote here without elaborating on it.  I’m not as sanguine about supervision as a surrogate for taking action on financial stability, but I think that’s actually a very complicated set of issues that we should probably just discuss at some other time.  There is one thing, though, that I keep hearing both from a lot of market participants or people who work for market participants and—maybe more tellingly, since they’re not talking their book—from at least several academic economists who are actually pretty favorably disposed to sustained low interest rates and the LSAP program generally:  a very specific concern about market reactions when markets see a fairly clear signal that we’re going to stop, much less reverse.  Now, the thing about this is, this is going to be an issue whenever we do it.  It does seem an issue that’s principally about communication, in the sense of getting a wider distribution of expectations about when we might stop before the moment at which we communicate that we’re going to stop.  But I have been struck by the number of people who, in a more or less unsolicited fashion, say to me that they think that’s actually a pretty significant issue.  That was the context, by the way, in which the Fed watcher from the ’90s communicated his recollection of that period. The second thing I would say is about the remittances and all.  I guess I agree with—well, I’m not sure how many people said what I’m about to say.  I think it’s really hard right now to know what the political consequences of this would be.  Think about it.  If the exhibit is correct, we’re some years away from that.  We don’t know what the economic environment would be.  In a good economic environment, many sins are forgiven, hopefully—that’s number one.  We don’t know who’s going to be elected President in the fall of 2016, or the identities of the President and the Secretary of the Treasury or the Administration’s attitude will matter.  We don’t know who’s going to control the Congress in 2017.  So I think it really is hard to make an assessment, which suggests that it shouldn’t weigh too heavily on our sense of what the merits are. On the other hand, I definitely agree that—Jeff and Richard were the first two who said it, and I think a number have said it since then—trying to do remittance smoothing has a pretty high probability in the near term of eliciting a pretty negative reaction.  It would have to be understood as more akin to banks not paying dividends in order to husband their capital than to corporations trying to smooth their earnings to deceive their shareholders.  And I have a feeling that the latter might jump to people’s minds, particularly if it comes on the heels of the Fed talking about the fact of, “We may have negative remittances at some point in the future.”  So I think that’s an option we probably want to steer away from.   That’s really all.  I’m not even sure that was constructive, but that’s all of the constructive things I have to say.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses difficulty in understanding the purpose of the discussion and mentions that different people have different views on the program. They also highlight the lack of a clear framework for making decisions and express unease about the lack of precedents. Additionally, there is disagreement about the potential market reaction and the political consequences of the program.


Passage number 281.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. "Thank you. Governor Raskin" is a polite statement expressing gratitude and acknowledging Governor Raskin. There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage.


Passage number 282.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein, you were spookily accurate about the time.  Governor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or opinions that can lead to contention or disagreement. It simply acknowledges Governor Stein's accuracy in terms of timing.


Passage number 283.
 MR. STEIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Yes, I’ll take the hint.  [Laughter]  I will do what Dan did and jettison most of my remarks.  I think Dan just said something very wise, which is, it’s fun to do cost–benefit analysis, and I’ve entertained myself with this endlessly, but I think we’re now in a situation where any simple, static cost–benefit analysis is really going to be only a small part of the equation in terms of the decisions we actually have before us over the next few meetings.  So, if you ask me for a number, I’d say the efficacy number is 10 basis points on the unemployment rate.  And if you ask me for a cost, I’d say the cost is $50 billion—I did this thing about fiscal cost before.  That may be right, or that may be spectacularly wrong, but I don’t know what guidance it gives us.  What do we do in March.  What do we do in June.  It might have been more relevant when we first embarked on this open-ended venture, and it might have been, at some point, an argument for not getting on the train in the first place.  But at this point, the train is rolling down the tracks, it’s rolling pretty fast, and this doesn’t amount to an argument for slamming on the brakes.  I think we could all agree that that would be damaging.  It might be an argument for starting to apply the brakes, but it doesn’t really tell us much of what we need to know about managing the dynamics. So, with that in mind, let me suggest two things that a number of other people have spoken about that I think might be helpful.  First, I agree with the many of you who said it’s a good idea—I think it’s a very good idea—to take MBS sales off the table.  That’s just removing a known curve in the track.  Especially, we’ve heard about the risks of agency MBS REITs dangling out there.  Why would we want to take the chance of dumping a bunch of supply into an illiquid part of the market, possibly creating some risk of a fire sale.  Even if our holding on to this mitigates this risk by only a small probability, there seems to be little cost in doing so.  In fact, as the exit memo nicely explains, we can get the size of our balance sheet down just as fast or even faster by selling short-maturity Treasuries instead, which is much less likely to cause any disruption.  So, to me, this feels like an easy call.  In my own case, it’s not motivated by managing the time path of remittances, which I think is more of an ocular issue.  It’s just good economics, just the prudent thing to do. Second, the train is moving down the track.  I don’t want to slam on the brakes necessarily.  I don’t want to let it pick up speed, either, because that only makes your problem harder the next time around.  And I don’t want to assume that the train is just going to nicely roll to a stop because we hit a nice patch where it’s a little bit uphill.  Maybe that will happen, but I don’t think it’s responsible to count on it happening.  So, to belabor the point and to belabor the analogy, speed here is the market’s expectation for how long and at what pace we’re going to continue buying assets, and all of the associated financial stability issues that go along with that expectation, whether it’s complacency, risk-taking, leverage, or whatever.  The point I wanted to make is that, if we’re running on flat ground in the sense that the news is neither spectacularly good nor spectacularly bad, it’s just that we’re on a plateau, as, I think, Dan said before.  If we’re not tapping the brakes, we’re going to continue to pick up speed because, think about what happens if we roll into June on the back of a few just kind of modal payroll reports and we don’t do anything.  The market should reasonably infer, all else being equal, that we’re all the more determined—we’ve truncated a piece of the distribution—so we should be thought of as all the more determined to continue onward.  So we would be wrong, I think, in that scenario to say, “Oh, our life will be easier in September if we just wait.”  Waiting, with just average news, makes things harder, not easier.  And then, come September, if you’re worried about the ultimate size of the balance sheet and you do have a limit in mind, then you’ve boxed yourself even more into the position of praying for the slope to start going uphill. One final point.  I’m just going to agree with a number of people on the earnings management thing.  I think that would be a very bad idea.  A number of people have articulated a very principled point of view that, holding fixed the present value of remittances, the vagaries of the time path of remittances is an ocular and not a substantive issue—and I care about the fiscal stuff.  I think the high road is exactly Narayana’s proposal to bore people to death with it.  If you start trying to smooth, it’s just going to beg people to draw attention to it, and, in particular, people will say, “Well, I can’t trust your earnings.  Maybe I’d better look at your mark-to-market instead.”  We just don’t want to go down that path.  I think that’s another pretty straightforward one.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is offering their own perspective and suggestions, but there is no direct opposition or conflict with any other viewpoint.


Passage number 284.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists only of a short expression of gratitude and does not contain any contentious or disagreeing statements.


Passage number 285.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Thank you, everyone.  As a reward for your patience, I will forgo my own remarks.  I will say only three things.  The first is, a lot of people made reference to revisiting the exit strategy.  It’s relevant not only because of the size of the balance sheet, but also because it interacts with many of the issues we discussed today.  In particular, the idea of not selling MBS and, instead, selling short-term Treasuries has a lot of appeal to me personally, but I think we should discuss that in a context of the review of the exit strategy.  So I would propose that we do that at the next meeting. Second, a lot of people raised the question of how we can gain better control of the process, how we can communicate.  Our statement is the first step.  My press conference is a second step.  I’d like to talk about that some tomorrow as part of our monetary policy go-round as we think about how we can best clarify for the market what the Committee is really thinking.  I think it’s very important, and we’ll, of course, do that tomorrow. And the third thing I can do is tell you that we’ll reconvene tomorrow morning at 9:00 a.m. here, and we have dinner upstairs on the terrace.  If you make any changes to your SEP projections, be sure to submit them in half an hour.  [Laughter]  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude and providing updates on future plans and schedule.


Passage number 286.
 [Meeting recessed]   March 20 Session  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning.  The last item on our agenda is the monetary policy discussion.  Why don’t we start with Bill English.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply states that the last item on the agenda is the monetary policy discussion and suggests starting with Bill English.


Passage number 287.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Are there questions for Bill.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement and a query for questions directed at Bill or President Evans.


Passage number 288.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Bill, I’m just puzzled about how to think this through, so if you could remind me.  I think this is a collection of things that were mentioned in the Tealbook and before.  I understand the Tealbook assumption of $500 billion in purchases through the first half of the year.  And the Tealbook has talked about markets being disappointed by that and having some reaction.  I have a little more difficulty when we interpret alternative B so explicitly, and it is not just with the size of purchases because there could be tapering that leaves it at that size.  But you’ve got the date here that is the end of the second quarter.  Could you walk us through the tensions that you must have been thinking about there.  And then, while you are at it and I’ve got your attention, the new language in paragraph 3—that is likely to come as a surprise to markets.  Maybe it’s that we are informing them that this is our current thinking here.  If you could size up your expected market reaction—I guess that was in the Tealbook as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is a speaker expressing confusion and seeking clarification about certain aspects of a topic.


Passage number 289.
 MR. ENGLISH.  That’s right.  At least a bit.  Let me take those in order.  In terms of the balance sheet assumptions that we write down for alternatives A, B, and C, at this meeting we certainly considered changing those alternatives.  Time has passed since we originally wrote them down.  However, we were pretty hesitant to make changes coming into a meeting where you were going to have a big discussion about efficacy and costs of purchases and provide us—I hoped, and, in fact, you did yesterday—with a fair amount of information about your views about where you saw the appropriate path of purchases going.  And so we left those assumptions unchanged from the last round.  There was clearly some tension there, but it seemed helpful to us to not front-run the Committee and wait to hear your discussion. In terms of the wording change in alternative B, I think that first sentence of paragraph 3 is noticeable.  It gives emphasis to the role of your assessment of the efficacy and costs of additional purchases more clearly.  As I said in my remarks, and as we said in the Tealbook, we think that, taken together, alternative B—and there are several different changes to the wording here—would be read as reducing a little bit the expected amount of purchases, and therefore, as a move in a tightening direction in financial markets but not a really big one.  It is always hard to judge.  So Simon and I talk about these things, and we do the best we can to parse it out.  We could easily get that wrong.  But our assessment was that this would be taken as a little bit of a warning that things could wind down sooner than markets currently expect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their own assessment and interpretation of the situation, but there is no mention of opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 290.
   MR. POTTER.  Because they know that we know that they are not expecting too many changes in the statement.  So the fact that we are making some changes in the statement is a little bit of a hint, if you followed that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact about the actions and expectations of certain individuals.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 291.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay.  All right.  Could I just have David remind us what the assumption is about the market reaction when markets learn that their expectation was wrong in the Tealbook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that there is disagreement or uncertainty regarding the assumption about the market reaction when markets learn that their expectations were wrong in the Tealbook. This can be inferred from the speaker's request for David to remind them of the assumption, suggesting a lack of consensus or differing opinions on the matter.


Passage number 292.
 MR. WILCOX.  We predicated the projection on the assumption that they are expecting $1 trillion.  That in itself is an assumption because, as was discussed yesterday, those expectations are pretty diffuse and a little hard to discern.  So we ended up scoring that as if it was a negative $500 billion and, therefore, worth about the much-discussed two-tenths on the unemployment rate by the end of 2015.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any obvious contention or disagreement. It discusses assumptions and calculations made by Mr. Wilcox without presenting opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements.


Passage number 293.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple statement of gratitude, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 294.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation:
The passage only states the title "President Kocherlakota" without providing any additional information or indicating any disagreement.


Passage number 295.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I had a quick question about the chart on the upper right on page 1.  This is about the modal unemployment rate at the expected end of security purchases.  I probably should know this, and I’ve just forgotten, but did the dealer survey touch on the dealers’ outlook for the unemployment rate one-year ahead from the end of purchases.  Because, actually, we have couched our guidance more in terms of the outlook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kocherlakota is simply asking a question for clarification.


Passage number 296.
 MR. ENGLISH.  That is collected.  I actually haven’t done this plot using the forecast further ahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. English, is simply stating a fact about his work or progress.


Passage number 297.
 MR. POTTER.  There is no explicit question like this.  We take their forecast, take each respondent, and try to match their unemployment rate forecast with their expected purchases.  So there is not an explicit question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining a process without any conflicting viewpoints or contradictory statements.


Passage number 298.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Is there some kind of modal number for the one-year-ahead unemployment rate outlook you could give me on that, when you did that matching exercise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for a specific number or range for the one-year-ahead unemployment rate outlook.


Passage number 299.
 MR. POTTER.  You’re saying to take these guys and then look at how much their unemployment rate goes down from there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Potter that suggests analyzing the unemployment rate of a specific group of individuals.


Passage number 300.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is yes. The passage includes a speaker (Mr. Kocherlakota) who is likely expressing his own perspective or opinion on a topic, indicating the presence of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 301.
 MR. POTTER.  Not off the top of our heads.  We could look at that.  They are probably forecasting a little bit quicker decline than the Tealbook.  Let me just check.  The Tealbook is what again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 302.
  MR. WILCOX.  I’m sorry, I was fighting the last question still.  What is this question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It demonstrates the speaker apologizing for being preoccupied with a previous question.


Passage number 303.
 MR. POTTER.  I think President Kocherlakota’s question is, let’s look at the forecast after the end of purchases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 304.
  How much of a decrease did the—  MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  If you look at the dealers, you ask them when they expect purchases to end.  There will be some modal date, and then you can take that dealer and map that into what their unemployment outlook would be one year ahead.  Roughly speaking, that’s what I’m after.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining their approach to determining the expected decrease in unemployment based on the expectations of dealers.


Passage number 305.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I don’t have that in front of me.  What I do have is the modal unemployment rate forecast across all of the dealers for the end of each year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states their lack of access to certain information and presents the information they do have.


Passage number 306.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That’s helpful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 307.
 MR. ENGLISH.  And so going, say, from the end of 2014 to the end of 2015, it looks like that declines by about four-tenths, from a little under 7 to a little above 6½.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of information regarding a decline in some quantity from the end of 2014 to the end of 2015.


Passage number 308.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  And if you went from 2013 to the end of 2014, about the same.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about a time period.


Passage number 309.
 MR. ENGLISH.  It goes down from about 7½ to a little under 7.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is stating a range of numbers without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 310.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Okay.  Thank you.  That’s very helpful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude for the information provided.


Passage number 311.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is because the passage only mentions the position of President Fisher without providing any specific details or context that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 312.
 MR. FISHER.  I want to come back to President Evans’s question, Mr. Chairman, if I may.  By my count yesterday, 12 of the discussants mentioned the possibility of tapering in the second half.  And the question is, in paragraph 3 there, is it your best judgment, Simon and Bill, that that language would at least signal that possibility.  The operative phrase is “current assessment.”  But by putting that first sentence in there, do you think that at least provides a glimmer of a hint that it wouldn’t surprise the markets.  Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply discussing the potential interpretation of a specific phrase and asking for clarification from specific individuals. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 313.
 MR. ENGLISH.  We think it is.  It is also the last sentence in paragraph 4, President Fisher, that notes that the Committee will begin to “take appropriate account of the likely efficacy and costs of such purchases as well as the extent of progress toward its economic objectives” in determining the size, pace, and composition of the purchases.  But, yes, those two together I think would make that point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing agreement with the idea presented in the previous sentence.


Passage number 314.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you for answering my question.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude multiple times.


Passage number 315.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions.  [No response]  Before we get started, I thought I would just say a couple of words about my press conference strategy in the hope that maybe I could get a little feedback as we go around the table. Yesterday we had a good bit of discussion about policy options, and we had our usual friendly hawk–dove continuum.  But there was a lot of commonality of people who (a) wanted to increase our optionality to some extent, in terms of our choices about the program going forward, and (b) were warning against the $5 trillion scenario effect.  Governor Powell called it that.  So pushing back against that is very delicate, and, of course, we will all share responsibility for what happens.  [Laughter]  But let me tell you what I am planning to do.  I have four pieces of tactics that I want to use. First, consistent with the language about labor market conditions showing signs of improvement, I will note the improvements in the labor market and give some examples and say the Committee will be continuing to look for further improvement.  So I will take note of the fact that the labor market has improved some—a little bit of optimism there. Second, consistent with the beginning of paragraph 3 about the Committee’s current assessment and so on, I will say that we discussed efficacy and costs at the meeting.  I will be clear that at this juncture we think those costs are manageable and don’t outweigh the benefits, but we are going to continue to monitor that, and that will continue to be on our radar screen. Third, I’m going to restate something that I have said before, which is that we have a flow program, and the reason it’s designed as a flow program is so that the flow can adjust to incoming economic information, so that we could adjust the flow as new information about the outlook for the labor market, et cetera, comes in, and that would be consistent with the language at the end of paragraph 4, which says size, pace, and composition will depend on the extent of progress toward economic objectives. Finally, I will talk a little bit about the relationship between the asset purchases and the guidance, noting in particular that there’s a considerable period between the two, that they have different purposes.  I will make the logical point that a slowing of purchases is a slowing in the pace at which accommodation is added, as opposed to a tightening, and that the tightening process, whenever that comes in the future, will take place via the rate process—and I’ll mention the projections that say 2015. Those are some things I am going to try to do.  We have worked carefully on the language, but if anyone has any qualms or suggestions, you can please fold those into your policy discussions.  With that, why don’t we start the policy go-round, and I will start with President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It is simply discussing the speaker's strategy for a press conference and seeking feedback from others.


Passage number 316.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is simply expressing gratitude towards President Lockhart. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 317.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  I think it’s premature to contemplate anything along the lines of alternative C, and the signs of progress in the labor market are encouraging enough to hold fire on any acceleration of purchases, as in alternative A.  I do have a few minor comments on the statement, and I emphasize “minor.”  I hesitate to complicate your negotiations at the end of the meeting, but let me go through these. I’m basically okay with paragraph 1, but it’s worth pointing out that current estimates in anticipation of a final reading on fourth-quarter growth last year put the number closer to 1 percent than to zero.  So I wonder if we want to characterize the fourth quarter as a “pause,” which, to me, connotes “flat.”  While still below the trend of the recovery, it’s not as much of a pause as we initially thought.  So the word “slowdown” might be more accurate. In paragraph 2, I have another nitpick.  The SEP forecasts mostly anticipate a faster pace of growth in 2014 and 2015.  Although there is nothing incorrect about the phrase “economic growth will proceed at a moderate pace,” it strikes me that the phrase in alternative C, excluding the word “further”—that is, “with appropriate policy accommodation, economic growth will pick up over time”—is just more consistent with the SEP submissions.  However, I understand that the language in the draft is the language used in January, and such a change could generate questions. Regarding paragraph 4, I share the concern that I think was expressed by Governor Powell and some others yesterday, that it’s possible the Committee later in the year could face an awkward or ambiguous set of circumstances in which there is some desire to taper, but we really have not seen adequate substantial improvement.  So I have a slight preference for what I take as the softer, more tentative expression that was in the original marked-up version that basically says the Committee “intends to” continue its purchases versus the more definitive “will continue.” And second, I suggested at the previous meeting the removal of the words “as always” in the sentence referencing considerations of efficacy and costs.  I thought, and I still think, that “as always” makes efficacy and costs sound a little bit perfunctory, like an afterthought.  So I’m happy that this is proposed in the draft for this meeting.  In the same vein, for this meeting statement, I suggest eliminating the replacement words, “continue to.”  This verbiage would read simply, “The Committee will take appropriate account of the likely efficacy and costs.”  In the event that the Committee finds itself grappling with a tough tradeoff decision, as I mentioned earlier, between the matters of substantial improvement and efficacy and costs, I think it may serve us to nudge the language toward a more explicit balance between these two considerations.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing their support for alternative B and providing minor comments on the statement, but there is no direct disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 318.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a polite phrase expressing gratitude to President Williams.


Passage number 319.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is not displaying any signs of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 320.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Alternative B reminds me of a well-known parable.  Long ago, an Indian raja led the blind men of his city to an elephant.  Each blind man touched just one part of the animal.  The man who touched the legs said an elephant is like a pillar.  The man who touched the ear said an elephant is like a leather shield, and the man who touched the trunk said an elephant is like a snake.  Alternative B is made up of as many distinct parts as an elephant.  I fear that the public will struggle to interpret our overall message.  Like the blind men in the parable, each person will latch onto a different part of the statement and think it alone conveys the essential meaning of the whole. In its typical understated tone, Tealbook, Book B, points out on page 34, “The size and nature of the market reaction to the new language in alternative B is difficult to predict.”  I sympathize with the public’s challenge in understanding the statement because I myself find paragraphs 3 and 4 confusing.  I count three separate descriptions of the conditions determining the continuation of our asset purchases.  The first highlights the outlook for labor markets and inflation but also mentions efficacy and costs.  The second is the reference to substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market.  And the third, in the final sentence of paragraph 4, brings back efficacy and costs but introduces a new criterion:  the degree of progress relative to our economic objectives, presumably an oblique reference to the level of unemployment.  So how can we possibly expect the public to correctly recognize the elephant.  To avoid this problem, I suggest we go back to the January versions of paragraph 3 and use paragraph 4 from alternative A. Based on what I heard yesterday, we are not trying to signal a major shift in policy now, so we should stick with the cardinal rule:  Don’t make changes unless you want to say something different.  The new elements in these paragraphs seem likely to add noise and muddle our message.  I note that paragraph 4 in alternative A does replace the “as always” with “continue to.”  So I think that avoids the appearance that the reference to efficacy and costs is merely boilerplate. As we get closer to the point of tapering, we can modify the language as appropriate.  As I said, Mr. Chairman, I agree with the description of what you plan to say at the press conference.  I see the press conference, as in other public speeches, as a better opportunity to explain our policy approach than to try to capture it all in the FOMC statement. More substantively, I also propose, going forward, that we move away from the term “efficacy” and actually use the term “benefits.”  It’s much more natural.  You compare benefits to costs, not efficacy to costs.  For example, the New York Fed memo highlights that if the efficacy of LSAPs is lower, we might do even more of them.  The fact is that the implications of efficacy for policy are not clear.  It’s just an input into the analysis of the benefits of LSAPs.  So in the interest of transparency, and I think clarity, the statement should refer to what we mean, which is benefits and costs. So other than my concerns about the changes in the statement language, I support the policy actions contained in alternative B.  The economy is only slowly improving.  Inflation is well below our target.  We’re missing on both sides of our mandate. Of course, continuing LSAPs is a potential cost, but at this stage, these costs are clearly outweighed by the benefits.  In my view, we’ll need to continue our Treasury and MBS purchases at least well into the second half of the year.  That said, I anticipate total purchases of around $750 billion for the whole year, which, based on the conversation I heard yesterday, doesn’t seem that out of alignment with many people. Going to President Kocherlakota’s comments about exit strategy, we talked about that yesterday.  I made some comments about that.  I completely agree that the exit strategy affects the amount of accommodation we have, and we should be thinking about it in that way and looking forward to further discussions around that.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their concerns and suggestions, but they do not argue against any specific points made by others.


Passage number 321.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude from someone referred to as President Rosengren.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 322.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  My preferred policy would be to continue the current pace of asset purchases through this year as long as we expect to miss on both elements of the mandate over the medium horizon.  Financial stability does not appear to be at risk from our actions to date, and I see no significant empirical evidence that financial instability is greater now than it was in the fall of last year.  Furthermore, the staff studies support the view that benefits exceed the costs at this time.  Were we to decide to taper in the future, I would emphasize that actions taken starting last September had substantially reduced tail risk as well as improved the outlook sufficiently to begin a slow taper. The 12-month change in the overall PCE chain index stands at 1.2 percent through January, 0.8 percentage point below our 2 percent target.  The unemployment rate is 7.7 percent, 2½ percent above my estimate of full employment.  Most forecasters, including the Tealbook, currently expect a very gradual return of both inflation and unemployment to their long-run desired levels given the policies we have already enacted. To be sure, we have put in place considerable stimulus between our extended period at the zero lower bound and our sequence of large-scale asset purchases.  But even given all that, the progress toward normalcy is frustratingly slow.  Our actions for the foreseeable future should be as aggressive as they would be if we were missing our key goals in the other direction by as much.  If inflation were 2.8 percent, the unemployment rate were below 3 percent, and the forecast envisioned a three-year-plus period to return to our mandate-consistent outcomes, I have no doubt many, myself included, would be advocating for more-aggressive action.  We should be no less aggressive in pursuing policy that will increase the speed through which we achieve mandate-consistent outcomes when the unemployment rate is high and the inflation rate is low. I do agree with President Kocherlakota’s characterization that last September we did somewhat promise to do whatever it takes.  I think that actually has helped us quite a bit, particularly through all of the fiscal problems that we experienced at the end of the year and through the sequester.  One reason that we haven’t had more buffeting from some of the fiscal shocks was because of the monetary policy promise that we did make. Now, I think that people have been emphasizing the modal forecast for unemployment, but I really would emphasize in your press conference, if you want to prepare the market for possible tapering, that the tail risk really has significantly diminished from where we were last September.  The economy is continuing to grow, despite much more fiscal austerity than many people anticipated.  If you had told me last fall that we were going to have a sequester and the tax increase that we had, I would have expected a much weaker first half than what we’ve actually seen.  Europe has definitely continued to be weak, but despite the election results in Italy and the turmoil in Cyprus, peripheral Europe to date has actually weathered the storm surprisingly well, so that the yields on Spanish and Italian debt have been pretty well behaved, given the sequence of shocks that we’ve had. If we’re to reevaluate whether we still need a “do what it takes” strategy, I think if that was the discussion we were having at today’s meeting, we probably wouldn’t say right now that we’d do what it takes, because I believe a lot of that tail risk has diminished.  Even though I think it is appropriate to continue with a more aggressive policy than it seems like many others are comfortable with, if we are going to prepare the markets for some tapering in or after June, then emphasizing the change in tail risk as well as the change in the labor market outcomes would make sense.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement present in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Rosengren, is advocating for a more aggressive policy to achieve mandate-consistent outcomes, while acknowledging that others may not be comfortable with this approach.


Passage number 323.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude from President Fisher.


Passage number 324.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wanted to make two comments and then make a suggestion about the policy alternatives before us.  The first comment I neglected to mention yesterday.  I said I would talk a little bit about financial conditions, and what I had meant to say was about the banking sector.   The 2012 banking data show it was a good year for banks.  We’re back above a 1 percent ROA.  Noncurrent loans are continuing to fall nationwide.  Lending was up 5 percent last year, but I was somewhat tickled—and I don’t mean delighted—but my brain was tickled from the standpoint of reading about JPMorgan this morning.  The proportion of banks that are 1- and 2-rated is now 70 percent.  That’s the highest since September of 2009.  You know that we developed, and a lot of the banks use, the SABR rating system.  The proportion of possible downgrades has declined to the lowest level nationwide since 2006.  My point is that, in addition to having improved economic activity and all the different points that were made yesterday, our banking sector is healthier, and the performance numbers are certainly a lot more robust, than they were before. My second point—we talk so much about the Bank of Japan, and I hate to bore you, but I did chair the joint commission set up by Prime Minister Hashimoto and President Clinton on deregulation and competition.  You cannot compare our two societies, and you cannot look to the Bank of Japan to solve the problems of bid rigging, corruption, the utility inefficiency, the retail law inefficiency, even the accounting and auditing standards that they still have not gotten straight.  I think we have to be very, very careful when we throw out the Bank of Japan as a comparison—total cultural differences, a totally different gearing of the economy, and, by the way, a totally different influence and structure in the way they conduct policy.  I do agree that there are lessons that we can learn from the Bank of Japan, but there are so many differences in the way our economies are structured that still remain.  The amount of accommodation they’ve provided is not necessarily instructive, and the methodology with which they provided that accommodation is not driven by monetary policy alone.  I wanted to make that point. We mentioned the word “credibility” a great deal.  It seems to me our credibility will be underscored best if we’re not driven by any fixed date but instead by being practicable and by being able to show that we can adjust to developments in the economy.  I think what you suggested with regard to your press conference—in particular, talking about the flow program, and that it would be adjusted, and making the point that slowing the pace of purchases is still additional monetary accommodation—is the right approach.  This is what we used to call in chemistry at Harvard “volumetric titration,” an even more nerdy phrase than you would use, Governor.  Those are the points I wanted to make. With regard to the statement, President Lockhart’s suggestions are very sound, and I would highly recommend them in paragraph 4, particularly changing the word “will” to “intends.”  It’s a slight difference.  The Committee should consider it. I did submit some language that suggests that I thought the first paragraph of alternative B was a little bit too Eeyore-ish, and I didn’t want to be Tigger-ish, to use the Winnie the Pooh example.  I noticed you included them in alternative C, Bill, and I appreciate that.  It seems to me if we took that language in alternative C and combined it with what you have in the remainder of the first paragraph in alternative B, I, at least, would be more comfortable.  It would signal the right tone.  It still doesn’t go overboard.  You would have to add that fiscal policy is still restrictive or the wording that we have, but I think there’s a slight difference in tone in that first paragraph. I don’t expect you to change things.  I don’t have a vote, but I would suggest that we go to some length to at least provide that slight hint that Simon and Bill have tried to work out and combine it with your press conference, Mr. Chairman.  But at least reflect the possibility that we will indeed in June, if economic conditions prevail, begin the process not of shutting off the program but of tapering it, or, as you put it, “slowing in the pace at which accommodation is added.”  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 325.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply expresses gratitude to President Evans without any mention of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 326.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I certainly support alternative B and support continuing our current pace of asset purchases.  I will say, like President Williams, I’m not really a fan of paragraph 3 the way it’s structured.  Adding the language, “based on its outlook for the labor market and inflation, and on its current assessment of the likely efficacy and costs of additional asset purchases”—I know that, on the merits, that’s true.  We’ve talked about how efficacy and costs are a basis for evaluating these programs, but it’s really kind of “in your face,” it seems to me.   It reminds me of a time when, many years ago, I let a doctor talk me into having an X-ray.  I thought I didn’t really need it, and he was going to inject something—I don’t know if it was radioactive, but it was something that caused me concern.  He said, “Oh, this is nothing.  We’ll go ahead and do that.”  He wanted to pay for his X-ray machine.  This was in the ’80s.  Of course, before he did it, he took me into his office.  He showed me a piece of paper, and he said, “Now, you have to understand, there is a risk that you may die because of this.”  And I’m thinking, “I didn’t think I needed it anyway,” but I did let him talk me into it.  I just think it’s unnecessary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is discontent in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, expresses his disagreement with the structure and wording of paragraph 3. He believes that it is unnecessary and reminiscent of a situation when he was convinced to undergo a procedure that he did not think he needed.


Passage number 327.
  [Laughter] MR. TARULLO.  Well, you didn’t die, Charlie.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The laughter indicates a light-hearted tone, and Mr. Tarullo's response is in agreement with the previous statement.


Passage number 328.
 MR. EVANS.  No, that’s right.  Everything can go very well, but I think the markets already understand the basis for how we’re going to think about it.  So I’m not sure this is the right time.  I am a little worried about an outsized reaction to this type of change once everybody starts thinking about what this likely means for the size of our balance sheet given what they are currently thinking.  I worry that it’s a little bit like what the ECB tried to do in July 2008 where they wanted to nudge things up a little bit.  I agree, we need more accommodation now.  We don’t need additional restrictiveness today. Those are some of my concerns.  This touches a little bit on some of your comments for the press.  You mentioned that you’re going to point out that all flow increases are accommodation, and I understand what you mean by that, but relative to expectations, once we move the size of the program down, that could have an adverse effect.  I think that’s consistent with the way I’m thinking about it.  But I just suggest being careful about that. Recognizing that language that shows up in alternative B usually stays in alternative B [laughter], there is one word that I really don’t like, and it’s “current”—“based on its outlook for the labor market and inflation, and on its ‘current’ assessment.”  I think, on the fundamentals, that’s redundant.  It’s based on our assessment.  Yes, it’s current.  What else would it be based on, tomorrow’s assessment or yesterday’s assessment.  But I think that the force of this is going to be a little bit more like when you have a problem employee that you haven’t dealt with for a while, and you’re going to undertake a performance action with them, and the employee relations people ask you, “Now, how did this work out before.  Has this been a good employee.”  And you say, “No, they’ve always been not so good.  I didn’t really want to do this before.”  Then they say, “Well, but you said they were doing pretty well.  So we need to start this off.”  And you always say, “Okay, currently you’re doing okay, but in 30 days we’re going to talk again,” and then, “I don’t think you’re doing so well.”  I think that’s sort of what this is trying to get across.  I’d strike that word, myself. The economic and inflation situations today call for continued strong accommodation.  My SEP submission was based on appropriate monetary policy, which I have learned to interpret in the current situation to mean that we should be trying for overshooting on inflation and also on the economy.  I had an additional boost on asset purchases and I could probably be convinced to go with less.  So my somewhat outsized assumption of an additional $750 billion may be too big.  But I do feel strongly that if we’re going to adjust the flow, like President Rosengren and others have been mentioning, it should be on the basis of reduced tail risks, an expectation that the labor market is really improving. I strongly agree with your plan to emphasize the labor market improvement issues in your press conference.  I would do as much of that as you feel comfortable with doing because, to the extent that we do end up tapering sooner than I would like, that should be the basis for it.  If we end up tapering based on something other than success on the economic side, the markets are going to wonder about that, and it’s potentially going to reveal that we never were really comfortable with open-ended programs.  We said quite a lot that this was open-ended.  When we go back and say, “Well, we didn’t really mean it,” then people are going to start thinking about what that means for credibility more generally, and I really do worry—President Kocherlakota mentioned this—that at the zero lower bound, everything we have that is effective depends on our credibility about forward intention.  I worry about that being degraded. Having said that, President Kocherlakota chose this opportunity to introduce some very interesting proposals, and I thought every one of them was worthy of consideration.  Focusing on the one-year-ahead unemployment rate or labor market improvement strikes me as something that is meaningful.  We might not be that far from it, looking at the SEP numbers.  They don’t quite speak to that exactly, but they’re pretty good. The idea of trying to measure the cap, if that’s what we’re going to do, to scale this so that there’s a very low probability of hitting that cap, but then also providing some other accommodation, I certainly agree with that as well.  Other than that, I do agree with continuing the pace.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While there are some concerns raised by Mr. Evans about the potential impact of certain changes, there is no direct opposition or disagreement present in the passage. Mr. Evans states that he agrees with the need for more accommodation and supports the emphasis on labor market improvement. Overall, he agrees with the plan presented by the Chairman.


Passage number 329.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "Thank you. President Plosser" does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply an expression of gratitude.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 330.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Were I not afraid of surprising the public, I would advocate beginning to taper purchases at this meeting.  The meager benefits of the current pace of purchases and continuing those to year-end, as indicated in the Tealbook, seems hardly worth it to me, given the prospective risk that we might be taking.  Now, of course, such a move would be a surprise, and, therefore, I can get comfortable with alternative B at this point.  But I believe tapering at the next meeting or in June is likely to be appropriate if the conditions warrant.  The minutes of today’s meeting will reflect our discussion and should serve as notification, or at least a heads-up, that asset purchases might well be slowing in the not-too-distant future. Mr. Chairman, I agree with your comments about the labor market, and it’s important for you to convey those at the press conference.  I’m very supportive of that.  I’m also very supportive of your talking about the point that reducing the pace of purchases is not reducing the level of accommodation, it is reducing the rate at which we are trying to increase accommodation.  There is a lot of confusion about what constitutes the level of accommodation versus the rate of change in accommodation.  Making that distinction in your press conference would be very helpful. Part of the problem we have with our flow program is that we’ve set up expectations that confuse stock effects with flow effects again.  And we talked about this when we initiated the flow program, about what the expectations might be of what the ultimate stock would be at the end, and we deliberately chose not to talk about that.  And we seem to have people arguing that because we let the market establish those expectations, now we can’t surprise them.  That was endogenous to the decision we made in the flow program, and we created the problem for ourselves. Interestingly enough, on the other side of that same argument, I also could support faster tapering.  If you really believe in the stock effects and the term-premium effects, the pace of our exit from our balance sheet really doesn’t matter.  Once we establish the size that we are going to unwind it from, the effects are there, and it may not make any difference whether we taper it slow or fast.  Now, of course, whether we taper slow or fast may matter for other things.  It may matter for our remittances.  It may matter for market functioning or effectiveness.  It may interact with the effectiveness of interest rate tools such as IOER and other things, and how we manage our balance sheet.  So there are other reasons to worry about the pace at which we would exit, but the argument for term premium is that once we decide the total size, the pace really shouldn’t matter on that side of the equation. At the time we begin tapering our purchases, we should also announce a change in our reinvestment strategy, which would help us on the exit.  We could take a minor step toward reducing the duration of the SOMA portfolio by reinvesting both MBS and Treasuries into shorter-term Treasuries.  That would help.  We would keep the portfolio large, but it would gradually begin changing the mix.  This would also help us if we choose an exit strategy where we do not sell MBS.  By gradually reinvesting into Treasuries, we are going to change the composition of the portfolio, and that may help us and give us more flexibility as we move forward.  This could mitigate some of the costs. Finally, I just want to make a note about communication.  Communication is always a very important part of our policy, and it is going to become more important as we navigate the end of purchases and our exit strategy.  And a lot of the conversation the past two days has focused on how we manage that communication.  One element, though, I have become increasingly concerned about is that the broad communication surrounding asset purchases, with its focus, in many cases, on how our policies are increasing stock prices or housing prices and working to help the economy through so-called wealth effects, is going to make our communications even more difficult when we agree to end purchases.  I’m concerned that through our discussion of asset prices, we are creating a condition that is helping to foster buoyancy in asset prices.  But when the time comes to withdraw, we then run the risk of a sharp correction in the markets, which could dash confidence and set back the recovery.  By emphasizing the boost in asset prices, I believe we are implicitly sending a signal to the markets and the public that we are taking responsibility for asset prices.  I do not think this is a healthy strategy, and it could create a dangerous dynamic for the conduct of monetary policy in the future.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: In this passage, there is disagreement or contention expressed by Mr. Plosser regarding the current pace of asset purchases and the approach to tapering. He states that he would advocate for beginning to taper purchases at this meeting and questions the meager benefits of continuing purchases until year-end. He also expresses concerns about the communication surrounding asset purchases and the potential negative consequences of emphasizing the boost in asset prices.


Passage number 331.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists of a simple phrase expressing gratitude and addressing Governor Stein. There is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 332.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Mr. Chairman, I had a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show contention or disagreement.


Passage number 333.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Oh, I’m sorry.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement of apologizing and mentioning President Kocherlakota.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 334.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, I’m sorry to intervene in this way, but I am not following the line of argument that President Plosser advanced.  I was hoping he could clear it up.  If we had a given stock of holdings of assets, say $3½ trillion, if we sell that all off in one day, I think it has less accommodation associated with it than if we sold it off at a dollar a day for the next 3½ trillion days, whatever that is.  [Laughter]  If we end up holding that stock of assets for a longer period, then it will end up having a bigger downward effect on the term premium because we are holding that stock of assets for longer.  That was my understanding of the term premium effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kocherlakota disagrees with President Plosser's line of argument and offers a different perspective on the impact of selling off assets.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 335.
 MR. PLOSSER.  It depends on when you start it.  Also, that’s not the argument we gave when we went into this.  That is changing the terms on which we entered into the LSAP purchases in the first place.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In this passage, Mr. Plosser is expressing disagreement with a previous argument or decision. He states that the argument being presented is not the one that was initially given when entering into the LSAP (Large-Scale Asset Purchase) purchases.


Passage number 336.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  So it’s a communication point you were making.  I didn’t understand.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 337.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Stein.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: cannot support this proposed legislation because it goes against our core values of equality and social justice.


Passage number 338.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The phrase "Thank you" does not indicate any disagreement or conflict. It is simply an expression of gratitude.


Passage number 339.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  My economic projections are consistent with a steady decline in the unemployment rate and the preservation of price stability, conditional on asset purchases being similar to the current Tealbook path. With that outlook, it might seem more logical for me to support alternative C today.  Moreover, I explained yesterday why I am concerned about the risks associated with further expansion in our balance sheet.  My support for alternative B today is due primarily to the desire to be more certain about the economic outlook and to better prepare financial markets.  As I indicated yesterday, I would judge the outlook for labor market conditions to have improved substantially once I see six to nine months of average job gains of about 200,000 per month.  Since we have already had five months at that pace, I am almost there.  But I would like to see another month or two of good labor market data.  I would also like to taper the pace of purchases before stopping them altogether.  Consequently, even though the language in alternative C most closely describes my thinking, I think such a statement would be premature and certainly not anticipated by financial markets.  However, I think the language changes proposed in alternative B are a step in the right direction, if those changes are interpreted in the way that Bill and Simon expect them to be interpreted. Beyond those changes, if economic and financial conditions evolve as I expect, I would favor adjusting the statement language further at our next meeting in a way that would prepare markets for tapering of asset purchases at our June meeting.  Purchases could then be discontinued as soon as practical after that—again, assuming that the economic outlook continues to support such a course of action.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's support for alternative B and their explanation for that support.


Passage number 340.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The individual simply expresses gratitude towards President George.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 341.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My forecast assumes that the labor market continues to improve further over the course of this year.  I expect fiscal policy will generate some headwinds, but private-sector demand and housing markets appear poised to support growth going forward. Accommodative monetary policy can serve to encourage and support this projected pace of growth.  Alternative B, however, continues a policy that I believe is too accommodative and poses growing risk to the achievement of our economic objectives in the long run.  As I mentioned in the discussion on asset purchases yesterday, the pace and open-ended approach to our current program appear to provide small benefits while carrying a number of risks as currently calibrated.  Given the improvements in the outlook for the labor market that we have seen from declines in initial claims for unemployment insurance and from the pace of private nonfarm payrolls, I believe we should start laying the groundwork for bringing asset purchases to an end. I do remain concerned that the incentives to reach for yield continue.  And although our dashboard may not signal near-term warnings, the time frame over which we have assured markets that rates will remain exceptionally low gives ample time for further acceleration.  While I am confident that our staff will remain vigilant in looking for indicators of excessive risk and our supervisors will do the same, I continue to hear from community banks, insurance companies, pension funds, and individual savers who find the extended low rate environment extremely challenging and are actively looking for riskier alternatives.  The staff memo on the experience of Japanese financial institutions and retail investors offers a perspective but with a number of differences that make it difficult to compare.  My own experience tells me that these risks can be hard to quantify and describe with any precision because they can arise in sectors of the financial system that are loosely monitored or poorly understood and are certainly beyond the scope of our supervisors to address. I have raised these concerns not to suggest monetary policy should respond to specifically address such risk, but to ensure they remain at the forefront of our assessment of the efficacy of our policy stance in general, relative to achieving sustained economic growth.  Monetary policy has its limits in achieving full employment on its own.  And as our discussion yesterday highlighted, clarifying the framework for our open-ended purchase program will be important.  I would prefer that we start now to taper asset purchases and tilt the mix toward Treasury securities in order to conclude the program by year-end.  We could then slowly begin to normalize rates in order to minimize the buildup of financial imbalances, a mispricing of risk, and higher long-term inflation expectations. Finally, as to the statement, I am not proposing any changes, but I do think President Williams raises some very good points about issues of clarity versus uncertainty in that statement.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. Ms. George disagrees with the accommodative monetary policy and expresses concerns about the risks and potential negative consequences of the current program of asset purchases.


Passage number 342.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude from someone named President Bullard.


Passage number 343.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B for today.  I have just a few comments.  I would say the general tenor of the data during the intermeeting period has been positive, and, despite the angst expressed around the table, I actually think the Committee is in a great position at the current juncture. Continuing good news will put us in a fairly good position to adjust the pace of purchases at future meetings.  I think a strategy of responding to incoming data by adjusting the pace of purchases will signal to markets the Committee’s judgment concerning the pace of healing occurring in the economy.  This will, in a sense, be good news and create a positive dynamic in the economy.  I would very much take care to only taper in response to good news.  We need to declare small victories when we get them, and they have been few and far between in the past few years.  This will maintain the credibility of our approach and will create the right dynamic going forward. Inflation is currently low according to our preferred measures, and on this I agree with President Rosengren.  This certainly bears watching.  We definitely need to defend our inflation target from the low side.  In my own forecast, I see inflation over 2 percent in 2014, but I’m going to need to see some incoming data during 2013 and the first part of 2014 to get to that. Let me talk for a minute about open-ended purchases.  Let me say, categorically, this is an absolutely brilliant policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses support for "alternative B" and agrees with President Rosengren's view on inflation. The speaker also praises the Committee's current position and proposes a strategy of adjusting the pace of purchases in response to positive data. Therefore, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 344.
  [Laughter] MR LACKER.  The U.K. use of the word or the U.S. use of the word.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is neither contention nor disagreement in the passage. This is indicated by the use of laughter, which signals that the speaker finds something amusing or entertaining.


Passage number 345.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard, the state-contingent forward guidance doesn’t address your concern about the signal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply acknowledging President Bullard's concern about the signal, without expressing any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 346.
  Because we’re saying we’re going to keep rates low until— MR. BULLARD.  No, I do think that that has been helpful.  That has been helpful and has helped to mitigate this problem, but I still think that if you try to make a lot of promises out into the distant future, you face some risk that you’re saying that the economy is going to be bad into the future.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. One person believes that keeping rates low has been helpful, while the other person expresses concern about making promises for the distant future and potential risks associated with it.


Passage number 347.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The passage provided is incomplete and does not contain any clear contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 348.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I fully support maintaining the federal funds rate target at 0 to 25 basis points.  I wanted to say something positive.  [Laughter] I remain unconvinced about the value, efficacy, benefits, or whatever we call it, of asset purchases now, and I’d favor moving toward tapering as soon as possible.  I think it would be feasible at this meeting, but I appreciate the comments about surprise and all. I want to comment about one thing.  We’ve talked a lot at this meeting, and it came up at the previous meeting, about the notion of holding MBS to maturity.  One idea that I think I heard in yesterday’s discussion was that one value this would have is that it would take sales off the table, and that would help with regard to the risks posed by agency MBS REITs.  To me, connecting our holding of MBS to the risks of agency MBS REITs is a terrible precedent and a dangerous notion.  It suggests that market participants should look to buy whatever we buy and then box us into not being able to sell, because they can lever up and make themselves fragile and then box us into not selling.  And I think that’s kind of a moral hazard that we should treat exceptionally cautiously.  If anything, that suggests we should sell sooner and get out of it more gradually before the risks in the agency MBS REITs get larger.  More broadly, that dilemma is why I’ve argued against us holding things other than Treasuries.  This is why I think historically we’ve wanted to stay out of markets because our decisions about disposition of those things—I know we all recognize this—have distributional implications that are tangential to monetary policy. Now, there was a lot of discussion yesterday about the relationship between financial stability concerns and monetary policy.  Market participants have all sorts of views, and they take positions based on all sorts of views, and some of those are levered.  And so investors are investing in entities that are taking positions based on some views about how financial asset prices are going to evolve, and some of those outcomes are going to depend on decisions we make.  For financial stability, you want resilience in the market, and you want to view those folks as likely to suffer the consequences of the decisions they make.  You don’t want them perceiving there to be some put involved.  I think the farther we go in holding non-Treasury assets and the longer we hold them, the greater is the market’s dependence on our having them in our portfolio and having them not be in private-sector portfolios.  I think that it’s going to make the adjustment to us backing out of those assets more costly for them.  For me, this suggests we should shift our portfolio away from MBS sooner rather than later.  I’d even consider just swapping them out for Treasuries in a steady program over time. So in this connection, I would note that our foray into housing finance began at the end of November 2008.  The situation was really in the depths of the crisis, where considerations about the disruption and functioning of markets were very real.  The functioning of the MBS market is not at all a concern in the same way now.  If anything, we view it as functioning well now, and our purchases might impede functioning rather than aid functioning.  It looks like our housing finance journey may last more than a decade.  You know, if we hold these to maturity, it will be more than 10 years that we’ve been involved in holding MBS.  Obviously, it has nothing to do with market disruption now.  I think it has to do with aiding the housing market. I’d also note in this connection a statement that we issued jointly with the Department of Treasury in the first half of 2009 in which both of us avowed that it was inappropriate for the Federal Reserve to steer credit to particular sectors.  It just seems clear to me that housing per se is a particular sector as articulated in that document.  And I’ve always had a hard time squaring our MBS purchases with that joint statement.  Is that statement not operative anymore or what.  I think we owe it to the American public, and we haven’t done it at all, but we owe them an explanation squaring our MBS purchases with that document or else rip it up and tell people it’s defunct.  Those are my comments, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In this passage, Mr. Lacker expresses disagreement with the notion of holding MBS to maturity and connecting the Fed's holding of MBS to the risks of agency MBS REITs. He argues that this sets a dangerous precedent and suggests that the Fed should sell the assets sooner rather than later. He also questions the joint statement issued by the Fed and the Department of Treasury in 2009, stating that it is difficult to square the MBS purchases with that statement.


Passage number 349.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage includes a phrase expressing gratitude, followed by a title ("Governor Yellen"). It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 350.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B and also the approach that you describe pertaining to your press conference remarks. I think we should continue our asset purchases at an undiminished pace.  We have thoroughly discussed their efficacy and costs, and as I indicated yesterday, I consider our purchases to be efficacious.  The evidence we have received since the program started in September is in line with my initial expectations. On the costs side, as I indicated, I do see some costs, but I consider them manageable at this point.  Moreover, I think we have learned nothing substantially new about costs since the program began.  I hope we can revisit our exit strategy next time because I agree with Presidents Kocherlakota and Stein.  I noted yesterday that I do see the potential to mitigate some of the costs that concern me by revising our strategy pertaining to asset sales.  We will, of course, need to continue monitoring efficacy and costs going forward, and I remain open to revising the program should our assessment change. With respect to the labor market, I consider it essential, as alt-B does, to reaffirm our commitment to continue asset purchases until we have seen a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market in the context of price stability.  I completely agree with President Kocherlakota and President Evans that our credibility here is at stake, and it is just critical that we not degrade our credibility by failing to make good on a promise that we made in September.  As I indicated in my economic remarks, I certainly do not see this criterion as yet being met, but there has been some improvement in the labor market.  Labor market slack did diminish during the late summer, and payroll employment growth has picked up in recent months. My forecast, like that of the Tealbook, envisions growth barely exceeding potential and little further improvement in the labor market over this coming year as increased fiscal drag offsets the improved momentum we’re seeing in domestic demand.  And my forecast for inflation one to two years out is still that it will continue running below our 2 percent objective. But going forward I certainly am open to adjusting the pace of our asset purchases over time, depending on the progress that we do see in meeting our economic objectives.  The dealer survey suggests that the dealers expect us to vary the pace of our purchases as economic performance changes, and that’s an approach I support, and, for that reason, I do support in paragraph 4 including the new language that makes that sentence explicit.  In other words, we’re really explicitly telling markets that we are prepared to vary the pace of our purchases as we see ourselves getting closer to being able to say that the outlook is substantially improved. I very much hope that the performance of the labor market will exceed my expectations and that I will be able to say in the coming months that the outlook for economic growth and the labor market has strengthened.  If that happens, I certainly see the potential for us to reduce the pace of our purchases even before we have concluded that a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market has been completely achieved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Yellen, expresses support for alternative B and agrees with the approach described by the chairman regarding asset purchases and the labor market. She also mentions her openness to adjusting the pace of asset purchases based on progress in meeting economic objectives.


Passage number 351.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  I understand coffee is ready, and we’ve made good progress this morning.  Why don’t we take a 15-minute coffee break.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply suggesting that the individuals take a coffee break.


Passage number 352.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Let’s recommence, and I’ll turn to Governor Duke, if you’re ready.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that the discussion will resume and that it will turn to Governor Duke. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 353.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Last December, I supported the flow-based LSAPs, based in part on staff analysis indicating that $500 billion in purchases, an amount consistent with stopping in June, would be beneficial and assuming that the labor market forecast would be consistent with a substantial improvement in the outlook having been achieved by then. Since then, labor market conditions have come in better than forecast.  So I can support alternative B at this meeting in the expectation that we’ll begin tapering purchases in June.  And during the break, I was talking to President Williams out in the hallway, and we realized that his view and mine are not that different; if I expect to taper in June and he expects to taper in August, there’s not that much difference.  So why am I so fixated on June.  I think it’s because we don’t have very many alternatives coming up to make such an adjustment.  Obviously, this is an action that we should take at a meeting that has a press conference where the action could be further explained.  This meeting seems too soon.  The September meeting could come on the heels of a nasty debt-limit standoff, as Governor Powell pointed out yesterday, or an extension of just-sort-of-okay results, as Governor Stein pointed out this morning, and December would be too late. So how do we get there in a way that doesn’t impair confidence or our credibility.  First of all, I think the graph in the Tealbook of the projected path of unemployment that we had when we first made the decision to start purchases last September, compared with the current projection, does show substantial improvement.  Sure, some of the improvement is due to revisions in the data we had at the time, but job creation held up remarkably well as we approached the fiscal cliff and, more recently, in the face of increases in payroll and income taxes.  If job creation follows the path in the Tealbook, creating 500,000 jobs in the next three months in spite of sequestration, I think that would justify a step-down.   Mr. Chairman, I’m pleased that you plan to explain in your press conference that a step-down is still adding accommodation in a flow-based world, because it’s only the potential for a step-down to cause markets to revise expectations for the ultimate size of the program that reduces accommodation in a stock-based view.  But as I’ve said repeatedly, I think market expectations got ahead of where we should have anchored them.  I think tapering with this communication would send the most confidence-enhancing message of any of the tapering communications that I can envision.  But if we don’t get this opportunity, I think the MBS market might provide us with another face-saving opportunity.  By June, we could begin to see fluctuations in mortgage origination volume that would cause us to reduce our MBS purchases, and, if so, I don’t think we should add to Treasuries but just use that as an opportunity to step down just a bit. In addition, I agree with a number of you that we should review our exit principles with a possible eye toward pairing a step-down in purchases with a commitment to hold the securities longer.  When we originally designed these exit principles, we thought we already knew the final size and composition of our balance sheet.  Now that we know it will be bigger and contain more MBS, it’s appropriate to reconsider our sales strategy, which I’m fully willing to do but with three cautions. First, if we’re going to modify our MBS sales strategy, I think it should be used in conjunction with a step-down in purchases because, as such, it could be used to cushion the blow of lower purchase expectations by offering the additional accommodation of holding them longer.  However, if we announce that we intended to hold them and we didn’t reduce purchases, then that would add still more accommodation and cause markets to extend their expectations even further.  Second, I can envision saying that we no longer plan to sell MBS over the three to five years after the first rate increase, but it might be difficult to fully design a new exit strategy precisely because we don’t know yet what these purchases will ultimately look like in total.  And the third caution, which may work against the first, is that in the past, every time we started talking about exit, markets took it as a sign of the end of accommodation, and this could get markets focused even further on normalization and cause them to change their position.  Market participants seem pretty certain that purchases will continue at the current pace until at least the end of this year.  Market expectations are determined, of course, by what we tell them.  I don’t want us to deliver a substantial shock to the markets.  The best way to avoid that risk is by keeping markets as fully informed as possible about the Committee’s preferences.   If the Committee does, indeed, view tapering in June as a real possibility, the FOMC statement, the Chairman’s press conference, and the minutes will all offer opportunities to guide markets.  For my part, if labor market conditions continue to improve as they have recently and as we forecast, I would expect tapering to begin in June.  Of course, if the conditions improve more quickly or more slowly than we expect, I would support adjusting purchases accordingly.  I know I presented this view in the go-round yesterday, but I wanted to be sure that the minutes reflect this position as one expressed by a member. Turning to the specifics in the statement, I actually agree with President Williams and President Evans that the changes in paragraph 3 create a lot of redundant discussion of the labor market, inflation, and costs and efficacy, and so I would get rid of the changes both at the beginning and the end.  I am fine with “decided to,” but put back the strike-out that begins “to support a stronger economic recovery.”  I don’t think those two changes add a whole lot, based on our discussion, and if we take those out, it will emphasize the last line added in paragraph 4, which for me is the money line, which says “as well as the extent of progress toward its economic objectives.”  So I would make those two changes. Consistent with that idea of drawing focus to the changes in paragraph 1, which are expected, and in paragraph 4, which will get more attention, I would not do the “pick up over time” suggestion in paragraph 2 that President Lockhart offered, although I wouldn’t object to it otherwise.  And then President Lockhart’s suggestion that we do “slowdown” rather than “a pause” in paragraph 1—I really still think it was a pause, and I like that characterization.  Other than that, I would agree with President Lockhart’s suggestions. And then President Williams suggested substituting “benefits” for “efficacy,” and I am so glad to hear someone as learned as Dr. Williams suggest “benefits” rather than “efficacy,” because I think “benefits” is a much more accessible and understandable term, so I would prefer “benefits.”  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their support for tapering purchases in June and discussing their preferences for the wording in the statement. There is no indication of disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 354.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Tarullo.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 355.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think once again Narayana put his finger on the issue that we face with this statement but, more importantly, maybe, with the next several meetings.  He characterized the tension between the cap and credibility.  I’m going to put a slight gloss on what he said because I think that there was a sense among many, though not all members of the Committee, that the reception of the September and December actions was not quite what they thought they were signing up for in agreeing to those actions.  Thus, they were in a situation in which I think a critical mass, although, again, not all of the Committee, wants to reshape some of the external expectations even while trying to maintain the very important value of credibility. To achieve that, I think what we should collectively be aiming for here in this statement and in the Chairman’s press conference is what he referred to in his opening remarks this morning as providing some optionality.  Now, optionality does not mean a change in policy, although it will mean some change in perceptions.  If you think about it, if you hold a position and you get no options, that’s your position.  If you hold a position and you have an option, you may sell.  So it will, in some sense, dial down expectations a little bit at the margin.  But I think—and here I’m not speaking personal policy preferences but just trying to put together everybody on the Committee—there’s probably a majority, though certainly not everybody, who would feel more comfortable if the external expectations were not $500 billion but maybe closer to the $750 billion or $800 billion that Bill talked about at the last meeting, and not everybody likes that.  Well, how do you get there.  I think you do have to create a little bit of optionality so that you retain the ability in the next couple of press conference meetings if you want to dial down, to taper some.  But, at the same time, if the majority of the Committee decides not to do that, you would not have already moved so as to undermine that credibility. I think in a way, John, ironically this is a moment in which a little bit of uncertainty in those who read the statement and hear the Chairman’s press conference is actually sort of a good thing.  On the one hand, I, personally, would not want to say anything strong enough to send a signal that has everybody speculating after this meeting, “they may be tapering, they may be tapering.”  On the other hand, if optionality is the aim, then you’ve got to do a little bit to, again, emphasize improvement in the labor market and suggest that we’re going through a decision process, at least during press conference meetings.  So how does the statement feed into that.  Well, I think there have been a couple of changes, and as Betsy says, probably the most important is the last clause in paragraph 4. With respect to the proposals a couple of people made to go back to the language of the earlier statements, again, personally, I don’t have a particularly strong view on it one way or another.  Over the coffee break, as I was listening to people, I got a sense that some of those who feel like expectations got out ahead of where they and the Committee are were of the view that the introductory language in the beginning of paragraph 3 gave a little bit more prominence to the efficacy and costs issue than they felt had been heard by the public before.  By the way, is the decision to have no doughnuts an effort to get people to act more quickly within the meeting so they can get to lunch.  If so, it was a brilliant tactical decision.  [Laughter]  Again, I’m not expressing my own preference, but if one option is to go back to paragraph 3 of the earlier statement, another option might be, in accordance with Charlie Evans’s suggestion, to eliminate the single word “current,” which at least pulls it back a little bit.  Then, as Dennis and I think some others referred to, balance that by also eliminating “continue to” in paragraph 4. Those are very minor changes that probably don’t go to the center of what John is concerned about, but I would end by saying part of our aim now should be to try to come together with a working consensus on what we’re saying and the kind of optionality that we’re trying to create for ourselves.  We do all have different views, obviously, but it’s important that no matter which of our views prevails, that the Committee as a whole does maintain its credibility.  Part of that at this point means preserving some optionality, else we risk a situation in which some months from now, there’s a real split that gets emphasized to the world, which I actually think would be decidedly suboptimal.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. This is evident in the discussion of different views among members of the Committee regarding the reception of previous actions and the desire to reshape external expectations. There is disagreement about the level of optionality that should be provided in the statement and the potential impact on credibility.


Passage number 356.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only includes a polite expression and a reference to Governor Raskin. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 357.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I described in the economic outlook go-round, the economy is showing some signs of improvement, and with accommodative monetary policies that we have put forth, I expect growth to proceed at a moderate pace.  I have yet to see convincing evidence that we’ve moved into a self-sustaining recovery or that the outlook for the labor market has substantially improved.  Therefore, with inflation remaining low and steady, and the outlook for inflation remaining anchored at this juncture, I support the continued accommodation described in alternative B. The benefits of our accommodative policy have clearly had a positive impact on financial conditions.  Since September, interest rates and exchange rates are down, and equity and house prices are up.  These improved conditions are starting to show through to the real economy.  While difficult to measure in real time, the rebound in housing markets and business investment is likely responding, at least in part, to the lower interest rates and the improved outlook that accompanied the mix of policies we initiated in the late summer.  At the same time, many of the costs associated with these policies currently appear manageable, and I hope we rise to the challenge of thinking about ways to address them.  Therefore, for purposes of this meeting, staying on the current policy trajectory appears to me to be the best course of action. The internal discussion today about exiting and tapering has been very useful in contemplating our asset purchases.  In addition to the fact that we’re still far from both our inflation and our unemployment targets, we have to stay mindful of the cost of prolonging economic weakness, which could potentially be quite damaging to the economy.  Although we have yet to see it emerge, persistently weak labor markets could lead to permanently bad outcomes.  We also want to be mindful of the costs associated with a premature tapering and the tools we will substitute or lean more heavily on once we initiate that tapering. In terms of discussing costs at the press conference and in the minutes, I’d underscore that the consideration of costs is not a one-day exercise but a continuous one.  I wouldn’t think it helpful for markets and the public to walk away with the view that there was any particular event or newly emerging concern that prompted such a careful and extensive discussion of costs by the Committee at these meetings.  In fact, that is not why we considered costs so extensively, and I’d take some care to not leave that impression. Regarding the moving text here in alternative B, one unsung virtue of the wording—the part of the elephant that I see—is the more positive spin on our stopping rule for asset purchases.  Instead of saying, “if the outlook for the labor market does not improve substantially” in paragraph 4, this alternative now says “until the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially.”  It’s a subtle change, but one that is more in keeping with my view that purchases are not a punishment by policymakers for poor outcomes [laughter], but rather are a source of meaningful support.  We are communicating with the signal that we will not stand back and let the economy falter, but that we fully expect it to recover.  But offsetting this slightly more positive signal, I do think that the new language in paragraphs 3 and 4 together could send a new signal, as Presidents Evans and Williams and others have noted.  I think it’s going to create some initial puzzlement but one that ultimately will be interpreted to reflect a sentiment toward a reduced flow, which is a signal toward tightening. Without mentioning that we are taking MBS sales off the table or taking a different compensating accommodation, neither of which we’re prepared to do today, the signal toward tightening is even stronger.  This signal itself could be problematic if economic conditions do not improve.  We don’t want to be poised to taper only to learn that the economy can’t yet support it.  Tapering should be done only in response to economic conditions; it should not be automatic.  I’ll let the Chairman review for us the current options on the table in terms of how we piece together the right signal, but I do want to make sure that the statement does not reflect anything automatic.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily provides an overview of the current state of the economy and the author's support for continued accommodative monetary policies. There is also discussion of the potential costs and considerations related to tapering asset purchases, but there is no disagreement expressed.


Passage number 358.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement indicated in the passage. The speaker is showing gratitude by saying "Thank you" to Governor Powell.


Passage number 359.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will support alternative B at this meeting.  If the employment numbers through May are close to the range in the past five months, we ought to take the opportunity to modestly reduce the pace of purchases, and I believe that the time to move to alternative C will be in June or, at the latest, September. I also believe it is time to revisit the exit strategy that was agreed to at the June 2011 FOMC meeting and support a change in that policy to let the MBS portfolio run off.  I also support selling short-term Treasuries after liftoff as described in the exit memo.  These changes would reduce financial stability risk, shorten the time to normalization, and reduce the risk of low remittances and accounting capital, all at what I see as very limited or no cost to policy.  And I think it’s important that those changes be announced at the same time the Committee announces an initial tapering of purchases.  As others have noted, changes to the exit strategy have a feel of adding accommodation and the tapering sends the opposite message.  Together they send a balanced message that leans to a reasonable extent, one would hope, in the direction of slowing the increase in accommodation.  I think it would be a mistake to announce the exit strategy separately.  To do so would add more accommodation and make it even harder to begin to taper without surprising the market.  And I think we would be throwing away a very practical solution to a difficult problem. Second, I think that our stopping rule for asset purchases needs clarification in the direction of adding flexibility on both aspects of the rule.  First, the market’s assessment of the substantial improvement test is hardening quickly.  The sense of that is that nothing will stop our purchases other than satisfying that test.  And as far as the nature of the test is concerned, it is, of course, true that the Committee will consider a number of employment-type measures, and output measures as well.  It would be a mistake to work that into a multipronged test, each prong of which must be satisfied for us to taper purchases.  I would begin to talk about that publicly in a way that preserves as much flexibility as possible, starting at this press conference. In terms of my own sense of the test, it is beyond argument that labor market conditions have improved since September.  The unemployment rate has come down about ½ percentage point more than expectation.  Payroll employment is stronger, averaging 200,000 for the past five months.  The six-month trailing number through about September was closer to 130,000 or 135,000.  Other aspects of the market are stronger, including hours worked and the level of employment.  And, as I said, if we get payroll numbers in that range for the June meeting, I can see no reason why we would not taper other than the failure to prepare the market for that. Second, the current cost–benefit test has turned out to be ineffective.  In the context of an open-ended purchase program, it effectively says that we see no practical limit to the size of the balance sheet in the absence of market turmoil.  By the time we see market conditions as an actual threat to financial stability, it will be too late.  And let me say that I don’t think it will ever be appropriate for us to say that the tools have stopped working.  I just don’t think that’s something that we would do or should do.  And, again, I would handle this aspect of the test in a way that restores some flexibility. I remain concerned, as I mentioned yesterday, that if the economy doesn’t cooperate, then we are on a road to a much bigger balance sheet, given the open-ended nature of the program and the market’s understanding of our stopping rule.  I found President Kocherlakota’s framework to be enormously constructive and potentially very useful in addressing my concerns.  First, at the beginning, thinking about this as a two- or three-meeting process is very helpful.  Again, my concern is with the open-ended nature of the purchases and the lack of a plan in the event that the economy does not cooperate.  So I really like the idea of working on other margins, different tools, a range of tools, and variations in the timing and pace and form of withdrawal.  I like those a lot. As far as the press conference is concerned, I do think it is important to begin to adjust market expectations.  I realize that is a delicate thing, and my level of risk aversion is such that, faced with very much the same situation that President Evans was faced with at his doctor, about 15 years ago I walked into the doctor’s office wearing my surgical gown and was handed a piece of paper.  The doctor read it to me and asked me to sign that I understood that I might die at what I felt was a very elective thing.  I handed it back to him unsigned, handed him my gown, walked out, and went back to work.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Powell, is expressing his opinions and supporting alternative B, as well as suggesting specific changes to the exit strategy and the stopping rule for asset purchases.


Passage number 360.
  [Laughter] MR. TARULLO.  And you are alive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is a simple statement and there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 361.
 MR. POWELL.  That’s why I’m here today.  I would say, Mr. Chairman, you mentioned four dimensions you were going to work on in your press conference, and I have a couple of thoughts to add to that. First, I thought that the idea of broadening the range of tools as an independent aspect to the level of accommodation was a very constructive one, and I wonder whether we couldn’t work that in.  I realize it’s late in the day to be suggesting that.  But for today’s press conference, the idea that you can preserve accommodation through a range of tools, and we may vary the use of particular tools in doing so, would be very, very helpful in setting up the trade in June or September that we may reduce the pace of purchases, but we will cover that move in a way by changing the exit strategy—varying the pace of purchases, varying the form of the exit, that sort of thing. And the second thing, which may be less useful than that but still potentially useful, is the idea of stressing the word “outlook.”  If you read market assessments of this, the way this test works, and if you read a journalist’s assessment, they don’t talk about outlook.  They talk about improvement in the labor market.  That is a freebie in a way, just to stress that.  I offer those thoughts for your consideration.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any form of contention or disagreement. Mr. Powell is offering his thoughts and suggestions to the chairman for consideration.


Passage number 362.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given statement. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 363.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you very much.  I think there is a very strong majority for continuing the policy. Let me address, I think, what is the most important question, and I have had in the last few minutes some back and forth in my own mind, which is the question of alternative B, paragraph 3.  One way to deal with this, as Governor Tarullo suggested, would be to compromise between B(3) and B(4) and to cut “current” out of B(3) and “continue to” out of B(4)—offsetting changes. Listening to the last few folks, I would like to ask whether there is any willingness to follow President Williams’s suggestion and use the old B(3).  And I’ll tell you why I think that might be the best thing to do.  It’s not the complexity; it’s not the differences in wording.  What is the headline.  What do we want people to take away from this.  We want them to take away that we will respond to changes in the outlook, and we expect to be tapering not because we expect to discover new costs between now and June, but because we expect the economy to be getting better.  So I think even those of us who are very eager to slow the process of purchases would like to do that because of economic strengthening rather than because of elevation of the costs and risks of the program.  I don’t want to double-cross anybody.  I was talking to my colleagues here to the left about these changes.  I don’t want to make changes unless people are very broadly comfortable with them.  Governor Powell, how do you feel about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear statements of contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of the speaker addressing a question and suggesting potential compromises or alternatives.


Passage number 364.
  MR. POWELL.  I would say I like it the way it is without “current.”  Having said that, I’m perfectly comfortable with that.  If you have a feeling like the one you just expressed, I’m okay with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Powell expresses his opinion and then states that he is comfortable with the speaker's feeling, indicating agreement.


Passage number 365.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you.  Again, it’s not a question of market impact or whatever.  It’s just a question of what message we want to send.  The message we want to send is that we think we might taper, but we think we might taper because we think the economy is getting better, not because we’ve found some fatal flaw.  Jeremy, is that okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement followed by a confirmation question.


Passage number 366.
  MR. STEIN.  Yes.  I certainly agree that that is the desired path.  I thought Dan put it well, which is we’d like to come out of this with a little bit more optionality.  And so I’m sort of trading the two, but I agree with Jay.  If you feel this is the more constructive way to go, I’m happy to go along with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker states that they agree with Dan and Jay and are willing to go along with the suggested approach.


Passage number 367.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Are others okay with that change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no indication of any contention or disagreement in the passage. The question is simply asking for the opinion or acceptance of others regarding a change.


Passage number 368.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So paragraph 3 goes back essentially to the way it was before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that paragraph 3 reverts to its previous state. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 369.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We just get rid of the changes in B(3) and go back to exactly the way it was in January.  So it will say, “. . . to support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at the rate most consistent with its dual mandate, the Committee”—well, I’ll tell you what.  We can keep “decided to,” if that will help you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 370.
 MR. FISHER.  Actually, I favor what you suggested, Mr. Chairman.  The old first sentence basically says what we stuck in the last sentence.  So there’s not a whole lot of change there.  In other words, what was crossed out here, you’re suggesting we go back to the old language we had.  Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is agreeing with the suggestion made by the chairman and stating that there is not much change being proposed.


Passage number 371.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 372.
 MR. FISHER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 373.
  Well, if you look at the last sentence, this is— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That comes out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply offering a statement as a response or explanation.


Passage number 374.
 MR. FISHER.  Yes.  It comes out because it’s in the first sentence in the old statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact.


Passage number 375.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The prompt asks whether there is contention or disagreement in the provided passage, which can only be determined by analyzing the passage itself. Since the passage is not provided, it is not possible to give a specific answer.


Passage number 376.
 MR. FISHER.  So there’s not much change there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply stating that there is not much change in the given situation.


Passage number 377.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We’re getting rid of the part about the “current assessment of the likely efficacy and costs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating that a certain part is being removed.


Passage number 378.
” MR. FISHER.  I like your recommendation.  In fact, I had argued it with my own staff, and I got talked out of it.  But I would keep it the way it was.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, expresses agreement with a recommendation and mentions that he had previously argued for it but ultimately changed his mind. However, he concludes by stating that he would maintain the current state of affairs, indicating consistency rather than disagreement.


Passage number 379.
 MS. DUKE.  I absolutely think it should go back to the original.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states Ms. Duke's opinion without any opposing view or conflicting statement.


Passage number 380.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. "All right" is a statement that does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 381.
 MS. DUKE.  But I do like “decided to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It appears to be a statement made by Ms. Duke without any opposition or conflicting viewpoints being presented.


Passage number 382.
” MR. FISHER.  I like “decided to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The phrase "I like" implies a statement of personal preference or opinion, rather than a conflict of ideas.


Passage number 383.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  My proposal is to go back to the original, put in “decided to,” but as a compensation for that, I don’t think I want to change to “intends to” as well, if that’s okay. All right.  That is the biggest thing I wanted to raise.  As far as the other concerns, I am indifferent about “pause” versus “slowdown.”  Mr. Wilcox, do you know what the current estimate of fourth-quarter GDP growth is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing their proposal and indifference towards certain concerns.


Passage number 384.
 MR. WILCOX.  Six-tenths.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact or measurement (six-tenths).


Passage number 385.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Six-tenths.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage "Six-tenths" as it is a numerical value and does not involve any opinion or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 386.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It sounds like a pause to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker is simply expressing their perception or interpretation of a specific sound.


Passage number 387.
 MR. WILCOX.  Six-tenths.  That would be an annual rate, as always.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 388.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any reaction.  [No response]  Okay.  Well, we had “pause” before.  On “economic growth” and “pick up over time,” I don’t think we can do that, since we haven’t done it before, and we have always had this pattern of projections.  I don’t feel strongly about “continue to” in the next-to-last line of B.4.  Anybody have a view on that.  The suggestion was to cut that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and seeking input from others.


Passage number 389.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But my view is just that we are continuing to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation:
The passage does not present any clear statements or arguments that could lead to contention or disagreement. It simply states the author's view without engaging in any opposing viewpoints or presenting any contradictory information.


Passage number 390.
  To say we “will” acts like all of a sudden we’re— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not present any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 391.
 MS. DUKE.  I like “continue to” because everybody knows we have just had a discussion of costs and efficacy.  And so I do like the fact that that is a continuing conversation.  If you don’t, just striking “as always” seems a little bizarre.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. Duke is expressing her personal preference for the phrase "continue to" and stating that removing "as always" would seem strange to her. However, she does not directly oppose or argue against anyone else's opinion or statement.


Passage number 392.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Let’s leave “continue to.”  Let’s see, President Fisher, I think I still have the view that your C(1) is a little bit too strong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is politely expressing their opinion that President Fisher's statement (referred to as C(1)) may be too strong without any indication of disagreement or argument.


Passage number 393.
 MR. FISHER.  I’m actually happy with the conversation, Mr. Chairman, particularly given the way you’re going to interpret it to the press.  Be positive.  Vice Chairman Dudley made a very important point.  The tone should not be that we have run out of stuff, the tone should be that we see improvements.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show contention or disagreement. Mr. Fisher expresses his satisfaction with the conversation and agrees with Vice Chairman Dudley's point about maintaining a positive tone.


Passage number 394.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage.


Passage number 395.
 MR. FISHER.  I’m happy.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for considering that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher is expressing his gratitude towards the Chairman for considering something, which indicates a positive sentiment.


Passage number 396.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I have mixed feelings about “benefits” versus “efficacy.”  I don’t think we want to change it now. Just a comment on Governor Powell’s remark about tools.  I am somewhat constrained by the fact that I can’t raise possibilities that haven’t been discussed in the Committee.  Now, one thing I have already, for better or worse, raised in public was not selling MBS.  But I will almost certainly say something about the fact that the Committee will be looking at the exit principles over the next few meetings, and, if asked about MBS, I will say that is one possibility.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing mixed feelings about the topic but does not indicate any opposition or disagreement with others.


Passage number 397.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Mr. Chairman, and maybe this pushes too far, but I think that it is useful to reiterate a lesson that we have heard many times around this table that the decisions we make about our exit strategy actually do have implications not just for exit but also for the stimulus we’re supplying today.  So mentioning that connection could be helpful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that it is useful to reiterate a lesson about the connection between exit strategy decisions and current stimulus.


Passage number 398.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The connection you would make in public would be with respect to the accommodation related to exit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a fact or offering advice about making a connection in a public setting related to exit accommodation. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 399.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The passage indicates that there is disagreement because Mr. Kocherlakota responds with "Yes" to a question or statement that likely involves conflicting opinions or perspectives.


Passage number 400.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Not to smoothing remittances or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a statement about not smoothing remittances, without any opposing viewpoints or arguments presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 401.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  No.  I’m just saying that our exit strategy, what we decide about that, has implications for the current level of accommodation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 
There is disagreement or contention in the passage because Mr. Kocherlakota disagrees with or contradicts a previous statement or viewpoint about the exit strategy.


Passage number 402.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Exactly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 403.
   MR. POWELL.  And MBS sales specifically.  I’m not sure if we mentioned that connection with respect to MBS sales, but I think we can.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing MBS sales, but there is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 404.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "Okay. President Fisher" seems to be a neutral acknowledgement or acceptance of what the speaker is being told.


Passage number 405.
 MR. FISHER.  I apologize.  I’m a little confused here.  Are you ruling out selling MBS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 406.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No.  Absolutely not.  Okay.  So to summarize, I believe that we have no changes in B(1), no changes in B(2) except the one that is shown there already.  For B(3), we are getting rid of all of the changes except for “decided to.”  We’re going back to the January B.3., but we’ll say, “. . . the Committee decided to continue purchasing.”  And I guess no change in B(4) either.  Is that everyone’s understanding.  And no changes in B(5), where there were no changes proposed.  All right.  Debbie, would you call the roll.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply summarizing and confirming that there are no changes except for a specific revision in B(3).


Passage number 407.
 MS. DANKER.  Yes.  This vote is on the version of the statement that the Chairman just described and the associated directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is a vote on a specific version of a statement and directive. There is no indication of any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 408.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Would anyone like to hear it again.  [No response]  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a simple question followed by silence.


Passage number 409.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is not provided, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement within it.


Passage number 410.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you for asking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is a simple expression of gratitude, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 411.
 MS. DANKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is not enough information given in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 412.
   Chairman Bernanke Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes President Bullard  Yes Governor Duke  Yes President Evans  Yes President George  No Governor Powell  Yes Governor Raskin  Yes President Rosengren Yes Governor Stein  Yes Governor Tarullo  Yes Governor Yellen  Yes  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  What time is lunch.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing a list of individuals and their responses, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 413.
 MS. DANKER.  In five minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any context or information to indicate that there is contention or disagreement. The statement itself is simply a name followed by a time limit.


