Passage number 1.
 MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Now, turning to our agenda, the first two items today are going to be considered in a joint meeting of the Board of Governors and the FOMC.  A Board vote is going to be needed to close the meeting.  So do I have a motion to close the Board meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the agenda for a meeting.


Passage number 2.
 MR. FISCHER. So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Without objection.  Our first item on the agenda is financial developments and open market operations, and Simon is going to begin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The participants are expressing agreement and support for the agenda item.


Passage number 3.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Let’s go back to exhibit 1, panel 3, which shows the survey-implied probability distribution of the timing of liftoff. I just have a simple question about this.  When was this survey taken relative to events in Greece and to Chair Yellen’s testimony.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 4.
 MR. POTTER. It was taken after most of those events. We got the results on Monday and Tuesday of last week, and that would fully take those into account.  The only recent event of large significance would be the drop in the Chinese stock market yesterday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage simply states a fact about the timing of when certain events took place, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 5.
MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 6.
 MR. EVANS.  Simon, during the comments on the dealer survey, I think you mentioned that they must have made some comments about the expected strained liquidity conditions at year-end.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 7.
 MR. POTTER. We received that more directly from market contacts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the information was received directly from market contacts.


Passage number 8.
 MR. EVANS. In those comments, are they talking about historical strains during that time period, a new liquidity environment affecting that period, or uncertainty about the liftoff environment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification or information about different factors that may have affected a specific time period.


Passage number 9.
 MR. POTTER.  I think part of it is just the classic, “The Fed won’t do things in December because there’s Christmas and the New Year and people aren’t there,” which we heard frequently.  We heard that in 2013.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 10.
 MR. EVANS.  Why would they say that.  We raised rates in 2004 and 2005 in December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Evans is simply asking a question and providing information about the raising of rates in 2004 and 2005.


Passage number 11.
 MR. POTTER. I’m just reporting what they said.  I’m not going to assess whether it’s got any merit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Potter is simply stating that he is reporting what was said without offering any assessment of its merit.


Passage number 12.
 MR. EVANS. All right, that is the rule.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a rule without any indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 13.
 MR. POTTER. On 2013, I think I belittled their views a little bit about whether they’d actually be there when the FOMC made its statement. I think they will be.  The slightly different variation—Vice Chairman Dudley talked about this at the June meeting—is that they’re aware there’s a lot of movement in money markets as you come up to quarter-end, and there’s a belief that those could be more intense around year-end.  So there are some market participants who believe that the FOMC would be wary of lifting off around year-end because of the ability toshow interest rate control. It’s not a view that I share in terms of the tools that we have, but definitely some of the people we speak to have that perception.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Potter, does not share the view that the FOMC would be wary of lifting off around year-end due to concerns about interest rate control. However, he acknowledges that some market participants hold this belief.


Passage number 14.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay, so that’s along the lines of the latter point that I was suggesting and that Vice Chairman Dudley has mentioned before.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 15.
 MR. POTTER.  But I think that most of what we hear is just that market liquidity in general is not as robust at the end of the year.  So if there’s some noise around liftoff, then that could be exaggerated by that lack of liquidity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Potter, is describing the possibility of noise around liftoff being exaggerated due to the lack of liquidity at the end of the year. This suggests a potential disagreement or contention regarding the impact of market liquidity on the amplification of any noise around liftoff.


Passage number 16.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay.  All right. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It consists of one individual responding to another in a polite and neutral manner.


Passage number 17.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, thank you, Madam Chair.  Simon, I have a question about panel 5 in exhibit 1.  My question is, what are the Desk’s perspectives on why we now see deviations between the price of oil and five-year, five-year breakevens.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a question being asked for clarification or information.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 18.
 MR. POTTER.  There’s definitely—from some market technical reasons—some seasonals in TIPS trading that could account for that.  We didn’t have a good explanation for the high correlation you can see in that chart earlier.  We looked for some explanations.  Some of those explanations should still be in play, so that would make us perhaps doubt those explanations that we came up with before, because we were clutching at straws a lot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.
There is disagreement in the passage because the speaker initially mentions that there might be some seasonals in TIPS trading to explain the high correlation shown in the chart. However, they later state that they did not have a good explanation and were "clutching at straws," suggesting doubt about the previous explanations.


Passage number 19.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 20.
 MR. POTTER. The only thing I’d note is that, in the past few days, the five-five forward has come down, and that does seem to be in response to further falls in the prices of oil and metals.  So even though it’s hard to see on this scale, the five-year-five-year forward over the intermeeting period has been relatively stable, but it still ended low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 21.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That’s correct.  Thank you.  CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions.  Seeing none, we need a vote to ratify domestic open market operations.  Any objection.  [No response]  Seeing no objection, consider that done.  Our next agenda item has to do with normalization planning, and I’m going to call on Lorie to begin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. The speakers are discussing the ratification of domestic open market operations and then moving on to the next agenda item.


Passage number 22.
 MS. LOGAN.2  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I will be referring to “Material for Briefing on Normalization.” Jim Clouse and I will summarize the state of preparations related to the approach the Committee has said it intends to take to normalize the stance of monetary policy. Having conducted nearly two years of daily test operations, the Desk is prepared to implement an ON RRP facility to support IOER in moving the effective federal funds rate into the target range when the FOMC commences policy firming.  At that time, the domestic policy directive that governs the Desk’s conduct of open market operations will need to incorporate instructions for the ON RRP facility and term RRPs.  The ON RRP test operations that have been conducted under the resolution passed by the Committee last December will then cease. The draft policy implementation note associated with alternative C in this meeting’s Tealbook B presents a revised proposal for the Desk directive at the time of liftoff.  This takes into account your feedback on the draft directive that Thomas presented at the June meeting. I would like to highlight three key elements of the draft directive, which are summarized in your first panel. First, we have added an effective date to the directive. The staff recommends that changes in the FOMC’s target range for the federal funds rate as well as changes to all overnight administered rates—namely, the IOER and IORR rates, the ON RRP rate, and the primary credit rate—be effective the day following the announcement of the Committee’s policy decision. This marks a departure from the Federal Reserve’s past practice.  However, it will allow changes in the full set of overnight administered rates to be introduced concurrently in support of an FOMC decision to change the target range, increasing the likelihood of the effective federal funds rate trading within the target range each day. As shown in your second panel, this new convention would be consistent with the practices of several other major central banks. It would also maximize the public’s understanding of the Committee’s policy framework.  From an operating perspective, this approach is consistent with the staff’s recommendation that any intermeeting changes in administered rates be announced at 4:30 p.m. when most markets are closed and are therefore only able to take effect the next day. Should the Committee support this approach, the staff recommends communicating the decision about the effective date for the other administered rates prior to liftoff, such as in the July 2 The materials used by Ms. Logan and Mr. Clouse are appended to this transcript (appendix 2). minutes, as we have started to receive questions by the public on the expected timing of changes in the overnight administered rates when the Committee commences policy firming. The second element of the draft directive to highlight is the clarification of the description of capacity for the ON RRP facility. Your third panel illustrates the language in the draft directive that could apply if the cap was temporarily suspended, indicating that the Desk could conduct ON RRPs in amounts “limited only by the value of Treasury securities held outright in the SOMA that are available for such operations.” We believe this language is consistent with the spirit of a suspended cap while at the same time highlighting the practical limitations that preclude unlimited provision of ON RRPs.  The Desk’s operating policy statement, which would be posted following the publication of the FOMC’s policy decision and implementation note, would explain how the staff would derive the operational limit and note that the value of Treasury securities in the SOMA available for RRP operations would be about $2 trillion. Finally, as summarized in your fourth panel, the draft directive strikes the sentence in the current directive that states it “seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with” the federal funds rate trading in the FOMC’s target  range, as the language would no longer be as reflective of policy implementation in the post-liftoff framework.  The draft, however, retains the directive’s broad instruction to the Desk to undertake open market operations “as necessary” to keep the federal funds rate in its target range.  This language is followed by specific instructions to undertake overnight and term reverse repurchase agreements according to parameters approved by the Committee. The baseline expectation is that reverse repos will be the only open market operations needed to support IOER to keep the effective federal funds rate in the FOMC’s target range. Nonetheless, a directive that authorizes the Desk to conduct other types of open market operations, if necessary—such as repos if the effective federal funds rate was expected to print too high—could signal to the public that the Committee has given the Desk some latitude to respond quickly to unexpected circumstances.  Any use of such authority would be limited and aimed at addressing transitory factors, such as in response to a major payments system disruption.  In the event of more persistent issues, the FOMC may choose to revise its guidance to the Desk.  The Desk would consult with the Chair and inform the FOMC of any plans to conduct open market operations other than the reverse repos specified in the directive. In addition to the revisions I have highlighted, other changes as shown in the draft directive for alternative C in Tealbook B, are generally consistent with the housekeeping-type changes that Thomas presented to the Committee in June. To summarize, at the June meeting you unanimously supported a proposal for the Federal Reserve to issue an implementation note that would communicate separately from the Committee’s postmeeting policy statement the specific measures the Federal Reserve was employing to implement the FOMC’s decision.  This note will include the policy directive to the Desk that you ultimately adopt.  We highlighted a few key elements of the draft directive for consideration, and the staff recommends the Committee communicate about the intended effective date of changes in the target range and administered rates in the upcoming minutes.  Jim will now discuss other elements of the implementation note.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a technical explanation of preparations related to the approach the Committee intends to take to normalize the stance of monetary policy.


Passage number 23.
 MR. CLOUSE. Thanks, Lorie.  As shown in the second exhibit, the implementation note will include information on the key administered rates that will support policy normalization.  Assuming that the FOMC initiates policy firming by raising the target range from 0 to 25 basis points to 25 to 50 basis points, the ON RRP rate would be set at 25 basis points, and the interest rates on required and excess reserves would both be set at 50 basis points.  In discussing changes in discount rates at the April FOMC meeting, participants generally seemed to favor maintaining the primary credit rate at the current spread of 50 basis points above the top of the target range for the federal funds rate for some time after liftoff.  As noted in the last bulleted item in the implementation note, that would imply a primary credit rate of 100 basis points immediately after liftoff. As Lorie noted, the staff is recommending that all of these changes in administered rates take effect on the day following the FOMC announcement. As noted in previous discussions, changes in some of the administered rates require Board approval.  Changes in the interest rates on reserves, required and excess, could be approved through a Board vote on the same day as the FOMC meeting.  Approval for changes in the primary credit rate are somewhat more involved in light of the role of the Boards of Directors of Reserve Banks in the discount rate-setting process.  On the day of any meeting in which the FOMC changes the target range for the federal funds rate, the Board could approve any existing requests by Reserve Banks for discount rate changes to the new rate to be effective on the next business day.  In addition, any requests for discount rate changes from Reserve Banks received in the afternoon following the conclusion of the FOMC meeting or on the subsequent business day would be approved by the Board Secretary under delegated authority with the same effective date.  These procedures are the same as those that have been in place for many years, except for the effective date. For completeness, it is worth noting that the rates for two other forms of discount window lending—secondary credit and seasonal credit—are set by formulas routinely proposed by the Reserve Banks and approved by the Board.  The secondary credit rate is set at 50 basis points above the primary credit rate.  The seasonal credit rate is established every two weeks based on the average effective federal funds rate and the 90-day CD rate over the previous reserve maintenance period.  These rates are not included in the proposed implementation note because they have no significant implications for the process of policy normalization. If policymakers wished to employ term draining tools—the term deposit facility or term RRP—the implementation note could include the important details of those operations.  Turning to two other items related to normalization, as discussed in memos prepared for the June FOMC meeting, the Desk will be expanding its coverage of money market developments in the morning calls in the period immediately after liftoff.  Moreover, the staff will brief policymakers each day at 2 p.m. in the days immediately after liftoff to review market developments and the effectiveness of policy implementation.  Those afternoon briefings can be readily converted to formal FOMC and Board meetings as necessary should policymakers wish to discuss and implement any changes in the approach to policy normalization. Finally, as discussed in previous FOMC meetings, the staff proposed a change to the methodology for the calculation of interest payments on reserves.  After a public-comment period, the Board approved that change, and it became effective in the maintenance period that began last Thursday.  The change in methodology should support the role of IOER as a policy normalization tool by ensuring that increases in the IOER rate are immediately reflected in higher interest payments to depository institutions.  In particular, interest payments are now based primarily on the level of balances that a depository institution maintains each day and the level of the IOER rate in effect that day.  That structure should help to ensure that an increase in the IOER rate immediately provides incentives for depository institutions to bid at higher rates in overnight funding markets and to require a rate of return at least as high as IOER on their investments in assets other than reserve balances.  That concludes our prepared remarks. CHAIR YELLEN. Does anyone have questions for Lorie or for Jim.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 24.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Jim and Lorie, understandably, the implementation directive would not refer to the expectation that the increase in the ON RRP would be temporary, and alternative C doesn’t refer to it either.  Would there be some other document that would be current and released around the time of liftoff and that would restate the expectations of the Committee as articulated in the set of normalization principles we agreed to some time ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement by Mr. Tarullo clarifying that the implementation directive and alternative C do not refer to the expectation that the increase in the ON RRP (overnight reverse repurchase agreement) rate would be temporary. He also asks if there would be another document released around the time of "liftoff" (presumably referring to an interest rate increase) that would restate the Committee's expectations.


Passage number 25.
 MR. CLOUSE.  There could be.  We haven’t discussed that among the staff, but, certainly, it’s already in the public domain, as you say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that there could be disagreement or contention, but the speaker acknowledges that it hasn't been discussed among the staff yet. However, it clarifies that the topic is already known to the public. Therefore, there is no explicit contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 26.
 MR. POTTER.  I think your question is, can we reiterate that at the time of liftoff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 27.
 MR. TARULLO.  Yes. Somewhere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that Mr. Tarullo agrees with something, without mentioning any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 28.
 MR. POTTER.  I think there’s space to do that in the Desk statement, which is a very low-key way of doing it.  It’s probably not the ideal way, because that’s a policymaker statement.  But we could reiterate the language used in the March minutes associated with that, which were basically added to the Principles and Plans document.  One approach could be to rerelease the Principles and Plans in the minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing different ways to address a specific issue, but there is no evident contention or disagreement between individuals. The speaker is simply suggesting different options for how to approach the issue.


Passage number 29.
 MR. TARULLO.  Yes. If there’s some way of doing it that’s not awkward, I think it would be good to reiterate that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker agrees with the idea being discussed.


Passage number 30.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Or it could be in the press conference. CHAIR YELLEN.  It could be in the press conference. Let me think about that.  That’s certainly a possibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 31.
 MR. TARULLO.  Okay.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions or comments.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a transcript of a conversation, so there is no clear contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 32.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, Madam Chair.  I want to build on what Governor Tarullo was talking about.  I think it would be useful for the Committee to have in mind exactly what kind of conditionality would be driving the changes of the cap on RRP.  It’s clear there’s a lot of support for not having a cap at liftoff, but at what point in time and under what conditions would it be adjusted. I think we have talked about that some in the past, but perhaps I’m not just not remembering what kinds of conclusions we had reached about that.  And I think it would be useful for us to have, at least, a refresher on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply a request for clarification and a suggestion to revisit a topic previously discussed.


Passage number 33.
 MR. POTTER. My memory is that we used some language that was trying to get at the notion it was temporary, but gave some flexibility.  For example, there might be requirements for flexibility in the fall if there are complications associated with the debt limit.  And even though  under other conditions you might want to introduce the cap, you might not feel comfortable at that point, but the language was “expects when it’s appropriate.” CHAIR YELLEN.  We said “fairly soon,” I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Both Mr. Potter and Chair Yellen seem to be discussing and clarifying their memory and recollection of the language used in a previous discussion.


Passage number 34.
 MR. POTTER.  “Fairly soon,” but there was something about expectations.  But there was wiggle room because we would learn a lot perhaps in the first few weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. It seems to be presenting information about potentially learning a lot in the first few weeks, without any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 35.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, that language seems appropriate to me.  My comment or question, though, is about having some common understanding on the Committee about what kinds of conditions will lead us to actually start to impose a cap.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply shows Mr. Kocherlakota expressing his agreement with the language and raising a question about the committee's understanding of imposing a cap.


Passage number 36.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  In fact, the idea is that, once we gained experience with the overnight RRP and what the take-up was going to be, we would then set a cap with a reasonable amount of head room so the cap would not be binding.  But it would take time to generate some experience. CHAIR YELLEN.  Right, and if necessary you adjust the rates or the spread in order to manage that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a collaborative discussion about setting a cap and adjusting rates if necessary.


Passage number 37.
 MR. POTTER.  I was just highlighting for you that the fall has the conflating factor in terms of understanding.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement where Mr. Potter is providing information or clarification.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 38.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes, the debt limit is a wild card.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, the debt limit is a wild card. 

Explanation: The statement suggests that there is uncertainty or unpredictability surrounding the debt limit, indicating potential contention or disagreement. Different individuals or groups may have different beliefs or opinions about how the debt limit should be handled, leading to potential disagreements.


Passage number 39.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, I imagine year-end will be another conflating factor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement made by MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.


Passage number 40.
 MR. POTTER.  Year-end is something that we understand better than the debt limit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presented as a fact or opinion that everyone understands year-end better than the debt limit.


Passage number 41.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes. CHAIR YELLEN.  Further comments or questions.  [No response]  In their presentations, both Lorie and Jim said that the staff recommends that all of the policy rate changes become effective the next day.  I didn’t hear any questions about that.  So let me ask:  Would there be any objections to reporting in the minutes of this meeting that the plan was to make these rate changes effective the next day.  [No response]  Okay.  Seeing no objection, let’s do that. The Board meeting has ended.  Now we’re ready to move along to our next topic, which is reinvestment policy.  We’re going to call on Beth Klee to start us off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker asks if there are any objections to reporting a specific plan in the meeting minutes and receives no response, indicating agreement or lack of disagreement.


Passage number 42.
 MS. KLEE.3  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Julie Remache and I will be referring to the handout labeled “Material for Briefing on SOMA Reinvestment Policy.” As you know, the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans state that the Committee expects to cease, or commence phasing out, reinvestments of principal on securities held in the SOMA after it begins increasing the target range for the federal funds rate, and that timing will depend on how economic and financial conditions and the economic outlook evolve.  As background for the Committee’s discussion on reinvestments, the staff prepared the memo titled “Reinvestments Considerations.”  The memo described several strategies that you could take and reviewed a range of issues associated with each strategy.  We also suggested questions to help structure your discussion of this topic. The top two panels of your first exhibit summarize the strategies as well as some pros and cons of each.  As shown in the top panel, the first set of strategies are calendar dependent—reinvestments would cease at a set date or after a specified interval following the initial firming of the federal funds rate.  The Committee could follow a strictly calendar-dependent strategy or make the date conditional on macroeconomic conditions.  Of note, a conditional calendar-based strategy is similar to that employed in the forward guidance for the federal funds rate from 2011 to 2012. You may want to use a date for communicating the anticipated end of reinvestments if you are reasonably confident that a reversal of the decision to cease reinvestments will not be necessary or because you view it as a parsimonious and effective approach to communicate economic conditionality.  As noted to the right, a calendar-based strategy would be relatively straightforward to communicate to the public.  In addition, it would offer some certainty regarding the timing of the ceasing of reinvestments, and by implication, the path of the SOMA portfolio.  These features could also be considered drawbacks in some circumstances, as this strategy could be seen as inflexible. In particular, the Committee could feel that, perhaps even with some conditionality, it could be difficult to deviate from the announced schedule even if the economy behaves much differently than expected.  Under those scenarios, the Federal Reserve’s action, or lack thereof, could send a confusing signal. 3 The materials used by Mses. Klee and Remache are appended to this transcript (appendix 3).As shown in the middle panel, the second set of strategies are state-dependent; reinvestments would cease based on specified economic conditions.  The Committee could follow a quantitative state-dependent strategy wherein redemptions would commence based on a particular macroeconomic threshold.  A quantitative state-dependent threshold strategy was used to provide forward guidance about the federal funds rate from 2012 to 2014.  Another variation of a state-dependent strategy would be one that offered qualitative guidance regarding the conditions under which the Committee expects to cease reinvestments—not unlike the current guidance for the federal funds rate. You may want to employ a state-dependent strategy if you believe doing so provides clear communications or if it enhances the “automatic stabilizer function” of monetary policy.  That is, if the economy improves less rapidly than expected, the cessation of reinvestments would occur later; they would also cease sooner if the economy improves more rapidly.  Consequently, a state-dependent strategy might also reduce the possibility of returning to the effective lower bound.  Important challenges would be determining the appropriate threshold or trigger under a quantitative approach or being sufficiently clear about your reaction function under a qualitative approach.  A state-dependent approach provides less certainty about the path of SOMA assets, but that consideration might be seen as offset by the improved economic responsiveness of this strategy. The details of either a calendar-dependent or state-dependent strategy would, of course, affect the path of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet over time. To illustrate how the details matter, the bottom-left panel presents scenarios under the modal outlook in which reinvestments end fairly soon after liftoff or much later.  The Tealbook baseline, the black line, is based on the assumption that reinvestments cease six months after initial policy firming, and that the federal funds rate will be around 60 basis points at that time.  The dashed blue line illustrates a scenario where reinvestments cease nearly two years after liftoff, when the funds rate reaches 2 percent.  Even though reinvestments continue for 16 months longer than in the baseline, normalization of the size of the balance sheet is delayed only about 9 months, in part because large amounts of securities are expected to mature around the time of normalization of the size of the balance sheet.  However, as shown in the bottom-right panel, the funds rate would be at a higher level when reinvestments end, incorporating some insurance against possible zero lower bound scenarios.  Still, the difference between the two funds rate paths is small, and this suggests that the benefit of extending reinvestments could potentially be modest.  Of course, it is possible that there are effects of continuing or ceasing reinvestment beyond those captured in our models.  To that end, Julie will now discuss market-specific considerations and expectations associated with ceasing reinvestments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents different strategies and their pros and cons without any conflicting viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 43.
 MS. REMACHE. Thank you, Beth.  In thinking about the strategy to end reinvestments, there are some market-specific issues which the Committee may wish to consider.  In the Treasury market, the Federal Reserve’s redemption of maturing securities will require the Treasury to auction more securities to the public than if the SOMA continues to roll over its Treasury holdings.  As shown in the top panel of exhibit 2, maturing securities from the SOMA—shown in blue—would add, on average, 40 percent to the projected increase in public holdings from 2016 through 2020 relative to the increase arising from the budget deficit—shown in red.  While these total increases are large, they are less than those recorded during the recession that followed the financial crisis.  That said, 2008 to 2009 was a period in which demand for Treasury securities was elevated, and it remains to be seen how the market would adjust without this boost to demand. While the market response to ending reinvestments will depend on the level and dispersion of market expectations for the path of the portfolio—which I will discuss in just a moment—in the case of Treasury securities, the effect will also be determined by the Treasury’s decisions about the maturity profile of the additional securities it issues. The Treasury might initially respond to the onset of SOMA redemptions by issuing more bills.  Over time, however, the Treasury would likely shift this financing toward longer-maturity coupon securities. In the MBS market, participants have expressed more concern about potential market strains. During the period where the Federal Reserve continues to reinvest the principal it receives from its MBS holdings, it will be purchasing approximately 30 percent of gross TBA-eligible issuance, a proportionately larger amount than in the Treasury market.  In addition, the inherent difficulties in accurately predicting prepayment activity implies considerable uncertainty about the dollar amount of reinvestments, limiting the extent to which markets can fully anticipate the effect of a decision to cease reinvestments. The bottom panel of your exhibit shows net changes in the Federal Reserve’s MBS activity over time.  Focusing on the black line, it highlights that in March 2010, following the completion of the first round of asset purchases, the shift in Federal Reserve participation in the mortgage market was larger than what is projected based on the current forecast, shown by the dotted portion of the line in early 2016.  Overall, the market withstood that change without significant disruption.  That said, the underlying structure of the market has shifted since then, with greater concentration among dealers and more constrained balance sheets due to the changing regulatory environment. These concerns may support a decision to phase out reinvestments over time rather than ceasing them all at once.  On the one hand, while a well-telegraphed end to reinvestments is not likely to lead to significant disruptions, phasing out reinvestments may provide insurance against this possibility and, if executed over a few quarters, would likely not have significantly different macroeconomic effects compared with a case in which cessation occurred all at once.  On the other hand, it would lead to a slower decline in the portfolio, though the change would only extend the timing of the normalization of the size of the portfolio by a few months.The Committee may also wish to consider phasing out reinvestments in order to address the uneven pattern of redemptions.  As shown in the top panel of exhibit 3, the amount of maturing Treasury securities held by the SOMA—shown by the red bars—will vary between $2 billion and $39 billion per month in 2016.  Although the projection of MBS principal payments—shown by the blue bars—appears smooth and steady, actual prepayments will vary over time as a function of prepayment behavior.  Smoothing redemptions may, on the margin, help the market absorb the new supply without a noticeable effect on the overall trajectory of the balance sheet or the associated withdrawal of accommodation.  An incidental benefit of phasing out Treasury reinvestments over time would be to add Treasury benchmark securities to the SOMA portfolio during the reinvestment period, which could then be made available to lend.  The SOMA has not held benchmark securities for some time because of the sales under the System’s maturity extension program, but making securities available to lend from the SOMA is helpful when there is tightness in the specials repo market. If the Committee wished to phase reinvestments out over time, it could do so in a number of ways.  A straightforward approach would be to reinvest a decreasing proportion of Treasury maturities or MBS principal payments over time.  This would result in a slower reduction in the portfolio and would smooth the pattern of maturities and principal payments to some extent.  Another approach could involve setting a maximum dollar amount of securities that would be allowed to mature or prepay without reinvestment in each month and to increase the dollar amount over time.  This would have a similar effect of slowing the reduction in the portfolio and would smooth the pattern of reductions more directly.  As with the strategy to begin to cease reinvestments that Beth discussed, these strategies could be executed based on a set schedule, or they could be contingent on continued improvement in the economy.  Further staff work could be completed to evaluate these and other options should the Committee decide to phase out reinvestments. Turning now to market expectations, as shown in the bottom-left panel of your exhibit, the median respondents to the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and its Survey of Market Participants expected both Treasury security and MBS reinvestments to cease approximately seven months after liftoff, but there was a wide range around this figure, with some respondents expecting reinvestments to cease at liftoff and others expecting reinvestments to continue for more than a year.  As shown in the bottom-right panel, respondents generally place the highest probability on reinvestments being gradually phased out over time.  The median expectation is that, should reinvestments be phased out gradually, this would be done over a period of about 11 months for both Treasury securities and MBS, though again, expectations for this are dispersed.  Overall, respondents generally expect the reinvestment policies for Treasuries and MBS to be similar. While market participants are generally not focused on whether a decision about reinvestments would be specifically calendar or state dependent, many note that they expect the Committee to be attentive to economic and financial conditions and to take account of potential disruptions to market functioning and liquidity in determining the  pace at which reinvestments could occur. In supporting this view, many cite the Committee’s Policy Normalization Principles and Plans statement and other communications emphasizing a gradual approach to normalization.  Some policymakers’ recent communications have reinforced these ideas, including the notion that a change in the reinvestment policy could be tied to the level of the federal funds target range. We should note that survey respondents and market participants indicate that they do not hold firm views about reinvestment, in light of the limited information available to them about the FOMC’s thinking on this topic. The final page of your handout provides the questions circulated to you previously.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  That concludes our prepared remarks. Beth and I would be happy to take questions. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Were there questions or comments.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is some contention in the passage. The passage discusses different views on the timing and approach to ending reinvestments. Some argue for a gradual phasing out of reinvestments over time, while others argue for a complete cessation of reinvestments at once. Additionally, there is disagreement among market participants about the specific timing and approach to ending reinvestments.


Passage number 44.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage contains a singular abbreviation "MR" which does not provide any context or information to determine if there is any contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 45.
 WILLIAMS.  Yes, I just have a question about the phaseout.  Julie, you listed a whole bunch of arguments in favor of a phaseout.  In weighing these, would you describe them primarily in terms of market dislocations, disruptions, and other aspects of it, or is there really much of an economic argument in terms of macroeconomic goals here. I’m just hoping to clarify what is the advantage of a phaseout over, say, 6 to 12 months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification on the advantages of a phaseout over a specific time frame.


Passage number 46.
 MS. REMACHE.  I think the main advantage to considering a phaseout would be to address the potential risks related to market functioning.  When we run the scenarios, we don’t see very significant changes in the macroeconomic outcomes, whether you use a phaseout or not.  So I think the arguments would probably fall primarily in the market-functioning state.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. MS. Remache simply states her opinion about considering a phaseout to address potential risks related to market functioning. She also mentions that running scenarios did not show significant changes in macroeconomic outcomes with or without a phaseout. She does not mention any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 47.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 48.
 WILLIAMS. Because I always wanted to be a lawyer, I’m going to do a follow-up question.  When you say “not significant,” you mean indecipherable in looking at a picture of inflation and unemployment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 49.
 MS. REMACHE.  I would say, basically, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Ms. Remache responds with "basically, yes," which suggests that she agrees with whatever was previously discussed.


Passage number 50.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but without the passage provided, I cannot determine whether there is contention or disagreement. Please provide the passage or context for me to analyze.


Passage number 51.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. "Thank you" is a statement of gratitude and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 52.
  MR. POTTER.  With the one caveat that in 2013, talking about what we might do in the future with a portfolio, in terms of the taper, had very big effects.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a statement made by Mr. Potter about the potential effects of discussing tapering in 2013.


Passage number 53.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  And the model would say that it would have no effects.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presented without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting arguments.


Passage number 54.
 MR. POTTER. The model would say that it would have no effects.  That’s the only caveat to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply providing an additional clarification or condition to the previously mentioned model.


Passage number 55.
 MS. REMACHE. So it’s important to recognize, in terms of the market response, that it will depend on where market expectations are at the time and how dispersed they are.  In thinking about the communications, that communication can clarify a range of expectations, and that could cause a change in market rates relative to before the announcement. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The two speakers are discussing the potential impact of market expectations on market rates.


Passage number 56.
 MR. EVANS.  When you say “market rates,” and you talk about the taper, I guess the one market rate that seems most important is the mortgage rate. Can you imagine that mortgage rates would have some type of outsized effect. Is that what you’re talking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question being asked for clarification.


Passage number 57.
 MS. REMACHE.  I think the effect could be both in the Treasury rate as well as the mortgage rate, but it would likely be more pronounced on the MBS side.  But I think it’s also important to draw a distinction between the effects of the programs in terms of the changes in levels.  As the portfolios unwound, you would expect—and, in fact, it’s incorporated into the model—that rates should rise over time.  In addition to those effects, there could be other, more temporary or transitory effects where you could see some more widening. We are hearing relatively more discussion about it in the MBS market than in the Treasury securities market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the potential effects of certain programs on Treasury rates and mortgage rates, as well as acknowledging the possibility of other temporary effects.


Passage number 58.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions. [No response]  Seeing none, why don’t we begin our go-round.  Governor Tarullo is going to start us off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple exchange where Mr. Evans thanks Chair Yellen and there are no responses to her request for further questions.


Passage number 59.
MR. TARULLO.  Thank you very much, Madam Chair.  I begin from the premise that the issue of when to cease reinvestments of the SOMA portfolio needs discussion among policymakers not only because of some of the considerations that Beth and Julie have just raised, but also because, while the funds rate and portfolio adjustments are both available monetary policy tools, we don’t regard them as perfect substitutes for one another. Before answering the questions that were put to us in the staff memo, I want to start by specifying what I think are the salient differences between them, for our purposes.  First, in our previous discussions of normalization policy, several participants have expressed the view that we should use only federal funds rate increases in the early stages of tightening so as to return as quickly as we can to a point where material federal funds rate reductions would be available as a response to a downturn in the economy.  The preference for federal funds rate reductions over additional SOMA purchases presumably arises from some combination of our sense of the relative efficacy of the two instruments in the contemplated deteriorating conditions and of concerns about institutional or external reactions to another LSAP program. This view seems quite sensible, though I might note in passing that the caution inherent in this view would also seem to argue, at least at the margin, for a delay in a start to tightening in order to reduce the chances of a downturn that would require a policy reversal. A second difference is the possibility that through some combination of direct and signaling effects, cessation of reinvestments in Treasury securities would more directly affect the longer end of the yield curve.  Right now, the average duration of Treasury securities in our portfolio is around seven years.  Reinvestments would probably have a duration of five to six years.  So stopping reinvestments would increase the supply of longer-duration bonds in the market.  This possibility would become significant if, as some observers have speculated, our  initial increases in the federal funds rate do not yield proportionate increases further out on the curve, an outcome presumably of some importance if the Committee’s efforts to tighten financial conditions are to be effective in the real economy. Of course, if the shape of the curve were determined overwhelmingly by market expectations of future short-term rates plus a term premium, then theoretically an anticipated reduction in our balance sheet size shouldn’t affect longer-term yields.  But I think we’ve seen in recent years that actual changes in the supply of securities can have some effects that are not altogether driven by rational expectations of future conditions. Third, if the ON RRP program becomes and remains larger because of the quantity of reserves associated with our large balance sheet, then the concerns I’ve previously expressed with respect to financial stability might be mitigated through earlier measures to reduce its size. Of course, the size of the ON RRP after liftoff will depend on many factors, including the Treasury’s decisions on bill issuance and the speed with which banks begin to raise the rates they pay on deposits.  And depending on when we began roll-offs, the mitigating effect might be pretty modest and more about signaling than direct effects.  But the possibility raised in the recent memo to Reserve Bank research directors—that the demand for ON RRP might increase over time, rather than stabilize or decline—is another reminder of why we should keep the financial-stability and market-structure issues in mind. Fourth, and finally, the fact that we hold a lot of MBS means that portfolio adjustment might have a disproportionate effect on mortgage markets relative to federal funds rate increases. Our decisions on reinvestment policy will be usefully informed by considering which of these differences are very likely to be important for our policies and which would be important only if less probable contingencies were to arise.   The fact that we don’t know at the outset of normalization whether we will need to react to a near- or medium-term downturn argues for pursuing initial tightening solely through federal funds rate increases so as to reacquire as quickly as possible the less controversial—and arguably more effective—tool of funds rate decreases.  But I wouldn’t want to adopt a policy that ruled out an earlier cessation of rollovers in the event that developments affecting the yield curve or the ON RRP program made such a step advisable.  In short, my current thinking is that our presumption should be that we will raise rates several times before ending reinvestments, but that we might move more quickly if we observe post-liftoff difficulties in these other areas. Looking at things this way, I’d be disinclined to get very specific in an ex-ante communication strategy.  Calendar guidance, even conditional, would almost surely be read as a near commitment.  And I don’t see how to sensibly use economic indicators such as unemployment or inflation as triggers because those kinds of indicators are relevant to the overall pace of tightening through both instruments.  The reasons for maintaining some optionality concerning portfolio practices pertain to financial conditions, which would be particularly difficult to capture in quantitative terms, especially because there are some quite distinct considerations.  I think this argues for only a modest change in the policy we announced in our normalization principles last fall—namely, that the timing of the cessation of reinvestment will depend on how economic and financial conditions and the economic outlook evolve. The modest change would be to add something to reflect that aim of reacquiring interest rate reductions as a policy tool.  One possible formulation—although I’m sure there are others that would capture the thought, and I think Vice Chairman Dudley has got one—would be to echo the Bank of England, which in various communications has indicated that the Monetary Policy Committee is not likely to change the size of the Bank’s balance sheet until the Bank rate  has reached a level from which it could be cut materially if needed. It’s worth noting that the Bank of England has kept this position pretty general and has not incorporated it into formal statements of monetary policy.  It’s been mentioned in some FAQs, referred to in its quarterly Inflation Reports, and, in even more general terms, mentioned by Governor Carney in testimony to a parliamentary committee.  It seems to me very sensible for us to emulate the Bank of England and not make too big a deal of all this so as to avoid creating specific expectations that might be taken as near commitments or used as benchmarks to evaluate how normalization is going.  That suggests to me that we should communicate this modest elaboration of our intentions through the minutes or through an answer by the Chair to a question at a press conference. Next, I’d note that the bunching of maturing Treasuries in our portfolio would happily coincide with the approach I’ve just suggested, assuming our first funds rate increase happens later this year.  Right now, relatively small amounts are maturing each month.  But in the period from February to May 2016, as one of the charts that they distributed shows, we have a substantial jump in maturing Treasuries to $128 billion over those four months.  Then there’s a pattern of a few low months followed by one higher month until early 2018, when the amounts for both higher- and lower-maturity months increase substantially.  If we thought in terms of ceasing reinvestments in the second half of next year, we would have given ourselves time to make a few federal funds rate increases, assuming the central tendency of the Committee holds, and yet still have a period of relatively low amounts maturing monthly so as not to tighten financial conditions very much via portfolio runoff, at least for a while. Finally, with respect to the issue of full cessation or phaseout of reinvestments, I feel differently about Treasury securities and MBS.  For Treasury securities, I’d probably favor ceasing most reinvestments immediately or soon after we make the decision to move ahead, particularly if that is in a period when relatively small amounts were maturing. However, in light of the fact that the pattern of maturation is quite uneven, I’d be interested in Simon Potter’s views as to whether it would be a good idea to smooth out the reduction in our Treasury portfolio as well as whether there are other reasons to continue to roll over a modest amount for some period of time, which I think Julie Remache alluded to.  As to MBS, because our portfolio accounts for a substantially greater share of that market, it’s probably better to phase out reinvestment of agency MBS, though as to precisely how, I would again want to be guided by advice from the Desk.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Tarullo, is providing his perspective on the issue of when to cease reinvestments of the SOMA portfolio and discussing the differences and considerations involved. He also mentions his preference for using federal funds rate increases in the early stages of tightening and the potential effects on the yield curve and mortgage markets. He concludes by discussing his thoughts on the timing and phasing out of reinvestments for both Treasury securities and MBS.


Passage number 60.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 61.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  May I ask a clarifying question.  You said that downward pressure of the balance sheet on term premiums would last 10 years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a request for clarification.


Passage number 62.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 63.
 WILLIAMS. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without any specific context or information about what is being discussed in the passage, it is impossible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement. The mere mention of "WILLIAMS" does not provide enough information to make a definitive conclusion.


Passage number 64.
 MS. REMACHE. The size of the portfolio would be normalized in 2021, but because of the composition of the portfolio, it would still have a lot of MBS and some longer-duration securities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents information about the size and composition of the portfolio without any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 65.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So it would be a longer duration portfolio.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the portfolio in question would have a longer duration.


Passage number 66.
  MS. REMACHE. It would be another several years before the composition of the portfolio is also normalized.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. REMACHE is stating a fact about the timeframe it would take for the portfolio to be normalized.


Passage number 67.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I see.  Okay.  I wanted to understand that.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is acknowledging and thanking someone for their input.


Passage number 68.
 MR. EVANS.  Could I just ask a question about the presentation.  In exhibit 3, you’ve got the sum of maturities and it has this certain Manhattan-skyline-peak aspect to it, which is getting my attention.  That made me go look at a part of Tealbook B I don’t look at very often.  But I tried to dig up what the SOMA balance sheet holdings would actually look like, and the chart there is consistent with these peaks in maturities, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and seeking clarification.


Passage number 69.
 MS. REMACHE.  That’s right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states a statement made by someone without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 70.
 MR. EVANS.  So you might look at those peaks and expect choppiness.  Maybe it’s the aspect ratio here, but it doesn’t look quite as jagged as I might have expected.  Okay.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statements made by Mr. Evans and Chair Yellen are not conflicting or contradictory. Mr. Evans simply expresses his observation about the peaks, and Chair Yellen responds with a thank you.


Passage number 71.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  In thinking about the normalization of the balance sheet, I have several principles that I would follow.  First, balance sheet normalization should be implemented in a way that minimizes the likelihood of returning short-term rates to the zero lower bound.  These are things highlighted by both Governor Tarullo and Vice Chairman Dudley. Second, balance sheet normalization should be conducted to reduce the likelihood of taper tantrum-type disruptions by avoiding large, discrete changes.  Our models didn’t anticipate the taper tantrum, and I don’t think our models will anticipate any effect now.  But I don’t have a lot of confidence in our ability to predict things that haven’t happened in the historical data.  In that historical period, we hadn’t been at the zero lower bound and we hadn’t had a large balance sheet.  So I don’t think we should have too much certainty about what the effect might be. Third, we should select and communicate a consistent, understandable redemption path, not necessarily tied to the somewhat arbitrary schedule of roll-offs and prepayments, but sized and timed to allow a smooth reduction in the size of the balance sheet. Fourth, the plan should be to reduce the balance sheet at a fairly steady and predictable pace, but a pace that produces monetary tightening consistent with our macroeconomic forecasts. Then we could use the federal funds target as the primary tool to respond to economic surprises that affect the forecast. The federal funds rate channel is better understood than the balance sheet channel and the federal funds rate seems the more appropriate tool for making modest changes to the normalization process resulting from surprises in the incoming data.  This is very similar to President Williams’s point on this. Fifth, shrinking the balance sheet is tightening.  We generally move the federal funds rate in 25 basis point increments.  I would prefer the cumulative effect of redemptions over a one-year period to be sized to approximate a 25 basis point change in the federal funds rate. In general, I envision a combination of funds rate policy and balance sheet reductions that follows the path outlined in the most recent Tealbooks, although with a somewhat more gradual start to the redemption program.  That is, we would choose a liftoff date, raise the federal funds rate a couple of times, and, if things go according to plan, begin a tapered reduction in reinvestments after those initial increases. But it’s important to retain the sense of data dependence and flexibility as we anticipate this next phase of our normalization.  The logic of sequencing our exit so that liftoff precedes redemptions is to ensure the balance sheet actions would not delay liftoff from the zero lower bound.  Using that same logic, I suggest raising thefederal funds rate target twice before beginning redemption tapering to ensure that we are well off the zero lower bound and that we have dealt with any complications in keeping the funds rate within our target range.  In addition, the delay would provide time to assess the degree to which the increases in the federal funds rate are being transmitted to longer-term interest rates and whether our first set of actions has unexpectedly slowed the economy.  I would then select and announce a path for redemptions that would reduce the chance of the announcement of balance sheet normalization creating a taper tantrum.  I consider the announcement of the tapering process as the third action in our tightening sequence. After we set the conditional path for redemptions, the criteria for additional tightening of the federal funds rate would be the same criteria I would use for beginning the balance sheet normalization process.  I would not tie the announcement to calendar dates. Because earlier estimates of the effect of our balance sheet suggest that $500 billion of purchases was roughly equivalent to a 75 basis point decrease in the federal funds rate, a constant redemption flow of $15 billion a month for a year would translate to roughly a 25 basis point federal funds tightening over the course of a year. When a third tightening appears appropriate, I would announce the beginning of tapering of our balance sheet of $15 billion a month in redemptions.  If additional tightening of financial conditions was required, we could raise the federal funds rate at the same time as beginning the tapering process.  If the forecast unfolded as in the Tealbook, a gradual approach to tightening would be appropriate and the tapering process would be an alternative to raising the federal funds rate at that meeting. In terms of the composition of the redemptions, I would start with $5 billion of MBS redemptions and $10 billion in Treasury redemptions.  This would minimize the chance that the announcement would cause a spike in mortgage rates.  If the housing market was becoming tooebullient, we could increase the proportion of MBS redemptions with or without subsequent increases in the flow of total redemptions. There is a financial-stability element in determining the size and composition of our redemptions.  Do we want to slow the housing sector or steepen the yield curve.  We should increase the redemption size or increase the MBS share of redemptions.  In fact, the financial-stability tabletop conducted by the COP Financial Stability Committee included a scenario in which two of the presidents involved felt that the redemption or selling of longer-term assets might be one of the potential reactions to an overheating in the real estate market.  For this reason, I would maintain some longer-term Treasury securities and MBS in our portfolio to preserve the option of a yield-curve tightening strategy should financial conditions in the future make that a desirable response to financial-stability concerns. Because our securities redemptions initially would be less than the balance sheet rollover, we also should discuss how the excess rollover funds should be reinvested.  If duration is one of the important factors in the effectiveness of the balance sheet as a monetary policy tool, reinvestment should be done to keep the proportion of MBS and the duration of the SOMA account unchanged other than for securities being redeemed.  In addition, reinvesting in Treasury bills would tend to offset some of the tightening effects we are trying to accomplish through raising short-term rates.  These concerns imply that the reinvesting should be concentrated in somewhat longer duration securities, which would pose complications down the road as it may alter the timing of roll-offs.  However, this is something we could perhaps delegate to the Desk.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 72.
   MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I had a two-hander, which actually is more a question for President Williams or Vice Chairman Dudley, and maybe Governor Tarullo, too.  There seems to be an implicit notion that reducing the balance sheet will increase the probability of our hitting the zero lower bound.  I couldn’t follow that logic.  Is it because—maybe I should go with what the Vice Chairman said—we think it would be very costly for us to ever increase the balance sheet again. Because if, when conditions are bad, we just go back up to $4 trillion, then I don’t see the argument.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Kocherlakota, expresses confusion or disagreement with the notion that reducing the balance sheet will increase the probability of hitting the zero lower bound. He argues that he doesn't see the logic behind this assumption and questions whether it is because increasing the balance sheet again in the future would be costly. This suggests a disagreement or lack of agreement on the relationship between reducing the balance sheet and the zero lower bound.


Passage number 73.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. In my judgment, there’s not a huge appetite for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The passage is expressing the opinion of the speaker, but it does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states the speaker's judgment about the appetite for something.


Passage number 74.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Okay, if that’s the implicit thinking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 75.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  The federal funds rate tool is considered a better tool than the balance sheet tool, and so we would prefer using the federal funds rate tool over the balance sheet tool.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement clearly expresses a preference for using the federal funds rate tool over the balance sheet tool without presenting any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 76.
 MR. EVANS.  Governor Tarullo said that explicitly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating what Governor Tarullo said without expressing any opposing views or argument.


Passage number 77.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. So the notion is that once we start reducing the balance sheet, we’re going to be very averse to reversing that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the possibility of reducing the balance sheet and states that there is aversion to reversing such reduction.


Passage number 78.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Let’s just say that we prefer the federal fund rate tool to the balance sheet tool.  It doesn’t mean the balance sheet tool isn’t present, but we prefer the funds rate tool.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply states a preference for the federal funds rate tool over the balance sheet tool. It does not argue against or dismiss the use of the balance sheet tool.


Passage number 79.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That’s fine, but even that doesn’t quite get you there, because if you were willing to reverse course and get yourself back up to the amount of the balance sheet we have in place now, whenever you’re faced with a shock, then you’re in the same place, essentially.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact or presenting a hypothetical scenario without challenging or contradicting any previous information or viewpoint.


Passage number 80.
   MR. TARULLO.  Yes.  That’s true, but I think what all of us are saying in different ways is, our expectation is that future Committees will be reluctant to use LSAP purchases as a routine instrument of monetary policy, as opposed to in the middle of the worst financial crisis in 75 years.  And there’s also a little bit of questioning of the relative efficacy of it, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It mentions a shared expectation and questioning, but there is no clear disagreement or opposing views presented.


Passage number 81.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Okay.  Thanks.  That’s helpful for me.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kocherlakota is thanking Chair Yellen for her helpful response.


Passage number 82.
 MR. FISCHER. What you say suggests that we don’t couch it in terms of when we feel that we’ve reached a sufficient level of confidence that we don’t go back down to zero, but rather when we feel we can comfortably, politically, market-wise, whatever, start engaging in purchases of assets again. CHAIR YELLEN.  Simon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Mr. Fischer and Chair Yellen seem to be in agreement about the idea of not going back down to zero and instead waiting until they feel comfortable to start engaging in purchases of assets again.


Passage number 83.
 MR. POTTER.  Can I just add one thing.  I guess you’ve done three asset purchase programs.  And one of the ways asset purchases work is that you have to hold them for a while.  So how you deal with the holdings of asset purchases will be important next time you want to buy assets in terms of the effect they can have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply making a statement and posing a question for further discussion.


Passage number 84.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That’s a good point.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response from Mr. Kocherlakota is acknowledging and appreciating Governor Brainard's point.


Passage number 85.
 MS. BRAINARD.  I think the other way to think about these two tools is simply that we have much greater empirical evidence over a much longer period of time connecting changes in the federal funds rate to macroeconomic conditions.  And so, ideally, one would be back in a framework in which one had the ability to use that, and so I think that would be a very strong rationale for preferring it. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement between Ms. Brainard and Chair Yellen. They are discussing different tools and their effectiveness, recognizing the benefits of using the federal funds rate based on empirical evidence.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 86.
   MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Much of the staff memo on reinvestment combines discussion of our reinvestment strategy with discussion of how we communicate about our strategy, especially what forward guidance we might provide.  In fact, I think it’s fair to say the memo is virtually all about the forward guidance regarding our reinvestment strategy, rather than the strategy itself. And I found this a little bit surprising, because just earlier this year we ended the practice of providing forward guidance on our interest rate policy and went instead to a meeting-by-meeting basis for setting policy.  And in our normalization plan document last September, we promised to give advance notice about asset sales, but we didn’t give any similar promise about reinvestment strategy. So, like President Williams, I found it useful to think first about what strategy we want to follow about our balance sheet and then to think about how we want to communicate about it. Now, something stood out to me in the memo.  The memo provides two scenarios regarding macroeconomic variables—one under an assumption of an early end to reinvestment and the other under an assumption of a later end to reinvestment.  The early scenario is taken from the June Tealbook, and so that involves a particular interest rate path, presumably chosen appropriately—or the staff’s view of what’s appropriate, I’m not going to quibble with that.  In the late scenario, the interest rate policy follows an inertial Taylor rule.  Now, because a later end to reinvestment by itself entails more accommodative policy, the funds rate is somewhat steeper in the later reinvestment path.  But it only partially offsets the effect of a later end to reinvestment.  The unemployment path is, accordingly, lower, and inflation, marginally higher. Now, the staff points out that a funds rate path could be chosen that in the model would completely insulate our goal variables from the balance sheet effects of our reinvestment strategy.  I’ve argued in the past that these balance sheet effects could be quite small, but let’s set  that aside and just take these effects as given.  I think it makes more sense to compare scenarios in which we are under the sort of complete-offset assumption.  In other words, under the baseline, we’re assuming we’re setting interest rate policy appropriately.  If we’re looking at a different timing for reinvestment, I think the sensible thing is to assume that if we adopted that, we would also set interest rate policy appropriately, and essentially that means projections regarding our goal variables would be invariant under the two scenarios. So the main effect of the choice of reinvestment is on the path of our balance sheet.  We can sort of set aside unemployment and inflation.  Now, framed this way, that seems to a first approximation—of course, there are second-order issues, too—the useful way to think about it.  To me, the choice seems pretty easy.  I think an array of political economy considerations make it attractive for us to normalize the size of our balance sheet as soon as possible—sooner rather than later. I think we’d prefer as small a financial-system footprint as possible while maintaining the ability to accomplish our objectives and live up to our promise not to sell assets.  I conclude that we should end reinvestment all at once, and soon.  Ideally, a meeting or two after we start raising rates seems reasonable.  Under that strategy, the interval between liftoff and ending reinvestment is relatively short, so forward guidance isn’t really that important a question. Now, it strikes me that we could easily make this decision about reinvestment on a meeting-by-meeting basis and, at the appropriate time, simply announce that we’ve decided to stop reinvestment effective immediately in the same way we announced the beginnings of our quantitative easing programs and the beginning of tapering and the like.  That would be consistent with our decision earlier this year to back away from forward guidance on interest rate policy, to go instead to a meeting-by-meeting basis.  And I don’t see why we need forward guidance on ending reinvestment. Let me just comment on the discussion about phaseout and market functioning.  I have a history of questioning the staff on what they mean by market disruption.  I think if we’re going to take some step like slowing down the end of reinvestments or delaying on the basis of the staff’s conjectures about market disruption, the Committee really ought to have a pretty concrete handle on what in the world that means.  If prices move, if they get volatile on a couple of days, if something like that happens, I’m not sure why we should care, and I’m not sure what that should mean to us.  If there’s something more fundamental, like some computers breaking down, I’d want to know about that—maybe that’s worth taking onboard.  But I think we need a more concrete account of what “market disruption” means before we actually act on it.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Thomas.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, disagrees with the staff memo's focus on forward guidance regarding the reinvestment strategy and instead argues that the decision to end reinvestment should be made sooner rather than later. Additionally, he questions the staff's definition of "market disruption" and suggests that the Committee should have a clearer understanding of what it means before making decisions based on it.


Passage number 87.
 MR. LAUBACH.  President Lacker, just for clarification, the baseline scenario is constructed as we always do using mechanically the inertial Taylor (1999) rule.  So that does not start with a specific notion of appropriate policy but, instead, just mechanically applies Taylor (1999).  We did basically the same in the alternative where the reinvestments continue until the federal funds rate hits 2 percent. For example, in the Risks and Uncertainty section of the Tealbook, we are applying the inertial Taylor (1999) rule to the deviations from the baseline.  I think the point that you highlighted—that, in principle, of course, the funds rate path could be adjusted to completely insulate the macroeconomy from the changes in reinvestment policy—is entirely correct.  It would just be more complex to run that scenario.  So we simply let the policymakers respond to the deviations from baseline according to the inertial Taylor (1999) rule.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing clarification and agreement with President Lacker's point.


Passage number 88.
   MR. LACKER.  Right.  So I stand corrected in my characterization of the baseline funds rate path.  The basic point is true, though.  If you’re setting policy in one scenario, you can insulate them.  More broadly, if you took an optimal policy calculation in the baseline path and then did the same with a different reinvestment policy, you’d get the same outcome, right.  This is basically an application of the envelope theory, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging a correction in their characterization but agrees with the basic point being made. They are also seeking confirmation on a statement through the use of the phrase "right."


Passage number 89.
 MR. LAUBACH.  Mostly correct, particularly as long as you are away from the zero bound.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the statement is mostly correct, especially when not near the zero bound.


Passage number 90.
 MR. LACKER.  Right.  Again, as a first-order approximation. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Lacker and Chair Yellen are agreeing with each other by saying "right" and "again".


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 91.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Yes.  Just to follow up on that.  If we were to stop the reinvestments very quickly, we might still be very close to the zero lower bound.  So the ability to offset seems a little bit inconsistent with starting the timing almost immediately.  You’d be right if there’s enough room, but if there’s not much room, the ability to offset using the federal funds rate seems quite limited, so I think you’d have to pick one of those two.  If you really want an offset, you need enough room to be very confident you’re not going to hit the zero lower bound again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting that there may be limited ability to offset the effects of stopping reinvestments with the federal funds rate if there is not enough room to maneuver away from the zero lower bound. This contradicts the idea of starting the timing of stopping reinvestments immediately.


Passage number 92.
 MR. LACKER.  This is worth thinking about.  In the macroeconomic literature, the standard treatment is that policy is sort of lexicographic, in that you only have the assets you need when interest rates are above zero.  When you get to zero, then the balance sheet is what you use.  And the presumption in a lot of models and a lot of discussions is last in, first out. On the way up, you’re running off the balance sheet and then raising rates.  But we’re doing something different—for various reasons, we’re doing something different. We’re raising rates before we’re running off the balance sheet, and so we’re getting away from that lexicographic   corner solution.  And I think we need to be clear on why that is and what’s constraining us.  If interest rates get to 2 percent and we’ve got a big balance sheet, well, why didn’t we buy a lot of assets when we cut rates to 2 percent in 2008.  We ought to think about that, I guess. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents different perspectives on monetary policy and discusses the need to clarify the reasons behind the current approach.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 93.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  I wanted to follow up on President Lacker’s attempt to build a theorem of invariants.  I think it would be valid except for the concerns we just heard about being willing to raise the size of our balance sheet when we get to the effective lower bound. So if we’ve cut the size of the balance sheet, whenever we hit the effective lower bound, we’re going to have less accommodation because of that cut.  So whenever we hit the effective lower bound at any time in the future, because we’ve reduced the balance sheet—assuming we’re unwilling to raise the size of the balance sheet—we’re going to have less accommodation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates a disagreement between Mr. Kocherlakota and President Lacker. Mr. Kocherlakota states that President Lacker's attempt to build a theorem of invariants would be valid, except for the concerns he raises about the willingness to raise the size of the balance sheet. This disagreement suggests contention between the two individuals.


Passage number 94.
 MR. LACKER.  Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Lacker addresses Chair Yellen respectfully, and Chair Yellen's response does not indicate any disagreement.


Passage number 95.
 MR. LACKER. Will that argument ever not apply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a direct question asking if a certain argument will ever not apply.


Passage number 96.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I think that’s an interesting question—which I will touch on later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that they find a question interesting and indicate that they will address it later.


Passage number 97.
 MR. LACKER. Should we have $4 trillion for the rest of time. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker is posing a question about whether the amount of money should be $4 trillion indefinitely, and Chair Yellen replies with the name "President Evans." The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention between the individuals mentioned.


Passage number 98.
 MR. EVANS.  Madam Chair, the other lever here in the situation that we’re talking about, without regard to increasing the balance sheet, would be once you go up two funds rate increases, you have a little more latitude to indicate we won’t necessarily raise rates as quickly as the baseline would, and that would impart more accommodation as well.  But that’s the environment that you’d be dealing with, one that would not be nearly as strong as we expect  when we say we’re reasonably confident we’re going to get inflation up to our 2 percent target, it seems to me. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Evans is simply explaining another lever that can be used in the situation being discussed, and Chair Yellen acknowledges his statement with the response "Okay.".


Passage number 99.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  In preparing for this round, I, too, tried to ground my thinking in guiding principles.  They’re not the same as President Rosengren’s. I came up with three.  First, consistency with the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans document that we published in June 2011 and updated last September.  As I read it, the September 2014 document established that reductions in SOMA holdings will be done gradually and predictably, that the timing of ceasing reinvestment after liftoff will be state dependent—that is, on the economic and financial conditions and the outlook—and that it is the Committee’s desire to return to a portfolio consisting primarily of Treasury securities, implying that runoff of MBS will be part of normalization from the outset.  The document also said we do not anticipate selling MBS.  Everybody is familiar with all of those principles.  My second guideline is that our reinvestment policy should, broadly speaking, work in support of interest rate policy in pursuit of our dual-mandate objectives.  This could be turned around to mean that reinvestment policy should not work counter to interest rate policy. My third principle is, the approach should be simple, uncomplicated, and clear in the substance of policy and its communication.  In other words, I don’t think our reinvestment approach should risk being too cute. In the spirit of this go-round, my thinking on the questions is preliminary, not as developed as many of the people who went ahead of me.  I lean in favor of what I consider a simple approach with these elements:  First, make the decision on the timing of ceasing reinvestments once the mechanics of ongoing interest rate policy implementation have been operationalized and are running smoothly.  Second, I do prefer a qualitative, state-dependent   guidance approach.  Set the timing of starting cessation of reinvestment in light of economic conditions once we’re reasonably confident the economy can handle any additional tightening that might come from balance sheet reductions. Third, allow full passive runoff.  Even though reductions will vary over time, a published maturity schedule should satisfy the predictability criterion.  And review the approach periodically in an attempt to assess considerations such as coherence with the expected path of interest rate policy, the extent the variable schedule of reductions is affecting the potency of interest rate policy, and any effect on market functioning. The Committee does have other options, as already discussed, of course.  For example, monthly reduction could be set as a straight line of equal monthly increments.  The mix between Treasuries and MBS could be altered. We’ve discussed the pros and cons of this idea before.  And it’s possible to imagine a scheme of tight coordination between interest rate and balance sheet normalization, trying to integrate these two tools into a dynamically set, data-dependent overall policy stance. I’m not warm to these ideas.  At present, I’m concerned that over-engineering might produce communication and other issues.  So, at this point, I prefer keeping it simple.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Lockhart, presents his own principles and guidelines for reinvestment policy, but does not express disagreement with any other speaker or opinion.


Passage number 100.
 MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I welcome this initial discussion on how to deal with reinvestments in our SOMA portfolio.  And I want to thank the staff for the memo that lays out some of the issues.  I found it quite helpful. I, like President Lockhart, start with our normalization principles.  Our September 2014 principles provide some guidance on how the Committee will handle its portfolio, including reducing its size and returning its composition to primarily Treasury securities. We stated in the principles that we plan to reduce the balance sheet in a gradual and predictable manner, primarily  by ending reinvestments, that reinvestments will end sometime after we begin raising the federal funds rate, and that the precise timing will depend on how the economy and outlook evolve.  Whatever plan we choose should be consistent with these principles.  My preference is also to adopt a simple approach, because at this point I don’t see any clear benefits to adopting a more complicated one.  I think the main issues are determining the starting point for ending reinvestments and determining when to communicate our strategy. While I would like the balance sheet to return to a more normal size and composition, I don’t see a compelling reason to begin this in the very early stages of liftoff.  I’d rather the balance sheet remain passive for a time after liftoff, so that we don’t encourage the idea that the balance sheet, in addition to interest rates, is a regular or active tool of monetary policy. We’ve stated that we’ll time the end of reinvestments based on the economy.  So the further in advance we want to communicate something more concrete about our reinvestment strategy, the less reasonable a calendar-based strategy is, because we don’t know precisely how the economy will evolve. That leaves a state-dependent strategy.  Now, one reason I don’t think the balance sheet should be viewed as a regular tool of monetary policy is that I don’t believe we have estimates of its effect on risk premiums and the real economy that are precise enough to be able to use it in that way.  This argues for not setting separate economic conditions for ending reinvestments.  My preference would be, for at least around this table, to think about ending reinvestments tied to the federal funds rate.  Essentially, this means that the economic conditions for ending reinvestments are the same ones we’ll be using to determine the appropriate target for the funds rate.  Participants who’ve said today that they would be comfortable beginning reinvestments after a couple of federal funds rate increases are essentially doing this.  The staff memo illustrates a scenario in which reinvestments stop when the federal funds rate hits 2 percent.  Under the Tealbook baseline, this means full reinvestments continue for almost two years after liftoff. That’s too long.  I’d be much more comfortable ending reinvestments sooner—say, when the fund rate is up to 1 percent.  If the balance sheet effects are larger than we thought, then we could adjust the subsequent path of the funds rate after the end of reinvestments to take account of that.  If an adverse shock were to hit the economy so that the federal funds rate needs to move back down, we could begin reinvestments again if need be. One issue that was not raised in the memo is when to convey information to the public about our reinvestment strategy.  While market participants are likely to turn attention to reinvestments once we lift off—indeed, there’s already some discussion of this by market participants and Fed watchers—I’m not convinced that at liftoff or shortly thereafter we need to say much more about our reinvestment strategy than we’ve already said in the normalization principles and what will be conveyed in the minutes of this meeting.  It would be useful to get the Desk’s view on how much advance notice market participants really need in order to prepare for the end of reinvestment. At some point after we’ve had experience with raising the federal funds rate, we would announce our reinvestment strategy.  If the market doesn’t need much advance notice to prepare, then the Committee could introduce statement language saying that if the economy evolves as expected, then we plan to end reinvestments at the next meeting, or at the time of the next federal funds rate increase.  We could presage this intention a meeting or two beforehand, similar to what we did when we began reducing our third LSAP program in December 2013.  You may recall that at the September 2013 meeting, the Committee introduced language saying that the economic improvement since the start of the purchase program was consistent with underlying   strength in the economy, but that the Committee decided to wait for more evidence that the progress was sustainable before adjusting the pace of purchases.  It repeated this language in October, and then tapering commenced in December.  So we could use a similar approach here if we thought that it was important to give some advance notice. Finally, with regard to whether to end reinvestments completely or phase them out over time, and whether to treat Treasuries or MBS differently, my initial thought is to keep it simple, like President Lockhart, by ending reinvestments all at once and treating Treasury securities and MBS in the same way.  The pattern of redemptions already has some phaseout built in.  The macroeconomic effects will be the same whether we announce reinvestments are ending completely or whether we announce a path of gradual phaseout.  And as the staff memo indicated, market functioning was not adversely affected by the end of our first LSAP program in March 2010, when the SOMA net purchases of MBS fell more than $40 billion.  Indeed, ending reinvestments might aid market functioning because it will mean there will be more safe assets available for collateral and repo in the hands of the public.  In addition, market participants know the CUSIPs in our SOMA portfolio.  So once we announce when reinvestments will end, they’ll know the path of Treasury redemptions, and they’ll be able to estimate the path of MBS redemptions. That said, the MBS market has changed over time, and the Desk estimates that MBS prepayments are expected to be about 30 percent of TBA gross issuance in 2016, requiring the private sector to absorb a large portion of the market.  Further analysis by the Desk of the risks of ending reinvestments all at once, rather than phasing them out, would be helpful.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. MS. Mester is simply expressing her preferences and thoughts on how to deal with reinvestments in the SOMA portfolio. She is providing her own perspective and suggestions, but there is no mention of others disagreeing with her or offering contradicting opinions.


Passage number 101.
MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  When I first started thinking about when to cease reinvestments, my instinct was that we should decide based on current and expected economic conditions.  After all, the size of the balance sheet is a monetary policy tool, and so it should be chosen in the same deliberate and comprehensive way in which we make federal funds rate decisions, or that we used to purchase the assets in the first place through our various QE programs.  So I was fundamentally in the state-based camp, and I wanted not to tie us down too much before it was necessary. However, the more I thought about it, the more I realized that a lot depends on how powerful the effects of announcing the dates and conditions for the end of reinvestments will be. To a first approximation—maybe a bad one, but it’s an approximation—one can say that announcing the schedule for sales, when it comes, will be equivalent to a given basis point increase or decrease—I’ll explain that in a minute—in the federal funds rate. But that isn’t quite right.  The markets have an expectation of how large the balance sheet will be at each future date.  If our announcement is that we’re going to go early relative to those dates, we’ll be tightening. If we go late relative to those dates, we’ll be easing.  Further, if the markets have reasonable foresight, we get most of the reaction with the announcement, and then carrying it out doesn’t have as much effect as one thinks.  The less foresight people have, the more one has to take into account all of the effects that President Rosengren indicated a few minutes ago. I think, at the very general level, our principle is that we should go late with the announcement and with the beginning of the running off the portfolio.  I say that because I think that the main thing we’ve got to avoid is getting back to the zero lower bound.  One of you said that we want to go up using the two tools so we get to an interest rate that will make us feel comfortable about not going back. Now, let’s go to the key point.  How big will these effects be.  I was surprised to hear President Rosengren talk about a 75 basis point effect, measured in terms of an equivalent move in the federal funds rate, of some aspect of phasing.  I’ve seen no evidence that we’ll be anywhere near as powerful as that in the timing of selling off different parts of the portfolio.  I’m not quite sure of the empirical significance of the lower right-hand chart in exhibit 1 of the handout that we got on SOMA reinvestment policy, but it does suggest that waiting a year doesn’t make much of a difference to interest rates at any time. I also think I’ve read a paper or heard a statement indicating that the effect of the running off the portfolio will be in the direction we all believe—namely, that a larger portfolio is more expansionary, but that the size of the effects will be relatively small. I think we have to ask the staff to tell us how powerful this is.  If the whole thing is worth the equivalent of 25 basis points in running down from $4 billion to $1 billion, that’s not huge.  One is tempted to say, “Well, we should just reverse the results of our empirical work on the effect of quantitative easing—unless there’s quantitative lack of easing—and then we’ll get the right answer.”  But there’s so much expectation in these things regarding what you’re saying about future policy that I’m really not sure that you could just do that reversal and say, “That’s what’s going to happen.”  And the question is, what message are we sending now. I’d announce the beginning of the nonreinvestments relatively late to give us a safety cushion with regard to going back to zero, which I think for a variety of reasons is a problem.  I agree with those people who’ve said we really don’t want to go there.  And the reason I reached that conclusion even before this discussion was, I’ve hardly heard anybody say around this table when bad news comes in, “Okay, guys, let’s do another QE.” In fact, it seems to have just fallen off the table, and I assume that reflects the conclusions we’ve all arrived at.  If these effects arepowerful, we’re going to have to have some more work by the staff telling us how to coordinate these two instruments.  What do we expect when we sell off at a given rate.  If we expect very little effect, we don’t have to worry very much, and we can just fix it.  If it’s powerful, then we’re going to have to think about what we’re doing at each stage. In the end, because I believe the effects are relatively small, I’ll end up with quite a few of you.  I’d give President Lockhart the prize for the most apt analogy in this FOMC meeting.  I’ve never thought of programs for reinvestment as being cute, but I’m very pleased to think about it.  We don’t want to be too cute if it isn’t that important.  If it is that important, we’ll have to be a little cuter, and then go into all of the elements that President Rosengren—and, I think to some extent, Governor Tarullo—mentioned.  Again, whether that very sophisticated analysis you gave, Governor Tarullo, is going to be the essence of what we do, or an aspect of what we do, depends on just how powerful this tool is that we’re going to be using. So what I’d like to ask for is that the staff come back with some quantitative stories about what will happen, or what they expect will happen, or the range of things that could happen, depending on the strategies.  If you can say this doesn’t matter at all, then we could do it on other grounds.  If you say this really matters, then we’ll have to do a lot more thinking.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Fischer is presenting his thoughts and analysis on the timing and impact of ceasing reinvestments, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement among others.


Passage number 102.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I prefer the qualitative state-dependent approach to initiating changes to our reinvestment policies.  However, once we start, I think there should be a high hurdle for making changes in the pace of our balance sheet reductions. Before we being altering our reinvestments, I think we should be well under way in the funds rate normalization process, and I think this is the biggest issue. I think a lot of what we’re talking about comes down to this:  We don’t know the effect of the balance sheet adjustments and how they are going to affect longer-term rates, and that translates into some equivalent increase in the funds rate.  If we get to a point at which the funds rate is high enough, there’s some offset that can be done with the funds rate itself or the funds rate path trajectory— somebody said this earlier as well.  So once we get to the point when the funds rate is a viable separate tool, I think it takes care of a lot of these issues. By that time, I expect everything should be working smoothly, with a strong economic outlook and inflation rising toward 2 percent.  I thought Governor Tarullo’s comments on the Bank of England guidance along these lines of the policy rate being high enough were particularly appropriate and helpful. At that point, we should follow through on our stated goal of returning to a traditional policy environment in which adjusting the funds rate is our primary tool for monetary policy.  This would mean putting our balance sheet reductions on “cruise control” as much as possible. We should do this in accordance with our exit-principles statement that we will reduce security holdings in a gradual and predictable manner. I hope we won’t need to adjust our reinvestment policies regularly, and certainly not as another policy lever, if things are going well.  This means that before we begin to cease reinvestments, we ought to be reasonably confident that we will be able to adequately respond to future shocks through adjustments in the funds rate.  This judgment regarding how high the funds rate needs to be before we alter our reinvestments is going to depend on the evolution of the economic environment and undoubtedly will have an aspect of “we’ll know it when we see it.”  This leads me to think that the best starting rule for ending reinvestments is one that is qualitative and state dependent.   On the other questions, I defer judgment to the Desk on how best to engineer the gradual and predictable reduction in the balance sheet.  From the memo, I infer that the Desk would prefer to taper reinvestments, at least for a while, to insure against market disruption.  I’m fine with this at the start and understand that we may have to treat MBS differently from Treasury securities.  But we should communicate that any decisions regarding the tapering process are dictated by market-microstructure and potential market dislocation considerations and not by macroeconomic monetary policy concerns.  We don’t want markets to confuse technical adjustments with changes in the stance of monetary policy.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Thomas.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Evans, is expressing his preference for a qualitative state-dependent approach to initiating changes in reinvestment policies and discussing the potential impact of balance sheet adjustments on longer-term rates and the funds rate. He also mentions the importance of the funds rate normalization process and the need for a high hurdle for making changes in the pace of balance sheet reductions. There is no conflict or disagreement in his statements.


Passage number 103.
 MR. LAUBACH.  Perhaps just as a brief clarification, because there have been some questions about our estimate of the size of the macroeconomic effects of these changes in reinvestment strategies.  Beth’s handout was only showing the comparison of the path for the federal funds rate.  For those of you who have the memo, on the third-to-last page, page 15, there is exhibit 2.  That shows you that, using the staff’s methodology, the difference between the two examples shown in the memo is effectively governed by the integral of the area between the two lines under the alternative paths for the SOMA holdings.  When you then go to page 15 of the memo, you see roughly what the effect of that is.  For example, on the unemployment rate, it’s roughly on the order of 0.1 percentage point at its peak.  So after a couple of years, the unemployment rate is about 0.1 percentage point lower. Now, again, the point applies that President Lacker made beforehand—namely, in principle, of course, you could adjust the federal funds rate so as to completely insulate.  So if you started off with some path of the unemployment rate that you had previously determined tobe optimal, you could, away from the zero lower bound, adjust the funds rate so as to insulate the economy completely from any changes in reinvestment strategy. But just to provide an order of magnitude, if you chose the differences in the path of the SOMA holdings and funds rate as shown in the memo, then that would be the resulting maximum effect on the unemployment rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is providing clarification and explaining the methodology and potential effects of changes in reinvestment strategies.


Passage number 104.
 MR. POTTER.  So that’s in FRB/US.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It appears to be a simple statement without any conflicting opinions or ideas.


Passage number 105.
 MR. LAUBACH.  That is in FRB/US.  There are a lot of caveats concerning this, obviously.  In particular, of course, it relies on the staff’s methodology that the effects result primarily from the stock of our holdings, and are being transmitted through term premiums as we estimate them. I will readily admit that there is a lot of uncertainty about that.  But those are our ballpark estimates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges uncertainties and caveats but does not express disagreement or contention with any specific point.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 106.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  And you have to also think of all the alternative paths that are foreclosed once you start to end your investments.  You sort of feel the ending reinvestments decision is not easily reversed. You’re then forestalling all those paths where you would’ve kept the balance sheet higher for a much longer period of time, and that’s not really captured completely in the model because the model is based on creating one path.  It’s not based on creating multiple potential outcomes. CHAIR YELLEN.  That’s true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that the model used is not capturing the potential outcomes and alternative paths that would be foreclosed if the decision to end investments is made. However, Chair Yellen agrees with this statement by responding with "That's true".


Passage number 107.
 MR. LACKER.  Madam Chair, if I could follow up, just back to the deterministic path— there’s some offset in here.  So you were describing the combined effect of the balance sheet difference and being partially offset by a funds rate path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is merely a continuation of a previous statement.


Passage number 108.
 MR. LAUBACH.  That’s correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 109.
 MR. LACKER.  So this isn’t pure balance sheet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Lacker about the balance sheet.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 110.
  MR. LAUBACH. As you can tell, under the path with the later end of reinvestments, the federal funds rate does rise a little bit above the baseline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that the federal funds rate would rise slightly above the baseline under a certain condition. This suggests a disagreement or contention about the expected outcome or trajectory of the federal funds rate.


Passage number 111.
 MR. LACKER.  Virtually opposite.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "Mr. Lacker" holds a view that is "virtually opposite" to another viewpoint.


Passage number 112.
 MR. LAUBACH.  Exactly.  And that has primarily to do with the inertial nature of the rule that we’re using. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Mr. Laubach and Chair Yellen seem to be in agreement about the reason for the inertial nature of the rule they are discussing.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 113.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Just so I understand the calculation—so there were some estimates when we were going into the quantitative easing.  Are you assuming going out is symmetric so that it’s primarily a balance sheet effect, not a flow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Rosengren, is seeking clarification about the calculation and is questioning whether the assumption about going out is symmetric. This implies that there might be disagreement or differing perspectives on the matter being discussed.


Passage number 114.
 MR. LAUBACH. Correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Laubach is correct.


Passage number 115.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  And that the sizes that were relevant going into QE—the estimates that you’re basing this on—are basically the same, roughly approximate size that you would have if you do it in reverse, is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 116.
 MR. LAUBACH. Correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements that suggest disagreement or contention. It appears to be a straightforward acknowledgement or confirmation of someone's correctness.


Passage number 117.
 MR. ROSENGREN. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply indicates gratitude or appreciation towards someone.


Passage number 118.
 MR. WILCOX.  And I don’t remember the chronology exactly, but the estimates of efficacy that we started out with at QE1—I don’t know what it was called back then—those were scaled back twice, is my recollection.  It is symmetric now, albeit smaller than what we told the Committee at the dawn of large-scale asset purchases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 119.
 MR. POTTER. It’s the same modeling approach, David.  The MBS is sort of put into that framework, and one of the uncertainties is on the MBS side because it’s been harder for us to model that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the modeling approach used for MBS (Mortgage-Backed Securities) is similar to the one used for something else. They also mention that there is uncertainty in modeling MBS, but there is no disagreement or contention expressed.


Passage number 120.
 MR. WILCOX.  Yes, but I think initially we were more optimistic about portfolio effects.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Wilcox initially had a more optimistic view about portfolio effects.


Passage number 121.
  MR. POTTER.  Oh, completely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage is a simple statement of agreement. It states that someone named Mr. Potter agrees completely with something, but it does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 122.
 MR. FISCHER.  David, is that an adjustment you’ve made before thinking about the reverse operation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a question asked by Mr. Fischer to David, without any contradictory statements or conflicting opinions presented.


Passage number 123.
 MR. WILCOX.  No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 124.
 MR. FISCHER.  You’re maintaining symmetry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is making a statement without any opposing viewpoints or arguments being presented.


Passage number 125.
 MR. WILCOX.  Correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wilcox is simply stating that something is correct.


Passage number 126.
 MR. LAUBACH.  Much of that adjustment had to do with the difficulty of estimating how asset prices other than, for example, 10-year term premiums respond. In particular, in response to the first asset purchase program, those responses seemed to be very large. Subsequently, we thought we observed somewhat smaller asset price responses like the stock market and, therefore, scaled back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply describing the difficulty of estimating how asset prices respond to different factors.


Passage number 127.
 MR. POTTER.  So one thing we could do is calibrate under those different responses so you could see that. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  I’m going to suggest we take a break at this point and eat [laughter] to fortify ourselves for this afternoon. I suggest we take until 1:15 and return to continue the go-round.  I believe lunch is available next door, as usual. [Lunch recess] CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Let’s continue our go-round with President Harker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The conversation is focused on logistics and logistics for their meeting. There is no conflict or opposing viewpoints being discussed.


Passage number 128.
 MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  As others have said, I believe that once we’ve achieved a degree of comfort regarding our ability to control short-term market rates, we should begin to reduce the size of our balance sheet. I see little reason to decide today when that will be. In my view, the process that governs the shrinking of the balance sheet should be simple, straightforward, and kept, as President Mester said, distinct from direct adjustments to   monetary policy accomplished through changes in the federal funds rate target. It should be calendar based, I believe, but at a date announced after liftoff when we are confident that we are well away from the lower bound.  It should be independent of economic conditions, and reductions in the balance sheet should proceed at a fairly constant pace. To avoid the volatility associated with simply ceasing reinvestments, we can, for example—and as others have mentioned—choose a pace that reduces the amount of longer-term Treasury securities and MBS at somewhat less than the average value of anticipated monthly reinvestments.  Doing so would involve outright sales in some months and reinvestments in other months in order to hit the preset target.  Proceeding in this manner would make the evolution of our portfolio transparent and avoid the complications that would accompany treating portfolio adjustments as a complementary tool of policy. There’s too much uncertainty surrounding the effects of balance sheet manipulation to treat the normalization of the balance sheet in a way that mimics the normalization of our primary policy instrument, in my opinion. This ends my attempt to answer the questions posed to us.  President Williams, consider this my rookie mistake.  [Laughter]  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 129.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Overall, I support a qualitative state-dependent approach to ceasing or phasing out reinvestments so we preserve optionality and managing decisions about the funds rate and the balance sheet.  To convey the likely timing of the start of balance sheet normalization, I would be open to having the minutes convey views, to having the Chair speak to this at future press conferences, or to considering whether the SEP could be a possible communications vehicle.  The table reporting the appropriate timing of   policy firming in figure 2 could be replaced with a table reporting participants’ judgments about the appropriate time at which to begin to cease or phase out reinvestments once liftoff occurs. In terms of the policy itself, I would prefer not to distinguish between Treasury securities and MBS.  In the longer run, I view a Treasury securities-only portfolio as most appropriate.  For that reason, I would not want to further concentrate our holdings of MBS.  And in light of uncertainty about how the market will respond to any adjustments in our reinvestment policy, I support gradually phasing out reinvestments over time.  After we announce the beginning of balance sheet normalization, I continue to support the approach in the normalization principles that reductions in our securities holdings will proceed in a gradual and predictable manner.  If possible, I would prefer to have adjustments to the pace of the phasing out of reinvestments being perceived as predictable rather than as subject to deliberations on a meeting-by-meeting basis.  The approach during the taper of asset purchases, where the process was put essentially on autopilot, barring any major surprise in the data, is relevant here.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  First Vice President Holcomb.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contentious or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's opinions and preferences.


Passage number 130.
 MS. HOLCOMB.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I share perspectives that several others have expressed already today.  As others have said, because the Committee has communicated that the timing of the cessation or phaseout of reinvestments will depend on the economic and financial conditions and the evolution of the economy, a pure calendar-based approach might be seen as a departure from that commitment.  That said, once we begin reducing the size of the balance sheet, we also should be consistent with the statement that we will do so in a gradual and predictable manner.  I take this second commitment to mean that once we actually begin reducing the balance sheet, we intend to rely on changes in the path of the federal funds rate  rather than in the pace of balance sheet reductions for marginal adjustments to the amount of policy accommodation provided. In qualitative terms, then, balance sheet normalization should not begin until we are reasonably confident that we won’t have to reverse course in order to avoid jeopardizing progress toward full employment and price stability—that is, until we are reasonably confident that subsequent policy adjustments will be achievable through manipulation of the federal funds rate. The Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas staff suggests a comfortable point would be 75 to 100 basis points of leeway.  Once the funds rate target is 75 to 100 basis points, or perhaps 100 to 125 basis points, it would seem reasonably unlikely that the zero bound would become a binding constraint on policy. In sum, I would support a specified funds rate threshold for beginning balance normalization rather than calendar-based guidance or guidance based on a set of economic criteria that might be complicated or confusing. On the second question—and, as a rookie, I guess I can answer the second question—we do make a distinction between the treatment of Treasuries and MBS.  The Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas view, as you may have heard in the past, is that the Federal Reserve should not play an ongoing role in providing support to the housing sector.  If housing finance remains difficult for certain groups of potential buyers, it is not the result of temporary liquidity problems but due to deliberate, nonmonetary regulatory and policy decisions. Nor do we see a rationale for continuing purchases of MBS as a countercyclical measure. By the time the process of balance sheet normalization commences, we are likely to be at or very near full employment, with price stability in view.  Accordingly, I favor as rapid an end to MBS reinvestments as is possible without disruption to housing finance.  Ending reinvestments completely as soon as balancesheet normalization begins would be ideal, with MBS holdings being allowed to run off until they reach de minimis levels. I would lean toward shrinking the balance sheet by a steady, predictable amount each month initially, consistent with our normalization pledge.  Looking at exhibit 4, a reduction of something like $20 billion to $25 billion per month appears realistic.  We would see this as made up of sharp cutbacks on MBS reinvestments supplemented with enough of a scale-back of our Treasury securities investments to reach that level.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 131.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I found this morning’s conversation regarding the thinking about this issue of halting or phasing out reinvestments very   useful and interesting.  I thought the discussion that once we reduce the balance sheet in size, there are big costs to reversing that reduction should really bear materially on our thinking about our policy in this space.  One way I am thinking about it is that reducing the balance sheet, because we are reducing the amount of accommodation that would be in place when we hit the zero lower bound, is not that different from raising the effective lower bound itself.  If we hit the zero lower bound with a $4 trillion balance sheet, we have a certain level of accommodation in place.  If we hit the zero lower bound with only a $3 trillion balance sheet, we have considerably less accommodation in place.  Another way to think about that is, we should be comfortable lowering the balance sheet when we are comfortable with the idea of raising the effective lower bound. Now, a couple of us—President Rosengren and I—have talked about our concerns about hitting the zero lower bound even in the longer run.  I think that makes you think about what our long-run goals for the balance sheet should be.  I think we are sort of in this autopilot mode of thinking, “Boy, we should just get the size of the balance sheet back to 2005.  That would be a good thing, because 2005 was a really good time.”  On the other hand, 2005 was only three years before 2008.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's thoughts and opinions on the topic of reducing the balance sheet and its implications on policy.


Passage number 132.
 MR. TARULLO.  And two before 2007.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a date - "two before 2007".


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 133.
  [Laughter] MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes. Thank you, Governor Tarullo.  That was helpful.  I think we should be thinking more systematically and deliberately about what we want our long-run balance sheet to look like.  If we are really averse in the longer term to the idea of ever increasing the size of the balance sheet because of the institutional or political risks that others have mentioned, I think that consideration really should shape our thinking about what that long-   run balance sheet should be.  And I think it should also be shaping our thinking about when to initiate the phaseout of reinvestments.  I will say a couple of words about that in a minute. The other point—and this has come up a little bit, but I’ll try to emphasize it a little more—is that the amount of accommodation associated with our balance sheet—the size and duration of our holdings—is not shaped by the rate of change of the size of our holdings.  So when we think about reinvestments, I think it’s important to be doing that in terms of how they are affecting the size and composition of the balance sheet, not in terms of reinvestments per se. This probably matters the most in terms of mortgage-backed securities. Because they are redemptions, we are delivering pro-cyclical variation in accommodation.  You can imagine households and businesses becoming more pessimistic about the prospects for the economy, of interest rates falling, and of mortgage refinancing increasing.  As the mortgages underlying those securities in our portfolio are prepaid, our balance sheet shrinks at a faster-than-expected rate. So we are removing accommodation exactly when we need it.  I think we want to be careful in thinking about reinvestment not in terms of the flow of reinvestments, but rather in terms of how it is affecting the stock of holdings on the balance sheet. Those are my high-level points.  I think we should be thinking more about what our long-term goal is in terms of the balance sheet, especially in light of what I hear, which is a feeling of concern regarding, or aversion to, initiating a new asset purchase program.  And we need to carefully reformulate our reinvestment policy to serve our balance sheet policy. That long-term goal, as I hinted at earlier, really should not just be shaped by a desire to get back to normal times.  I think we should be taking into account the fact that we a very bad outcome occurred that we didn’t anticipate, and we should be keeping in mind that, as we go forward, we might want tools to deal with that kind of outcome.   Let me turn to the questions—though, having said that, I suspect I won’t be answering the questions because I am not a rookie.  I like the idea of a state-based approach.  A lot of you have talked about the challenges in communicating effectively about a state-based approach.  A couple of people—I remember President Mester doing this, and I think First Vice President Holcomb also mentioned this—suggested that we tie the initiation of phaseouts or reinvestments to the path of the federal funds rate.  So we could announce very soon that the phasing out of reinvestments will begin when the target range of the federal funds rate hits X percent. Now, what should X be.  Here I would disagree with some of the numbers I heard earlier.  I’ve heard people would be comfortable with numbers like 1 percent for the target for the federal funds rate.  Remember what I said at the very beginning:  When would you be comfortable raising the effective lower bound for interest rates.  Maybe you’re comfortable with that prospect at 1 percent.  I myself would not be.  I would think we would want a higher target range for the federal funds rate before we go through the relatively irreversible process of shrinking the size of the balance sheet. I think the staff could be helpful on this by giving us some simulations that would show us a probability of hitting the zero lower bound if we are at 1 or at 2 percent.  I think that it could provide an analytical framework for the Committee to think through those matters.  At that point, once we start, I would just announce that the evolution of phaseouts of reinvestments would depend on the evolution of the economy. Now, if you go with my 2 percent target range for the federal funds rate, that actually gives the Committee quite a bit of time to work on the details of the phaseout strategy.  Before you do that, though, I think a key part of that work is to settle as much as possible what the long-term vision for the balance sheet is.  President Rosengren mentioned that the Conference of Presidents’ Financial Stability Committee went through a tabletop exercise in which two of us saw that actually selling assets might be a useful way to respond to a particular financial stability risk.  Well, if you want that as part of your vision, it should be affecting the size of your balance sheet.  If you are averse to ever buying assets again, that should be affecting the long-term size of your balance sheet.  All of these things should be going into thinking about where you want to be headed. Focusing on the size and the composition of the balance sheet, focusing on the long-term goals, and not being comfortable with initiating reinvestments until such time as you are really comfortable with the idea of raising the effective lower bound on interest rates—those things should be connected in our thinking. Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement with others' viewpoints and presents their own arguments and suggestions. They mention being averse to initiating new asset purchase programs and disagree with the idea of having a target federal funds rate of 1 percent before starting the process of shrinking the balance sheet. They also mention the need to consider the long-term vision for the balance sheet and to connect the size and composition of the balance sheet with long-term goals and the idea of raising the effective lower bound on interest rates.


Passage number 134.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Narayana is quite right.  He, Eric, and a few other people over time have alluded to the possible desirability of an end state in which we have a larger balance sheet and one that may have different-duration securities in it. It feels like the next several meetings are going to be potentially full enough that we probably would not have enough time to debate something like that.  But should we try to set, at some point, a discussion of that particular issue a little bit apart from the immediacy of decisions about liftoff. CHAIR YELLEN. Let me just say that the staff have embarked on a project that will concern our long-run framework and will take up these questions, and I planned at the end of the meeting to tell you a little bit more about that work plan.  But I think that is very important.  The staff is thinking about it, and we hope this will be a project that will involve a lot of staff around the System.  We’ll be giving you a bit more information about what our expectations are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 135.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The interaction between Mr. Kocherlakota and Chair Yellen seems to be polite and respectful.


Passage number 136.
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I want to start by distinguishing between two things.  First, there is clearly a need to have a decent answer to the question of when reinvestments will end, and that need will ripen no later than the liftoff press conference. Second, there is the need to decide a whole range of questions about the exact timing, whether we do it all at once or taper, whether we distinguish between Treasury securities and MBS, and whether the taper is a complex or a simple one.  And most or all of that, I think—though we are talking about it today, and it will go into the minutes and season people’s thinking—is not ready to be decided and won’t be for some time.  The way I think about this is that one of the purposes of the first statement, what will be said at the press conference, is to clear space and time to allow the normalization process to proceed and give the Committee the information it needs to make those decisions when they need to be made. Today the public seems to think that the Committee intends to wait somewhere in the range of 6 to 12 months before ending reinvestments either through a taper or perhaps all at once. The primary dealer survey suggests a reasonable likelihood that we would taper over the course of a year.  Those are pretty reasonable parameters, they could be about right, but I don’t see how it is in the Committee’s interest to harden those expectations in the near term.  I’ll offer two reasons for caution. First, the model shows only a very slight effect on rates from ending reinvestment.  Actual effects may differ materially from those in the model.  And, as many have noted, I think we learned that lesson—and shouldn’t forget it—in the taper tantrum, when we sat around this table, and I don’t know that there were more people who thought it would be seen as a tightening move or not. I will speak for myself—I certainly didn’t see it as predicting the move that we saw in the summer of 2013.  These signaling effects are not in the model, and they can be very large or not.  I don’t expect that there would be much of a reaction from a decision to taper, but I don’t see any reason to take that risk unnecessarily.  The second reason to wait is that I would really like to minimize the chances of ever having to vote again at the zero lower bound on asset purchases. I think both of those reasons argue for caution. I think there’s even a third reason that hasn’t been talked about as much, and that is, the situation has really changed since our earlier discussions on reinvestment.  Specifically, the normalization process has slowed down.  Liftoff is going to be later than expected, and the pace of increases is going to be slower. I looked back: The median interest rate forecast in the June 2014 SEP showed the policy rate at 1⅛ percent at year-end 2015 and 2½ percent at year-end 2016. Current expectations are far below that.  Of course, the reason why liftoff is later and the path is lower is that in June 2014, the central tendency for 2015 economic growth was 3.0 to 3.2 percent, compared with 1.8 to 2.0 percent in the June 2015 SEP.  What has happened is, as global economic growth has weakened, other central banks around the world have cut their rates to their effective lower bound, and they seem likely to remain there for several years.  They’ve also embarked on their own asset purchases.  And all of this is likely to limit significantly the speed with which we can depart from our own effective lower bound.  And unless and until global economic growth moves up significantly, we’re very likely to be forced into a shallow path for rate increases, which is risky but is still preferable to the alternative.  I don’t want balance sheet tightening to make that path any shallower, so it makes sense to me that balance sheet tightening should slow down, just like the other pieces of the normalization process. As a result, when it becomes appropriate to clarify the Committee’s thinking on reinvestment, I would recommend the Committee stress that our focus for now is on the path of the federal funds rate and give only a much more general statement of conditions for shrinkingthe balance sheet.  I would be clearly in the qualitative state-dependent camp.  An example would be, “The Committee expects to begin the process of normalizing the balance sheet when it is reasonably confident that the policy normalization process is well established,” which is very much along the lines of what the Chair, I believe, has said. I have no attraction to calendar-based guidance, nor do I have any attraction to quantitative state-based guidance along the lines of the thresholds that we used earlier. When we do begin the balance sheet normalization process, I might prefer a phased-in approach to a sudden stop in reinvestments, and I might want to consider distinguishing between Treasury securities and MBS.  I think all of those things are going to be informed by events after liftoff, and I find it very hard to have a thoughtful opinion on them until I see where the normalization process is.  I will close by echoing President Lockhart’s earlier point about keeping it simple when it comes time to taper.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a speech by Mr. Powell expressing his thoughts and recommendations on the timing and approach to ending reinvestments. He provides reasons for caution and suggests a phased-in approach to balance sheet normalization.


Passage number 137.
 MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The policy framework that we have agreed to over the past year is designed to make the federal funds rate the focal point for our policy stance and to make the IOER the primary instrument for influencing that rate, with the ON RRP a secondary tool. That policy framework has the virtue of being clear and familiar to market participants and the public as well as empirically well understood.  In contrast, we have far less experience and little quantitative research to guide us on how reductions in the size of the balance sheet away from the effective lower bound would translate into financial conditions.  For that reason, while it is important to reduce the size of the balance sheet over time, I would not want to do so prematurely if that risked any sacrifice to the efficacy of our policy framework.   I would prefer the ceasing of reinvestments to be conditioned on economic developments and based on quantitative rather than qualitative guidance.  There have been considerable time and effort over the past few meetings spent informing the public that monetary policy will be conditioned on economic developments.  As reinvestments are an important component of policy, it would be confusing for guidance in this area to be conditioned on the calendar. Quantitative guidance would be clearer and more informative than qualitative guidance.  However, guidance based on one or more macroeconomic indicators would be, I think, problematic and confusing vis-à-vis the macroeconomic framework we have set out for the federal funds rate.  The simple solution that others have alluded to is to base reinvestment policy on the federal funds rate, which parsimoniously summarizes the Committee’s view on all macroeconomic factors that influence the outlook for the labor market and inflation.  In addition, conditioning on the federal funds rate maintains the focus on our primary policy tool, simplifying communications.  A further advantage is that it guarantees that changes in the IOER and the phaseout of reinvestments will be aligned with one another, minimizing any confusion that might arise from changes to one tool that are not coordinated simultaneously with changes in the setting of the other tool. Regarding the specifics of the guidance to be provided, my preference would be for our communication to state that an initial reduction in reinvestments would likely occur only after the federal funds rate has reached a range around 2 percent. When rates get into that range, moreover, it may be useful to pause changes to the IOER in order to gauge the effect on financial conditions.  The preferred range would be motivated, in my thinking, by several factors.  First, like many others around this table, I place a high priority on minimizing the risk that adverse economic developments cause a return to the zero lower bound.  Maintaining investments until the federal funds rate is within more normal levels and comfortably above the zero lower bound would minimize that risk. Now, as we’ve discussed, the model-based analysis suggests that the direct effect of a delay in reinvestments—until the federal funds rate is within more normal levels—on the term premium and, through longer-term rates, on economic activity is likely to be quite small.  Nonetheless, I’m concerned about the signaling effects of an early change in reinvestment policy, which could produce larger effects than we anticipate. In particular, one risk that I would want to keep in mind as we contemplate our reinvestment policy is the risk that longer-run rates behave in an unexpected way that complicates policy, as happened during the taper tantrum.  Thus, I prefer to wait on ceasing or tapering until it becomes clear that the headwinds that have limited economic growth to quite moderate levels despite extremely accommodative monetary policy have subsided. I recognize that agreeing to specific quantitative guidance may be difficult, and I’m open to qualitative alternatives such as the ones that have been stated around this table—possibly referring to a time when the federal funds rate returns to more normal levels, or referring to the wish to minimize the risk of a return to the zero lower bound, or simply referencing normalization. I think the difficulty, though, with any qualitative guidance is that market participants may well interpret it as much sooner or later that we intend, and it will immediately leave Committee members to face ongoing efforts to get us to further elaborate what precisely we mean by those qualitative conditions. In an abundance of caution, I would probably favor some phasing or tapering so as to avoid any possible effects on market function when the time comes.  I might also be inclined to apply the phaseout of reinvestments symmetrically to MBS and Treasury securities, although I must say I’d be open to altering this policy if market conditions suggest it would be desirable to do so when we get to that point.  Finally, I do favor communicating clearly our policy framework once these decisions have been made, but I would caution about how we reflect this discussion in the minutes, in order not to get ahead of the policymaking process.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN. Thank you, and thanks to everyone for a very rich discussion.  I think this has really been quite an interesting set of considerations we’ve discussed.  You’ve heard various suggestions about additional staff work that might be appropriate, and I think we will proceed by sitting down with the staff and trying to narrow down a few alternatives based on what we have heard around the table.  I’m not going to try to summarize the discussion; I think that probably would be a mistake at this point.  But I do hear some congealing of views, and I think we can probably narrow down the alternatives for your consideration and get back to you to have a further discussion on this matter.  I think this has been a really useful discussion, and I thank you for your thoughtfulness. Let’s move along, then, to the fourth item on the agenda, which is “Potential Enhancements to the Summary of Economic Projections.”  And I’d like to call on Governor Fischer to start us off on this topic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.  It is a discussion among colleagues and the speaker is expressing their thoughts and preferences on the policy framework and reinvestment policy.


Passage number 138.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The subcommittee on communications consists of Loretta Mester, Jay Powell, John Williams, and myself, and we have been considering various enhancements to the SEP.  Today we are coming to you with a fairly modest initial proposal, which mainly consists of adding medians to the SEP materials in September.  I wasn’t here when FOMC participants considered SEP enhancements in January 2013, but the transcript suggests that adding medians of participants’ responses was the most popular of the proposed changes at that time. The subcommittee continues to think it’s a good idea, and I hope that most of you will think so, too. You received a memo last week on this topic written by Todd Clark from the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland and Ellen Meade from the Board staff, who are sitting opposite us.  It was a short memo, as these memos go, and so perhaps you all had a chance to read it.  [Laughter] In a moment, Todd is going to review for you the subcommittee’s proposal and some of our ongoing work, and afterward we’ll have time for any remaining questions or suggestions you may have.  Todd, please.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information about the subcommittee's proposal and their hope that it will be well-received by the audience.


Passage number 139.
 MR. CLARK.4  Thank you, Governor Fischer.  I will be referring to the handout titled “Materials for Briefing on Potential Enhancements to the Summary of Economic Projections.”  That handout includes a first page that has an outline of my comments and then some graphics that correspond exactly to those included in the staff memo circulated to the Committee last week. As Governor Fischer indicated, and as the cover memo from the subcommittee indicated, the subcommittee has identified two broad, promising enhancements to the SEP.  The first is the addition of median projections, and the second would be the addition of fan charts to illustrate forecast uncertainty.  At this time, as I will detail, the subcommittee is recommending the addition of medians and one other change to the SEP, which concerns the federal funds rate projections in figure 2.  The subcommittee intends to come back to the Committee later this year with a recommendation regarding fan charts, and I will conclude with a brief review of staff work on those fan charts. In their current form, table 1 and figure 1 of the SEP provide the full range and the central tendencies for the macroeconomic variables that are included in the projections.  In the absence of a median or some other central value, public commentary has tended to focus on the midpoints of the central tendencies as measures of participants’ collective view of the outlook.  Figure 2 of the SEP provides the “dot plot” for the federal funds rate.  This dot plot does not report a median projection, but it is pretty easy to identify the median projection, and public commentary makes some use of that median.  Finally, in the full SEP materials that are published three weeks later along with the FOMC meeting minutes, figure 3 provides histograms for all the macroeconomic variables and the federal funds rate. And from those histograms, medians can be computed for each of those variables. 4 The materials used by Mr. Clark are appended to this transcript (appendix 4).The basic rationale for including medians in the SEP would be to improve the Committee’s communications by providing, in a more direct way, a measure of participants’ collective view of the outlook and appropriate policy.  The median is a robust statistical measure of the center of a distribution.  It is more standard than the midpoint of the central tendency that some of the public uses today.  Publishing the median as a summary measure of the collective view would help illuminate that collective view and would foster the public use of that median in summarizing the Committee’s projections. To incorporate medians, the subcommittee recommends revising both table 1 and figure 1 of the SEP.  The proposed new table 1, which is shown on page 2 of the handout, adds columns that would provide the median projections.  It also includes the federal funds rate as a memo item and an expanded title that makes clear the conditioning of the projections on participants’ assessments of appropriate policy.  Since we prepared these materials, President Lacker has offered a suggestion that the subcommittee believes to be helpful, and that would be the insertion of the word “projected” before “appropriate” in three places:  In the memo line, instead of “appropriate policy path,” it would be “projected appropriate policy path,” and then the same “projected appropriate” would appear in the first red sentence in the notes to the tables. The point of President Lacker’s suggestion was to emphasize the endogeneity of policy—that there is a reaction function, and policy will respond as the outlook changes, et cetera.  The subcommittee believes that President Lacker’s suggestion will be a useful change.  Finally, in terms of medians, in the proposed figure 1, which is shown on page 3 of the handout, thick red lines have been added to report the median projection in the case of each of the macroeconomic variables. The subcommittee recommends implementing these changes with the September 2015 SEP.  The minutes of the July meeting will report on the discussion of medians that we are about to have, and those minutes could also review the proposed addition and its rationale, along with a summary of the discussion that occurs today.  If participants favor adding the median, then over the intermeeting period, staff will develop and provide complete mockups of the full set of materials—including tables, charts, and text—that would be warranted by the addition of medians. The other change to the SEP the subcommittee is recommending today concerns figure 2, which is shown in its current form on page 4 of the handout.  The top panel provides a histogram of participants’ views on the appropriate year of liftoff.  The bottom panel provides the dot plot. The start of normalization will make the top panel obsolete, and the subcommittee recommends removing that top panel at that time.  The dot plot, on the other hand, in the bottom panel has been useful for communicating policy views in the period since policy has been constrained by the zero lower bound.  Looking ahead, the subcommittee believes the dot plot is likely to remain useful for communicating policy and recommends retaining it even after we’re well away from the effective lower bound. Finally, the subcommittee believes that adding fan charts to the SEP would help communicate the considerable uncertainty that attends the Committee’s projections. The staff is currently working on fan charts that would be centered on the median projections, with uncertainty bands constructed based on historical forecast errors from a range of public and private sources.  Fan charts of this form would provide a quantitative illustration of the historical uncertainty that would complement the judgmental assessment of uncertainty that the SEP currently includes.  Fan charts would likely be more effective for communicating the historical uncertainty than the root mean squared errors that are currently provided in a table in the SEP and thereby should help to reduce the public’s occasional confusion of forecast uncertainty with the range of views across FOMC participants.  In light of these potential benefits, the subcommittee plans to come back to the Committee with a concrete proposal later this year after resolving some technical issues, some of which require further investigation by the staff.  That concludes my prepared remarks.  Ellen and I would be happy to answer any questions you might have. CHAIR YELLEN. President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply explaining the recommendations of the subcommittee and the potential enhancements to the Summary of Economic Projections.


Passage number 140.
 MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I would like to thank Todd and Ellen for their work.  There are a lot of other staff members also involved in this project, and I want to thank them for that, as well as the subcommittee members. I think the changes we’re proposing for our September Summary of Economic Projections are very small ones, and because of that they pose little announcement risk.  But I do think they are an enhancement to the SEP.  As Todd said, right now the midpoint of the central tendency is sometimes a focal point in the discussion of the SEP.  And in lieu of actually constructing a consensus forecast—which is still one of my aspirational goals that I look forward to telling my great-great-great nieces about when it happens—I think the median is preferable to that central tendency midpoint.  Of course, we’re going to have to be clear that the median is not a consensus, but I think that’s easily done.  And I think that would be a beneficial addition to the SEP. Of course, regarding the top part of figure 2, as Todd said, when we lift off, it’s irrelevant at that point, it’s obsolete, and it should go.  But the dot plot, I think, has been proven to be a useful communications device.  Stepping back from it would be considered a step back in   transparency, which I don’t think would be helpful for the Committee.  And I think it can prove to be useful in the future as well, depending on how the economy evolves. Finally, as Todd said, it’s important that we give a better sense of the degree of uncertainty surrounding the projections. We have table 2, but a picture can often be worth 1,000 words.  I think it could be an important enhancement to our communications.  We all know that the divergence of views across participants is not the same thing as uncertainty, but we’ve seen discussions of this in the press and in the public in which that often is the way the public interprets the divergence of views.  And so if we can think about a better way of doing that in terms of conveying uncertainty, I think it would be worthwhile. As Todd indicated, the subcommittee is continuing to work through some technical issues involving fan charts to indicate confidence bands.  It’s important to know that other central banks have successfully used fan charts as a way of communicating uncertainty.  So I and, I believe, the rest of the subcommittee hope that we can actually use them to enhance our own communications as well. The subcommittee intends to bring a concrete proposal to the Committee later this year.  So I just want to say that I think these are important changes that pose little risk and can enhance communications.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Are there questions or comments.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the proposed changes and stating that they can enhance communications. There is no indication of any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 141.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I agree with what President Mester just said. I want to thank her, the rest of the subcommittee, and the staff for bringing forward what will prove, I think, to be enhancements to the SEP that pose little in the way of announcement risk, which is a difficult needle to thread.  But I think it has been done successfully here. I have a couple of minor comments. One is about how we will characterize the medians in the minutes and other SEP documentation.  The memo clearly recognizes that the new medians don’t represent a consensus view, but the language “collective view” is, I think, potentially risky.  I would prefer not to use the phrase “collective view.”  To my ear, at least, the word “collective” suggests the Committee has worked together to reach this assessment of the evolution of economic conditions, but, in fact, it’s just a summary statistic of distinct perspectives.  I think “the midpoint of the range of views,” “midpoint,” or even potentially the word “median” could be used instead. In terms of fan charts, I have mixed views.  I agree completely that the SEP’s range of projections is too often used inappropriately as an indicator of forecast risk, and so I think the idea of trying to use fan charts to mitigate that confusion is good.  I do think the fan charts that we propose are a sort of awkward hybrid of Committee views and external statistics.  For example, I will note one thing that we are all asked when we submit our SEP responses:  Do you think that the range of uncertainty today is more or less than in the past 20 years. If many of us said “more” to that, then the fan chart itself is not reflective of that. I don’t have a strong view about this, and I understand the gains that could be made here.  I will just say a couple of things.  One is that it may seem modest, but we want to be very careful taking any step like this, because it would be hard, I think, to remove anything from the SEP.  And if fan charts are ultimately added, I think it has to be very clearly explained that these are just merely summaries of past data and not the perspectives of the Committee at all. But I do applaud the subcommittee for coming up with these enhancements and, particularly in terms of the suggestions made for September, I am completely supportive. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing agreement with the previous speaker's remarks and offering some minor comments and suggestions for improvement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 142.
MR. LOCKHART.  My thanks also to the subcommittee and the staff for moving forward on the SEP.  I’ve thought for a long time that we could make some improvement.  I do support publishing medians as well as the other proposed changes to table 1 and figure 2.  I support making these changes with the next SEP submission and including notice of these changes in the minutes of this meeting.  I also support removing the top panel of figure 2. On the second question about the inclusion of fan charts, I’m more skeptical.  I’m not sure adding the proposed uncertainty bands would materially enhance the communications value of the SEP. I’m not sure there is widespread misunderstanding today that the SEP numbers are subject to a lot of uncertainty.  I will wait to see the later construction of the fan charts, but my guess is that they may show very wide potential variance from the median of the projections.  I think, best case, this would provide information SEP readers already grasp, and, worst case, it would come across as hedging projections so much as to greatly dilute their seriousness.  In earlier years, I sometimes used the expression “I am not entirely sure.”  My late wife had a knack for cutting to the quick. When I said, “I am not entirely sure,” she would respond, “You mean you don’t know.”  [Laughter]  The fan chart idea brought back that memory. As an alternative, if I were a market participant or an outside consumer of the SEP, what I would find useful is information on FOMC participants’ forward-looking, subjective assessments of uncertainty. We’ve discussed this before, and I still think it’s worth an internal experiment.  We collectively have experience in generating simple subjective probability distributions from survey data.  The Desk’s primary dealer survey, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s survey of household inflation expectations, and my own Bank’s business inflation expectations survey come to mind.  I can support further work on adding some kind of uncertainty overlay on the SEP projections, but I’d like to see that work include an option togenerate, as I said, forward-looking, necessarily subjective uncertainty measures concerning the specific forecasts in the SEP.  I think something like this would be useful to market participants and the public.  Thank you, Madam Chair.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: The speaker expresses support for some proposed changes to table 1 and figure 2, but expresses skepticism and disagreement regarding the inclusion of fan charts. The speaker suggests an alternative approach and expresses a preference for generating forward-looking subjective uncertainty measures instead.


Passage number 143.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Can I ask a clarifying question.  Do you mean something like a histogram.  So each respondent would write down their histogram of the probability of outcomes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply includes a question and a statement seeking clarification.


Passage number 144.
 MR. LOCKHART. Something along those lines.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement. It only mentions Mr. Lockhart without providing any context or details of a conversation or situation.


Passage number 145.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Okay. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 146.
 MS. BRAINARD.  Sorry—because I have not participated in this discussion before, is the fan chart supposed to be around the median or around each individual projection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is only asking for clarification, not expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 147.
 MR. FISCHER.  Around the median.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
This passage is a simple statement without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 148.
 MS. BRAINARD.  I don’t really understand the mathematical properties of transposing some kind of uncertainty from other forecasts onto a median that itself comes independent of the broader set of macroeconomic projections.  I would just want to see more on the mathematical properties of that before we considered it. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 149.
 MR. FISCHER.  This says that on the basis of the many forecasts that have been made in the past by various experts, this is roughly the size of the error bands going ahead that we have experienced in the past.  This is a typical range of uncertainty that you see from economists.  And that’s all it says.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the size of error bands and the range of uncertainty seen from economists.


Passage number 150.
 MS. BRAINARD. But it’s around a median as opposed to a projection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply states that something is around a median as opposed to a projection.


Passage number 151.
  MR. FISCHER.  It’s around a median.  You could put it around each person if you want, assuming they are all typical people.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 152.
 MS. BRAINARD.  That would make more sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Brainard is expressing that something would make more sense, suggesting agreement or understanding.


Passage number 153.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is not provided, so it is impossible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in it.


Passage number 154.
 WILLIAMS.  Well, the Blue Chip is a consensus forecast.  The SPF has a median forecast that they publish.  And often the calculation we are doing is looking at the forecast errors of the median SPF.  So if you think about it that way, we treat the median SPF as a forecast, even though it is no individual’s forecast.  We calculate the error bands around that and talk about forecast accuracy that way.  I mean, that’s how we talk about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is explaining how forecast errors are calculated based on the median SPF forecast, which is a consensus forecast. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 155.
 MS. BRAINARD. These are individual point estimates of that forecast, right.  They’re unconnected to each other, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a simple clarification question where the speaker seeks confirmation about the nature of the individual point estimates.


Passage number 156.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage is not provided. Can you please provide the passage you are referring to?


Passage number 157.
 WILLIAMS.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage consists of one word only, "Right," which does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 158.
 MS. BRAINARD.  So I think it’s different. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 159.
 MR. EVANS.  I think that having some measure like this could well be an advance.  I think there are probably opportunities to make adjustments to how we calculate this over time.  I don’t think this rises to the level that it would be a really big deal if, a few quarters ahead or years ahead, we altered how we did these calculations and explained it very carefully.  I doubt that the size of the bands would vary a lot.  But at any rate, I just wanted to indicate that I could easily support this type of fan chart. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Mr. Evans and Chair Yellen express support for the idea of a fan chart and potential adjustments in the future.


Passage number 160.
 MR. FISCHER.  I will just wait until the end.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they will wait until the end.


Passage number 161.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. The one issue I’ve always had on these fan charts is whether the fan charts are just based on an unbiased average history or are conditioned on where   you are in the business cycle.  And I think that is a more substantive choice, because I personally believe that you really want to condition it on all of the available information you have at the time.  But that’s a much bigger exercise in terms of calculating these fan charts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their personal belief and the notion that fan charts could be based on unbiased average history or conditioned on the business cycle. However, the passage does not present a clear argument or disagreement on the matter.


Passage number 162.
 MR. CLARK. At the subcommittee level, that has come up as something that the staff should look into.  For example, you might think of the unemployment rate:  If you are already at 5 percent, do you really think it can go to 3 percent.  You might want to have that kind of conditionality or asymmetry.  So that would be on the to-do list at the staff level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses a suggestion made by Mr. Clark regarding the staff looking into a certain issue.


Passage number 163.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I would favor a fan chart on that basis much more than one that is unconditional with regard to where you are in the business cycle, because in the latter case I think you get answers that are not very sensible at times. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Fischer, did you want to add something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a personal preference for a certain type of chart, but there is no direct disagreement or conflicting opinion presented.


Passage number 164.
 MR. FISCHER.  Yes, just a few things. When we said there are technical problems, there are two sets of technical problems. One has already been hinted at, which is that the SEP already includes a question to FOMC participants on whether you think the risk is up or down.  We are trying to figure out if we can get a graphical representation of that, so you can see why that is a technical problem.  The second problem relates to the question, how do you draw the fan charts for variables like the unemployment rate, which tend to have a lower bound, which is zero.  And typically these things all go out like that, and they take you out into the zero range.  So we’ve got to figure out a way of dealing with that as well. Those are technical issues which no doubt have a solution. And this was President Lockhart’s point regarding our uncertainty about the projections.  I certainly agree with the things President Evans said.  We are already trying to figure out how to deal with the problems that we see with using the fan charts.  But if I can just drop a personal   hint about how I began to believe the width of these fan charts: I used to tell Mervyn King regularly, up to 2007, that his fan charts were much too wide.  And then came the great financial crisis.  They were much too narrow, it turned out.  So that is how I got to think that maybe there is something to this widening out that you see. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It mainly discusses technical problems and the personal experience of Mr. Fischer with fan charts.


Passage number 165.
 MR. LACKER.  Just a suggestion on the first problem you mentioned, and I think others have mentioned this.  We do respond about what uncertainty is, and how large uncertainty is now relative to some historical benchmark.  The natural way to communicate would be to supply error bands or fan charts based on that.  And then you’ve got, in the back of the SEP, how the Committee thinks about it relative to that. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thanks.  Any further comments.  [No response]  Okay.  In terms of the Committee’s suggestion that we make the enhancement that involves including the median and the revised table in September, I have heard several people comment in support.  I have heard no one express opposition, but I would like to get a clearer read on sentiment in the Committee. We normally do not decide things like changing the SEP by a vote, but what I would like to do is take a straw poll of all of the participants.  The minutes can then express the degree of support.  So let me ask all of the participants to raise your hand if you support the changes that are proposed for September.  [Show of hands]  Okay.  Are there any opposed. Okay.  Thank you.  We will put these changes into effect in September.  The minutes will explain what’s going to happen in September and what the Committee has agreed on so it will not come as a surprise in the press conference.  And we look forward to the subcommittee coming back with more on fan charts.  Ellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a discussion where participants are providing suggestions and expressing support for proposed changes.


Passage number 166.
 MS. MEADE. There was also the change to figure 2.   CHAIR YELLEN.  Oh, yes, and I take it there is also agreement that, whenever we lift off, we get rid of the top part of figure 2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The conversation between Ms. Meade and Chair Yellen does not show any disagreement or contention. They are discussing a change in figure 2 and there is no indication of conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 167.
 MR. TARULLO.  Only for the most obstinate amongst us. CHAIR YELLEN. “We increased it, but it was a mistake.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Tarullo's statement is followed by Chair Yellen's statement, which seems to agree with him.


Passage number 168.
” MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Well, I’ll be gone.  [Laughter] CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay. We are now going to turn to the economic and financial situation, and let me call on David Wilcox to start us off on our briefings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple announcement of the next agenda item in a meeting.


Passage number 169.
 MS. MESTER.  Nellie, I have two questions for you.  First, I want to say that I can actually see changes over time in the QS reports, and I find them very useful, so I appreciate the staff work on that.  One question I have concerns the fact that market participants are telling us that there are liquidity problems in the fixed-income market, and yet our measures really don’t seem to be picking that up.  I know we can’t rely too much on anecdotes, but I’m wondering whether they are informing us about our measures being off.  How should we think about that. How does the staff think about that. And the other thing I noticed in the report is that it talks about how, after the leveraged loan guidance was put out, there doesn’t seem to have been a switch from banks doing it into the nonbank sector.  I’m wondering whether that’s telling us something about the guidance, that perhaps banks aren’t paying attention to the guidance.  And this is important because Presidents Rosengren and Kocherlakota talked a little bit about the tabletop exercise that we had done on financial stability, and guidance was one of the tools that we said would be a potentially useful tool.  But if it’s not working, or we don’t think it’s going to be working, then we may have to rethink the efficacy of that tool.  I’d just like the opinion of the staff on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking questions and seeking the opinion of the staff on certain matters.


Passage number 170.
 MS. LIANG.  Let me speak with regard to market liquidity first. The measures we have, and the ones we have tracked over time, are about transactions that have actually occurred.  So what you don’t observe is a transaction that someone might have wanted to take had they been able to execute at a price they wanted, for example.  We are trying to build data that might give you a better look.  For instance, regarding market depth, if you actually have order books and you could see for a typical transaction size how far into the order books you had to go to transact, that might give you better sense of how much there is. We were able to actually see a lot in the October 15 report, which was able to get a lot of detail on the order books at, I think, millisecond units of time.  I don’t think we have to go to milliseconds to observe what’s happening in, say, corporate bond markets, but there are more and better data that we’re pursuing.  I think there are important issues related to why provisionalliquidity would have changed, and maybe just understanding the motivations better might be able to help us as well.  We hear it everywhere.  The data aren’t that supportive, but we’re open to the discussions. On the leveraged loan guidance, we’ve been tracking that very carefully for migration.  One of the big concerns about guidance was that if you just told the banks they couldn’t do this, the activity would migrate.  What we did was break down the market a little bit into big loans— say, over $100 million—and then what we call the middle market.  And for the large loans, there’s less migration.  And it could just be that banks need to have size to be able to provide the revolvers associated with $100 million loans.  We’ve seen market shares of nonbank firms move from around 7 percent to 10 percent, back to 8 percent—they jump around—and the next tier of investment banks haven’t really gained substantial share. In the middle market, it’s very possible they’re gaining more share.  That’s very hard to track.  Business development companies and private equity funds can do some direct lending, but they tend to be much smaller loans.  The business development companies are also much less levered than the banks who might provide the loans. I think from a financial stability perspective, it might be better.  It is hard to tell.  In our view, there continues to be a lot of issuance. Capital is available.  The underwriting standards are getting better.  I think, at least while we’re in the midst of it, it’s hard to know whether it’s been successful, but it seems like it’s gone in the right direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and perspectives on market liquidity and the impact of leveraged loan guidance.


Passage number 171.
 MS. MESTER.  So what I’m hearing you say is, it’s effective on the banking side, and it doesn’t have the unintended consequences of shifting things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a statement by Ms. Mester summarizing what she understands from the previous speaker. It does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 172.
MS. LIANG.  Not yet.  Over long periods, say two or three years, it’s possible that the industry could transform and change their practices, and they could pick up the activities of the larger banks.  But it’s not immediate. CHAIR YELLEN. President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 173.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage.


Passage number 174.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I would like to echo President Mester’s comment.  I find that these QS reports are very valuable.  We discuss them quite a bit at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, and I’ve seen significant improvement in these over time. The staff should get a lot of credit for that. In our bank’s discussions  last week, I was struck by the radar chart. It’s in the back of your QS memo.  It’s one of the cooler charts coming out of the Board these days.  But besides talking about how it’s cool and knowing that it’s called a radar chart, I wanted to actually ask you for your perspective on this.  In the text of the QS report, in your judgmental assessment of various parts of this, you actually comment that it might be somewhat different from the quantitative part, but I just want to focus on the quantitative part for this purpose.  The radar chart basically breaks out financial stability risk for the financial sector, the nonfinancial sector, and risk appetite/asset valuations. What’s really striking about your assessment, both this time and for some time before this, is that the heightened risk assessments are all with regard to this asset valuation/risk appetite, and there’s essentially none on the quantitative side regarding the financial-sector vulnerability.  And, again, in the qualitative discussion in the text, you go into that in a little bit.  But the question I have for you is—if you were to roll back time and think about 2006 when, in this radar chart, you show everything is dangerous, we should have known that things were about to explode. To what extent are there hidden aspects of vulnerabilities in the financial system that our quantitative measures somehow don’t see or don’t capture and that, years later, when the thing blows up on you, you say, “Oh, yes, sure.  There were a lot of short-term wholesale funding problems.  There was a lot of interconnectedness.”  I don’t even think the word “interconnectedness” was in our vocabulary in 2006.  So I’m asking a serious question about the real-time use of this versus the ex post description of things.  How much confidence do you have that our financial sector has essentially no vulnerability on its own today. That last one was an easy one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve contention or disagreement. It is a conversation where Williams is asking a question and seeking clarification.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 175.
 MS. LIANG. As you know, the radar chart uses time-series data—what you can capture in quantitative data and what you ex post now go back and look at.  If we were to use just this, we might assign a level of vulnerability to the financial system a notch lower than we are— which is, say, moderate, which is in the middle of the range—because, as you say, everything here except for asset values is as low as it’s been. There are a couple of reasons we don’t.  There are things that I don’t think you can capture in time-series data, so we apply judgment.  One is bank leveraging, for example.  I think with hindsight we know that capital was too low before.  Right now we’re double that, but is that enough.  We don’t really know, so we’re withholding judgment on it.  There are also structural issues that don’t get captured in time-series data.  For example, a money market fund vulnerability to runs is very difficult to capture here.  Perhaps we’ve addressed that one.  But liquidity transformation is a different risk that we’re hearing about and evaluating and that you can’t capture here.  And the one that I probably worry most about is the off-balance-sheet leverage, which is really hard to see. Derivatives markets have changed a lot since the 1980s, and we just haven’t been able to capture that in this yet.  Those are a couple of the reasons why we wouldn’t just take this and say this is our assessment.  But it’s useful because it does forceyou to think about, well, where are you relative to, say, the 1980s.  If you didn’t see structural problems or missing data problems, you might just be able to use this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains disagreement or contention. The speaker, Ms. Liang, explains that while time-series data can provide some information about vulnerabilities in the financial system, there are certain factors that cannot be captured in this type of data. She argues that factors such as bank leveraging, structural issues, money market fund vulnerability, liquidity transformation, and off-balance-sheet leverage are not adequately reflected in the time-series data used in the radar chart. Therefore, she suggests that solely relying on this data would not provide a comprehensive assessment of the financial system's vulnerability.


Passage number 176.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as no conflicting viewpoints or arguments are presented.


Passage number 177.
 WILLIAMS.  If I may follow up:  I’ve lived through the 2000s.  We all have. We lived through these various bubbles, and if you were to do a real-time, Orphanides-esque exercise about these quantitative measures—and I know you didn’t construct these in 2006—but if you went back and looked at the memos and the analysis that was done, I’m guessing that a lot of these things weren’t even on the chart.  And so I worry that there are things that aren’t on the chart today that are really the biggest dangers.  When I look at something that says it’s all clear, I feel like it’s because we’re not looking, somehow, at the things that just aren’t on the radar, if you will.  And with that quip, I’m going to end.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses their concern about potential dangers that may not be accounted for or considered in current charts and analysis. There is no opposing view or argument presented in the passage.


Passage number 178.
 MR. TARULLO.  But a lot of what Nellie and her office do though, I think—Nellie, correct me if I’m wrong—is to go in and look at where leverage, funding vulnerability, or both are rising, particularly rising at rates that are much larger than historical averages.  And then they dig into those.  What you see is the end result of all their analysis.  So I think, President Williams, part of what you’re getting in that radar chart is the gross conclusion based on a lot of more discrete inquiries they’re doing along the way that all factor into those gross answers. Now, there’s no guarantee that they or we or anybody else are picking up on every one of those hidden vulnerabilities you see, but I think there’s some sort of filtering concepts that they, and the people at OFR, and a lot of others who are trying to make it their business to identify financial stability problems in advance are now using to begin the analytics that they engaged in.  Is that fair.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a clarification and explanation of the work done by Nellie and her office in identifying rising leverage and funding vulnerability.


Passage number 179.
 MS. LIANG.  Well said.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. MS. LIANG is expressing gratitude and complimenting someone's statement, indicating agreement.


Passage number 180.
  MR. TARULLO.  Yes—whenever you defend the staff, they say that was very good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is agreeing with a statement about defending the staff.


Passage number 181.
  [Laughter] MR. POTTER. The situation in 2005 to 2007 wasn’t that hard to see.  You had to try very hard not to see it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making a statement about the situation in 2005-2007, stating that it was not difficult to see. There is no opposition or conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 182.
 MR. TARULLO.  It was seen.  It’s just that people didn’t do anything about it. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Tarullo and Chair Yellen seem to be in agreement that the issue they are discussing was seen by people but no action was taken.


Passage number 183.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  A question for Steve Kamin, to interpret your explanation of the exchange rate sensitivity of net exports and their effect on real GDP growth a little bit in a grander way.  When the dollar began to appreciate a little more than a year ago, a back-of-the-envelope guesstimate that I would have made was that a significant amount of our trade is cross-border with Mexico and Canada, a back-and-forth, supply chain sort of trade, which is not necessarily sensitive to an exchange rate. Another big piece of it is agricultural that sells into markets that are dollar denominated.  Mining is also conceivably in that category.  And then airplane orders are placed well in advance. So I would have guessed then that we didn’t have an economy very sensitive to exchange rate movements, or less than some other countries.  And yet, in the first quarter, we saw net exports have a pretty significant effect, and your projection, I think, shows a pretty significant effect on economic growth for a 10 percent appreciation.  Could you just elaborate a little bit more.  When you step back, what have you learned about the U.S. economy from this process.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking for clarification and further explanation.


Passage number 184.
 MR. KAMIN.  I think you are entirely right that the more your trade involves these two-way trades, with inputs going back and forth, that, all else being equal, ought to diminish the effect of exchange rates, at least on gross trade flows. It will not necessarily diminish their effect on trade balance, because, again, these things are going back and forth.  But all else being equal, you might expect some reduced effect of exchange rates on trade the more of your trade is of the two-way type, and the less of it is non-two-way trade in, for example, finished goods. Now, a couple things.  First, we have been very keen to try to ascertain whether our model estimates, which are basically estimated over a sample that goes back to the 1970s in some cases, in some sense apply less now than they did before.  And the short answer is that we are not convinced that they are less applicable, though we are parsing some evidence that goes in different directions.  If you take a look at the charts, looking at the years 2010 through 2014, it doesn’t look like our model has gone tremendously awry.  But at the same time, it doesn’t seem to be fitting as well as in previous episodes.  Second, it is true that if you estimate our trade models over some more recent samples—say, starting in 2000—then you do get somewhat smaller elasticities.  On the other hand, you don’t get particularly improved performance, in a robust sense, in tracking changes in the trade balance over this period.  And we think that a lot of what is going on is that the global financial crisis so disrupted trade flows—it led to this huge decline in trade, followed by very sharp rebounds, that our model couldn’t capture—and that is part of what’s at play.  So, we are alert to the possibility that the structure of trade has changed over time, but we are not convinced we see enough of that in the data to merit reducing our elasticities of the response of trade to the dollar. Now, directly to that issue, our model embodies responses of exports and imports to changes in the dollar that are not particularly outsized, and broadly speaking are in the neighborhood of what you will find in the literature.  And I would note that, as a rule of thumb, macroeconomists often assume that trade responses, or any type of demand responses to prices, are of a unit elasticity.  So if the price goes up 1 percent, the demand goes down 1 percent.  And we often make those assumptions in our trade models, too.  In fact, our model incorporates   features such that when the dollar goes up 10 percent, exports fall by 7½ percent. That implies a responsiveness of trade to the dollar that is actually less than 1.  And on the import side, we have even smaller responses to a change in the dollar.  So the merits of further compressing those trade responses don’t seem great. You raise a question that we are definitely in the process of wrestling with.  For now, we think the trade responses that we have built in are about right, but we are certainly going to be looking into this further. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their own model estimates and acknowledging that there may be evidence pointing in different directions, but ultimately they believe their trade responses are accurate.


Passage number 185.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  This is for David Wilcox.  You went through page 1 of 2 very systematically, and I was waiting for the Beveridge curve, but it seemed to fall off the page.  Tell us what we see there and where it’s going.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and seeking clarification from David Wilcox.


Passage number 186.
 MR. WASCHER. I’ll take that question. The chart shows that the Beveridge curve for the JOLTS vacancy rate has shifted out.  Ordinarily one would think of a shift out in the Beveridge curve as indicative of a decline in matching efficiency, and we had built that in.  One of the reasons we hadn’t lowered our natural rate was because we were taking some signal from that, offsetting the downward pressure on the natural rate that arises from demographic changes in the labor force. So what David was referring to was that Andrew Figura and David Ratner on our staff have put forward an argument that the outward shift in the Beveridge curve may not be reflective of an increase in the natural rate of unemployment if it instead is due to a decline in worker bargaining power, as perhaps evidenced by the decline in the labor share over the past decade or so.  In that case it is more profitable for firms to post a vacancy because the labor share is lower, and they get more of the profits from any additional employee.  And that would push up the equilibrium level of vacancies relative to any unemployment rate.That is roughly the story that David was trying to illustrate with the Beveridge curve. That it has shifted out.  Previously, we had interpreted that as consistent with a decline in matching efficiency or an increase in the natural rate.  But maybe there is another story that leads us not to take as much signal from that outward shift.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining a different perspective or argument proposed by Andrew Figura and David Ratner, but it is not presented as a direct disagreement with the previous interpretation.


Passage number 187.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by Mr. Fischer is a simple thank you, and the response by Chair Yellen is a polite acknowledgment.


Passage number 188.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I wanted to follow up on the conversation that President Williams started on the radar chart. It seems to me that you are trying to assess financial-sector vulnerability, and your ability to do that, though, is only as good as the metrics that you have on the right-hand side of the column.  So I wanted to ask a question on, how do you think about things like legal risk, which has obviously gone up dramatically, or cyber risk, which has gone up dramatically.  And when would that rise to the level that you would put that in the radar chart.  Because it seems like those are two really big risks that have emerged in the past few years that weren’t significant before.  And this is not a criticism.  I think that what you guys are doing is great.  It is state-of-the-art, as far as I am concerned.  But how do you think about something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 189.
 MS. LIANG. Behind this are a number of indicators—around 40.  First, cyber risk is not on here.  We think of that not as a financial vulnerability.  It is more of an operational risk, which isn’t on here. Legal risk is on the border of that, but, in principle, you could catch that with bank leverage or the bank capital ratios. Do you incorporate.  Are they holding capital sufficient for legal or operational risks.  And so on.  Things that we currently do in the stress test, we try to capture some of that at this point.  And so, to the extent we can put that in here in a quantitative way, we do so.  We don’t have a time series on that, though, so my guess is, it’s not well captured in here, which is also why this is just a backstop, and we don’t stop here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is simply explaining the factors that are included and not included in the analysis.


Passage number 190.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Well, one way to get at this a little bit is, you have some very large banks that are still selling at a discount, their book value.  And I find that interesting. In an environment in which the stock market is at a multiple of book value, you have these big financial institutions that are still very depressed. That might be something to think about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 191.
 MS. LIANG.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: 

The answer is "Yes." The word "Yes" indicates that there is contention or disagreement in the passage, but without any context or further information about the content of the passage, it is not possible to provide a detailed explanation.


Passage number 192.
 MR. WILCOX.  Can I offer just a brief bit of context on what this radar chart is.  And, Nellie, maybe you and I can have a little dialogue back and forth, and we’ll get it straight between the two of us.  My understanding is that a rough way to see what is going on here is to think of this radar chart as, in ever-so-rough terms, analogous to, say, the FRB/US or the EDO model.  It is an algorithmic approach, which I think is used to inform what might be called the analogue to the judgmental staff assessment of financial stability. I think there were many staff members who were very excited about putting this radar chart methodology together, but the exercise was not to supplant all of the judgment of the human beings that are involved in the QS process, but rather to say, “Okay, look, what could we do if we had a little bit of an expert system, or a very algorithmic approach based on quantitative indicators. And let’s just gain some real-time experience with how well or poorly that performs.” I think it’s a little like the status of the FRB/US model with regard to the judgmental economic outlook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily providing background information and discussing the purpose of a radar chart.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 193.
 MS. LIANG.  Right.  The FRB/US model, though, has a lot of structural modeling elements.  This, in contrast, is pretty statistical. Just to be clear, “algorithm” covers a broad range of approaches. But that’s exactly right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is a disagreement in the passage. The speaker is contrasting the FRB/US model, which has many structural modeling elements, with the approach being discussed, which is described as "pretty statistical." This suggests a difference in opinion or perspective on the two approaches.


Passage number 194.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 195.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I wanted to ask, on the financial-stability report, the valuation pressures are described as “notable,” but a lot of that seems to be driven—and you can certainly correct me if I am wrong on this—by the fact that term premiums are so low.  Risk premiums themselves don’t seem that high.  And, in fact, you could make an argument that housing looks undervalued in some sense.  At least the risk premiums on housing look very high, if you were to try to look at where the price-to-rent ratios are relative to longer-term risk-free yields.  My question is, what made you come down on the side of thinking about the valuation pressures being “notable” as opposed to simply noting that term premiums remain remarkably low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It consists of the speaker asking a question and seeking clarification on a specific topic.


Passage number 196.
 MS. LIANG. When we say “most asset valuation pressures,” we exclude residential housing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is providing clarification and excluding residential housing from the discussion of asset valuation pressures.


Passage number 197.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information or statements that may indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 198.
 MS. LIANG.  I think in the corporate sector—commercial real estate—there are rising prices and rising capitalization rates, et cetera, even relative to low spreads, at least in the high-yield bond sector.  In conjunction with that, we see the weakening of underwriting standards.  So it is just looking at the prices plus looking at what investors are willing to pay for something.  And are they willing to give something up just to get an asset that is yielding them something a little higher.  This is based on underwriting standards, quantitative factors that we can assess, conversations with market participants, and the actual metric.  So it has some of that.  In that sense, we have it. In the CRE space, we are seeing the decline.  And we hear a lot of discussions about rising LTVs, shopping for ratings on the CMBS—the kinds of things that make you think people are taking a little bit more risk than they had been for a while. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  

Explanation: The passage does not discuss any disagreement or contention. It presents observations and analysis about rising prices and capitalization rates in the commercial real estate sector, along with the weakening of underwriting standards. The statement is made without any contradictory opinions or conflicting perspectives.


Passage number 199.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  I have a question for Nellie as well, so obviously your report was one that was well read this time around.  And it is a follow-up to what Loretta asked about highly leveraged loans.  When we think about financial-stability risk, both amounts and distribution matter.  And when you look at the league tables for who is underwriting the highly leveraged loans, there have been some dramatic changes.  And, specifically, there is a fairly large broker-dealer who didn’t used to be on the league tables who is now much more significant on the league tables for doing highly leveraged lending. It isn’t in a bank holding company, and it is supervised by the SEC.  So I wonder how we think about how people are moving up and down the league tables for some of those markets that we think are critically important, and whether there is some way to also capture some of that concentration of risk that may be moving out of the regulated sector into the unregulated sector, particularly with a supervisor that may not be as focused on financial stability.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 200.
 MR. TARULLO.  I just want to make sure everybody is clear.  Very little of this stuff is held on the balance sheet of regulated institutions. What Nellie’s charts are showing is the originations of this stuff—but, Nellie, you have to help me here, because you haven’t done a recent detailed briefing on this—most of which is being held by quite nonleveraged institutions.  And so I actually don’t think, as we have looked at this, that we have seen it as a financial stability risk, as conventionally understood, so much as, instead, a potential macroprudential risk because of what would happen to the real economy if there were an awful lot of bankruptcies, which then carried through into affecting the end investors.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply clarifying the information and expressing their own viewpoint.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 201.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. There is a warehousing risk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

The passage states that there is a "warehousing risk," indicating that there is some level of concern or potential problem related to warehousing. This suggests that there may be disagreement or contention about the potential risks and challenges associated with warehousing.


Passage number 202.
 MR. TARULLO.  There is warehousing, but to date that has not been big issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the given passage, there is no contention or disagreement. Mr. Tarullo states that there is warehousing, but it has not been a big issue. There is no conflicting opinion or disagreement presented.


Passage number 203.
MS. LIANG.  Right.  I think the supervisory guidance and the lessons from 2008 are still fresh enough that they’re managing the pipeline risk.  We’ve been looking at the league tables for loans over $100 million.  The largest nonbank entity—which is an SEC-supervised broker-dealer, I think, if we’re referring to the same entity—its shares have held constant between around 3 and 4 percent.  Is that what you’re referring to. I still see the top 10 as being standard bank holding companies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and seeking clarification.


Passage number 204.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  When you talk to private equity and ask them who they are going to get their bids from, that broker-dealer seems to be the broker-dealer of choice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that when private equity is asked about their preferred broker-dealer for bids, they often mention a specific broker-dealer.


Passage number 205.
 MS. LIANG.  Right.  It had a 4 percent share in 2014 and 3 percent in each of the first two quarters.  So it clearly is there as an alternative, and it hasn’t really moved up the ranks over the past couple of years as much as we had maybe thought it could.  Again, these are league tables that give the share to the primary bookrunner.  It’s possible that others might participate more than they used to.  This is just one way to look at it.  So, for the large loans, where we are now, the way we’ve been thinking about it is that the ability to provide some backup revolver limits the ability for nonbanks to be the primary lead.  For middle-market loans, where a smaller fund could take it and distribute it, then it’s possible these kinds of firms can join. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  We now have an opportunity for comments on financial stability—not a full go-round—and I have two people who indicated they would like to make comments.  Let me start with President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 206.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I thought it might be useful to give a brief discussion of the financial-stability tabletop exercise conducted by the Financial Stability Committee of the Conference of Presidents in Charlotte in June.  The purpose was to obtain a better understanding of how the nexus of monetary policy and supervisory policy tools could beused in a scenario in which financial stability issues were emerging. The exercise was based on the assumption that decisions were being made in 2017.  At that time, the scenario that was assumed was that the economy had attained both elements of the dual mandate and the economy was expected to remain at full employment and 2 percent inflation in the absence of any changes to our monetary policy stance.  The staff provided forecasts for both macroeconomic variables using Tealbook discussions as well as developments in financial markets.  The scenario also included signs of emerging financial instability. Specifically, the scenario included a rapid rise in real estate values, significant growth in the shadow banking sector, and increased risk-taking by non-SIFI financial intermediaries. The discussion of the scenario and possible policy responses highlighted the important role of both governance issues and time lags in many of the potential supervisory policy responses. In part because of these governance complications and the lags in supervisory implementation, some committee members thought that monetary policy tools should be considered to address the concerns about future financial stability, even though doing so would result in a less optimal macroeconomic outcome.  Other members wanted to use supervisory tools and margin requirements but did not necessarily rule out using a monetary policy tool at some later point. The exercise was useful in crystallizing potential financial-stability problems and the complexity of responding to those problems.  I’ve shared the materials with Governors Fischer and Tarullo and think it might be worthwhile considering such an exercise for the full Committee at some future date.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, there is disagreement among committee members about whether to use monetary policy tools or supervisory tools to address concerns about future financial stability. Some members believe that monetary policy tools should be considered, even though it may result in a less optimal macroeconomic outcome. Others prefer to use supervisory tools and margin requirements, but do not rule out using a monetary policy tool in the future.


Passage number 207.
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Actually, my remarks will build on President Rosengren’s.  I was one of the members of the committee who did think that monetary policy might be a useful response to the situation that was crafted by the staff. With that in mind, I think that this Committee, the FOMC, should begin to thinking about recording its assessment of financial stability conditions on an ongoing basis in the FOMC statement itself.  If we do think there is a chance that, in the future, the FOMC will feel the need to adjust the stance of monetary policy in response to financial-stability risks—and President Rosengren described the very plausible contingency that the New York and Boston Reserve Bank staffs helped frame for the Conference of Presidents’ Financial Stability Committee that seemed to have that feature—and if we think we’re going to be adjusting the stance of monetary policy in that context, then I think it means that we have to, as a Committee, start to say something about how we’re assessing financial-stability contingencies on an ongoing basis. So what would that look like. I think what it could look like is adding a sentence about financial stability conditions to paragraph 1.  One way to at least start that discussion would be to simply restate the QS report’s assessment that overall financial system vulnerabilities are moderate. Alternatively, and like the QS report, the new sentence could also mention that there are notable vulnerabilities in valuation pressures.  If we were to add such a sentence today or tomorrow in the FOMC statement, you would add a sentence to paragraph 1 that would read, “In the Committee’s assessment, financial system vulnerabilities were moderate.”  You could stop there, or you could add a second clause saying “with notable vulnerabilities associated with valuation pressures in certain asset classes.” This is just a one-sentence description of what we would be seeing in the financial system in terms of financial stability risk.  I don’t think we want to wait until the moment when it turns out that financial system vulnerabilities are really high so   we’re going to raise rates to start to record that in the FOMC statement.  I doubt that the Committee will feel comfortable going forward with this in this meeting, but I certainly encourage building toward that kind of formulation in the statement itself.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a suggestion made by Mr. Kocherlakota to the FOMC committee about recording assessments of financial stability conditions in their statements. There is no opposing viewpoint mentioned.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 208.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you. First, on the tabletop exercise, it was a really good tabletop exercise because it wasn’t obvious what the right policy solution was supposed to be, and people had quite a bit of disagreement.  So it shows there’s a lot of nuance here in terms of figuring out how to use monetary policy versus macroprudential tools.  That was really very useful. I want to talk a little bit about Puerto Rico, which is in our District.  The Tealbook had a box on it, which I thought was quite good.  I think this is likely to be a very messy process because there is no bankruptcy option currently available for the territory of Puerto Rico or for its public corporations. Puerto Rico officials are seeking, with the support of the Administration, legislation that would provide a Chapter 9 bankruptcy filing option.  This could either be narrow, which is what the Administration would support—in other words, it would just apply as a public corporation, such as PREPA, which is the government power company—or broad, which is what the commonwealth would prefer, and that would apply to all of the commonwealth’s obligations. But the hurdle to even getting the narrow Chapter 9 legislation is high because many lawmakers are reluctant to set the precedent of providing this option.  Recall that U.S. states do not have the right to file for bankruptcy protection, although municipalities in states do have that option. So if you assume that broad Chapter 9 legislation is not forthcoming, it seems to me that it’s going to be very challenging for Puerto Rico authorities to be able to restructure their Puerto  Rican debt on a voluntary basis before the territory hits the wall in terms of running out of financial resources.  This means that sometime later this year or early 2016, there really is a risk of a hard landing—you can think of it as our own Greece—with the potential of disruption to social services and even, potentially, social unrest.  When this will happen is hard to say.  There’s really considerable uncertainty about how long the liquidity resources of the government and the Government Development Bank will last.  I don’t really know when the timing of this might take place. Now, while a bad outcome in Puerto Rico seems quite likely, I do agree with the Tealbook’s assessment that contagion risks seem to be low. Puerto Rico’s problems are quite unique and are already well known.  Puerto Rican municipal debt, while sizable, only represents about 2 percent of the total tax-exempt market, and the bulk of the Puerto Rico outstanding munis have already been marked down sharply in price.  So a good portion of the pain has already been manifested in financial markets.  One other potential channel of contagion are the monoline insurers, which guarantee about $15 billion of Puerto Rican debt.  Their share prices have often fallen sharply, and they would clearly be hurt further if there was actually an outright default.  The good news is that the role of the monoline insurers has diminished very significantly since the financial crisis.  Monolines currently wrap only about 5 percent of new municipal bond issuance.  So the ability of states and localities to raise funding, even if Puerto Rico got into difficulty and the monoline insurers went out of business, shouldn’t be disrupted unduly.  But this is something that could be very, very messy and difficult for Puerto Rico.  So you want to distinguish between the implications for the country and the implications for Puerto Rico—sort of like Europe. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  I suggest we take a 10-minute break.  There is coffee available, and we’ll come back to start our economic go-round and, I hope, get through it before dinner. [Coffee break] CHAIR YELLEN. Why don’t we get started on our economic go-round. We’re going to begin with President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that there is disagreement and uncertainty regarding how to use monetary policy versus macroprudential tools. Additionally, lawmakers are reluctant to provide bankruptcy options for Puerto Rico, which shows disagreement on this issue.


Passage number 209.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Our Fifth District surveys for the month of July were released earlier today.  The service-sector revenue index rose 13 points to a robust level of 32, and the manufacturing activity index rose 6 points to a moderately strong level of 13.  The positive signals from these diffusion indexes are consistent with recent anecdotal reports from our District.  A spate of reports came in this month about business activity having returned to pre-recession levels. This caught our attention.  These reports come from an array of contacts, including a banker, a building supply firm executive, an auto dealer, and a seller of sod.  Reports received from the commercial real estate sector were quite positive as well, and a panel of retailers with whom we regularly convene was upbeat and said business had improved notably since last year.  Interestingly, some of them said that sales have tended to be strong one month and then relatively weak the next month—which is exactly the pattern we’ve been seeing in the national retail sales data. An increasing number of anecdotal reports mentioned wage increases and tightening labor markets.  When I say “increasing,” it’s not just our impression—we went back and counted, and positive wage comments have been distinctly more frequent this year than last.  A construction site specialist in Maryland said, “No one responds to ads.  We’ve tried everything  we know.  We could be busier if we could get the people.” Our diffusion indexes also indicate building wage pressures.  Our service-sector average wage increase increased 4 points to a fairly high level of 25.  As you may recall, a recent Tealbook cited this index as a good indicator of movements in average hourly compensation.  In addition, our manufacturing wage index stands at 29, a relatively strong reading.  Based on our surveys and anecdotal reports—and at least until I heard President Rosengren’s report—I was not going to be surprised to see more firming in the national wage and compensation data in the last half of this year.  But that was a very interesting report on the research you’ve done on the ECI.  I’ll have to think about that. Speaking of the national picture, the data we’ve received since the last meeting are quite consistent with the outlook we had back in June, so I think I can be brief.  My projections of real GDP remain similar to the Tealbook’s, with economic growth through 2017 averaging between 2 and 2½ percent, and continued improvement in labor markets.  On inflation, over the last four months for which we have data, the core CPI has increased at an annual rate of 2.4 percent, and the core PCE price index has increased at a 1.7 percent rate.  Granted, four months might be too short an interval to get excited about, and some residual seasonality could be at work, as suggested by the staff.  Still, I remain pretty confident that inflation is moving toward 2 percent.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of the speaker providing information about surveys and anecdotal reports from the Fifth District and discussing their implications for the economy.


Passage number 210.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The tone of recent reports of the majority of our Sixth District contacts continues to be positive.  Contacts reported good current activity and were increasingly upbeat about future sales.  Retailers continued to affirm strengthening sales volume, especially those feeding off tourism and hospitality.  Low gasoline prices are finally being cited as contributing to consumer spending momentum.  A number of our   interviews fell in the period of the most intense coverage of developments in Greece and China.  While international events had the attention of many contacts, few expressed concern that the momentum they’re enjoying will be disrupted.  Hiring challenges continued to intensify for many contacts.  Following a pattern we’ve noted over the course of the year, reports of plans to pick up the pace of wage hikes were increasingly broad based.  We heard more reports than in earlier periods of investment in employee training and acquisitions as a human capital strategy. My sense is, the incoming data have been largely consistent with the upbeat reports we heard from most of our District contacts.  We expect tomorrow’s second-quarter GDP report to register a substantial improvement over the first quarter, and we expect some further improvement in the second half.  I believe the economy remains on a track characterized as moderate economic growth, continuing employment gains, and, by some measures, firming price pressures.  This has been my baseline outlook for quite some time.  Now that questions of persistence of first-quarter weakness can be put aside, my confidence in the economy’s momentum is much improved from earlier this year. Because my economic outlook is comparatively optimistic and is likely at the upper end of Committee participants’ range of projections regarding real GDP growth, I’m more concerned about chances of downside risks materializing than prospects for upside developments.  I’m watching the broad-based decline of commodity prices as a possible indicator of the direction of global demand.  However, this is not to say that I object to this meeting’s alternative B policy statement attributing a “balance of risk” view of the Committee as “nearly balanced.”  I’m comfortable with the domestic economic picture at this time.  I think the burden of proof has now shifted from why we should lift off to why we shouldn’t.  To my mind, it would take a sharp deviation in the overall tone of the data over the next six weeks—more than the not unusual  month-to-month noise in the data—or an abrupt deterioration in a significant risk factor, such as global economic growth, or some other material shock to dissuade me from carrying through.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker presents information and expresses their own opinion, but there is no disagreement mentioned.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 211.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The reports from my business contacts and directors were similar to what we’ve been hearing for several meetings now.  Most see demand expanding at a moderate rate and were reasonably optimistic about prospects for decent economic growth in the United States. But there was broad-based concern about international developments—particularly about those related to China—and on the pricing front, there were no reports of any pickup in inflation. To the contrary, anyone with exposure to commodity markets was talking about downward price pressures.   Let me start with the positive news for the United States.  The industries that I’m going to mention are quite similar to President Mester’s characterization as well.  Automakers and their suppliers were upbeat.  GM and Ford were pleased with the recent industry numbers, and both may again be revising up their forecasts for sales in 2015.  Each of them once again noted that low borrowing rates have provided important support for vehicle demand.  Also on the consumer front, my director who runs Discover credit cards said the company has seen a modest increase in retail usage over the past six weeks.  This is notable because earlier this year, he gave us a bit of an early read on the weaker PCE data that we ended up getting.  I received positive reports regarding multifamily residential construction.  Urban markets are particularly strong. On the other hand, businesses that manufacture heavy equipment continue to experience sluggish domestic demand, even aside from the weakness in their oil and gas-related businesses. Nevertheless, most contacts in this area are optimistic that energy-related investment will stabilize and demand from other sectors will pick up, leading to stronger equipment sales in 2016. I heard similar commentary about the demand for steel in 2016 from ArcelorMittal. The heavy equipment and steel manufacturers also have a lot of exposure to international developments, and here the story from them and my other contacts is pretty downbeat.  The largest worry is China. Indeed, several of my contacts characterized the situation there as “troubling.” There’s widespread concern that China will not be able to sustain the more modest 7 percent growth target laid out by the Chinese government planners.  Such an outcome likely implies continued softness for businesses with significant exposure to commodity markets and, more generally, for China’s major trading partners. It could also further elevate the dollar, leading to stronger headwinds for U.S. economic growth and inflation. Combining my contact reports with the data we’ve received over the intermeeting period, my forecast for GDP and inflation are essentially unchanged from my June SEP submission.  Adjusting for differences in our views about potential, my economic growth forecast is close to the Tealbook, and this results in resource gaps essentially closing by late 2016.  My inflation forecast has PCE prices rising 1.7 percent in 2017.  This is the same as the downwardly revised Tealbook projection, but my forecast builds in a later policy liftoff.  While these inflation forecasts are on the low end of the SEP submissions, I’m still concerned that they may be overly optimistic. We’ve seen little upward movement so far in core inflation.  Without something at least beginning to show up in the data, I find it difficult to write down a forecast that has inflation returning to target within the current projection period.  Indeed, the only statistical model we have in Chicago that generates a reasonably optimistic increase in inflation is one based largely on mean reversion to a constant, and that forecast still falls short of our 2 percent objective, even in 2017. In sum, the international situation presents an important downside risk.  I think we’re well on track to achieving our employment mandate, but I’m still worried about when inflation will finally begin to rise to 2 percent.  With the evidence in hand today and the knowledge of the uncertainty surrounding the inflation process, I cannot yet write down a baseline forecast that has us achieving our inflation mandate within a reasonable period of time.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  First Vice President Holcomb.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges positive economic growth in the United States but expresses concern about international developments, particularly in China. The speaker also expresses doubt about inflation reaching the 2 percent target and suggests that current inflation forecasts may be overly optimistic.


Passage number 212.
 MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Economic activity in the Third District continues to grow modestly, about the typical pace for the region.  Employment growth in our three-state region has remained steady over the past three months at 1.4 percent, with Pennsylvania experiencing the highest employment growth of our three states.  Steady job growth led to a 0.2 percentage point decline in the unemployment rate, to 5.6 percent in June.  Our unemployment rate is a bit higher than the nation’s, in part due to our somewhat higher participation rate—a rate that has been gradually increasing over the past 12 months. Reflecting the softness in manufacturing nationally, the general activity index in our July manufacturing Business Outlook Survey came in barely positive at 5.7, returning to single-digit territory where it had been for most of the year.  Both the shipments and new orders indexes declined as well.  However, optimism prevails in this sector as the future general activity index rose to a solid 41.5.  Manufacturers in our District are definitely viewing the recent weakness as temporary.  They also indicate that they have little pricing power.  One of our contacts, who has interest in a diverse range of manufacturing activities, reported that the reason wage growth has been so subdued is a lack of pricing power.  Wage growth is unlikely to pick up until some degree of pricing power returns.  Although this is anecdotal, his comments reinforce the message that a number of you have made, both around this table and in your speeches, that inflation leads wage growth and not the other way around. The service sector also showed some unexpected signs of weakness in the District.  The nonmanufacturing Business Outlook Survey index for the current conditions decreased substantially in July.  The series is quite volatile, and historically lower-than-average numbers are common in July, but seasonality is only part of the story.  Much like our District’s manufacturers, firms in this sector remain optimistic about future activity. Housing in the region continues its slow recovery.  But growth in the multifamily component entirely accounts for that recovery, with permits for single-family housing actually declining.  Growth in northern New Jersey has been particularly robust, but Pennsylvania and Delaware are also outpacing the nation in multifamily housing activity.  House prices appreciated moderately in May, but at about half the national average.  Turning to the nation as a whole, I view the decline in GDP in the first quarter as mainly reflecting problems with seasonal adjustment.  Doubly seasonally adjusted GDP grew at a rate of 1.7 percent, GDI grew at a 1.9 percent rate, and GDPplus grew at a 2.4 percent rate in Q1.  So I’m not overly concerned with the weak expenditure data reported in the first quarter, and I’m optimistic that the economy will rebound in the second half of the year a bit more strongly than suggested in the Tealbook. Despite the weak recent data on consumer activity, strong fundamentals lead me to believe that the consumer will underpin an economy that should perform at or a bit above trend over the next year or so.  Continued strong job growth, falling unemployment in both U-3 and U-6, and the labor market dynamism reflected in the JOLTS data point to an end of labor market slack in the near future.  A lot of progress has been made.  Further, I found the recent work by Didem Tüzemen and Jonathan Willis of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City to be quite compelling.  The authors indicate that match qualities have improved in the labor market over the past year or so, and that even those with less than a high school education are finding highly skilled employment.  A contact in my region confirms that, as we heard previously, firms are engaging in more training and apprenticeship programs in order to find people to fill jobs that require higher skills. The recent news on inflation has reduced my concern about disinflationary pressures, even though inflation remains a bit on the low side.  As mentioned previously, headline CPI inflation has accelerated a bit of late, and other measures of inflation, such as the trimmed mean measures that are computed at the Reserve Banks of Dallas and Cleveland, are not very far behind our target.  Further, expected inflation measures produced at Cleveland and our own SPF   survey have remained stable and are also near our inflation target.  I am thus persuaded that inflation will most likely gradually return to target.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It primarily presents data and observations about the economic activity in the Third District and the author's perspective on various economic indicators.


Passage number 213.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Employment in the 10th District declined in recent months primarily because of weakness in the energy and agriculture sectors. Manufacturing activity decreased, although services continued to expand.  Contacts in both services and manufacturing expect activity to increase in the coming months.  And wage and salary growth picked up slightly outside energy-dependent areas. The residential real estate market remains tight, with low inventories across most of the District.  House prices continue to rise, leading to a decline in housing affordability.  Yet, despite low inventories and rising prices, residential construction activity continues to increase only at a modest pace. Excessive rainfall in parts of the Midwest have boosted corn prices, although profit margins in the livestock sector have declined as cattle and hog prices softened and input costs remained elevated. Finally, District energy activity continued to decline in the second quarter but at a slower rate than earlier in the year.  And expectations for future activity were slightly positive in our quarterly energy survey conducted in late June.  This modest optimism was, in part, due to less tightening of energy financing than had been expected, along with domestic oil prices remaining at about $60 at that time.  However, many firms were concerned about another oil price drop— which has since occurred—as it would likely cause energy activity to contract further. For the national economy, my outlook for the medium term is little changed.  With the first-quarter weakness proving transitory, I expect economic growth to pick up during the year and average around 2 percent in 2015 before moving up a bit higher next year.  Healthy growth in household spending is a key aspect supporting my forecast.  And, in terms of the labor market,  the declines in the unemployment rate and the broader U-6 measure in June indicate that labor market slack continues to diminish. Regarding the inflation outlook, with the unemployment rate close to its natural rate and continuing improvement in the labor market, inflation seems poised to firm in the second half of the year.  Despite the stronger dollar and lower oil prices, we have seen four solid monthly increases in the core PCE price index, giving me reasonable confidence that headline inflation should return to the 2 percent goal over the medium term.  Looking at inflation expectations, Tealbook A noted that some measures of longer-term inflation expectations, including the median five-year-forward measure from the Survey of Professional Forecasters, have edged down during the past years, and that this could suggest a risk of a downward shift in expectations.  I asked my staff to look at this more closely, and they found that the individual longer-term forecasts for PCE inflation in the SPF resulted because a number of forecasts above 3 percent had steadily fallen since the recession, and the very high outliers have disappeared. In contrast, the number of forecasts below 1 percent have remained steady. Although this could lead the median to decline, I see the reduction in outliers as consistent with better-anchored expectations.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It provides a summary of various economic factors and outlooks without presenting any conflicting information or opinions.


Passage number 214.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without the presence of the full passage, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the given text.


Passage number 215.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The Eighth District economy continues to expand at a moderate pace.  News from District contacts has not changed appreciably from our previous meeting in most dimensions.  Anecdotal reports of tight labor market conditions have become commonplace.  A very wet spring has significantly reduced the percentage of crops in good condition.  Declining commodity price prospects generally have reduced expectations for farm income for 2015.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply states various observations and reports without any conflicting information or differing opinions.


Passage number 216.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Before I talk about what I prepared for these remarks, I wanted to touch on some of the issues that have been brought up in others’ interventions. There is a lot of discussion about a “transitory first quarter,” and I just wanted to clarify the meaning of that.  In growth rate terms, it’s correct that we don’t see the very low growth rate that we saw in the first quarter—of near zero, below zero, or maybe we’ll see the revisions later this week that will push it a little bit above zero—carried forward into the second quarter, third quarter, or fourth quarter.  Rather, we see more robust growth in those quarters.  But many of the stories with regard to that “transitoriness” are actually stories that you would not expect to show up in the level of GDP.  On the other hand, the low growth that we saw in the first quarter is actually translating into distinctly lower levels of GDP at the end of the year than at least I had anticipated going into the year.  We’re not seeing a 3 percent growth rate overall. We’re not seeing catch-up in the second and third quarters.  So I think when we use the word “transitory,” the stories we tell for that transitoriness should be stories that actually lead to a permanently lower level of GDP going forward to the end of 2015.  The seasonal adjustment story has that  flavor, but some of the other stories, such as the port strikes and others, seem much more challenging along those lines. For the second issue that came up, I was very interested to hear from President George about the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s analysis of the SPF, about how some of the decline in the forecast is from losing the inflation nutters—those forecasting the 3 percent and above.  Losing those forces in the market is actually a challenge for us.  If you have folks in the market that are betting on inflation being above 3 percent, that helps keep the real interest rate low and helps stimulate the economy.  If those folks are exiting the market—are not betting that inflation is going to be high—that actually serves to drive up the real interest rate and push down stimulus, as long as we’re keeping the nominal rates the same, or the expectations of nominal rates the same.  This is in line with the idea, which I haven’t voiced publicly yet, that Allan Meltzer was actually one of the big forces for accommodation in the past five years, because the idea that inflation was going to be high in the years ahead was actually a very positive force for this Committee, in light of the fact that we’re not able to drive nominal interest rates lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 217.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but you haven't provided a passage for me to analyze. Could you please provide the passage you would like me to assess for contention or disagreement?


Passage number 218.
 WILLIAMS. Was that a beta test of that argument.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question about a beta test of an argument.


Passage number 219.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  It was a beta test, yes.  [Laughter] Maybe a gamma test.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The response "Maybe a gamma test" is meant to humorously continue the conversation and does not indicate disagreement.


Passage number 220.
 MR. EVANS. Well, Allan says people don’t always understand nominal versus real, and this argument demands that people understand nominal versus real.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply stating Allan's perspective that people sometimes struggle to differentiate between nominal and real, and acknowledging that understanding this concept is necessary for the argument being discussed.


Passage number 221.
 MR. FISCHER. We surely noticed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement about the observation of Mr. Fischer.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 222.
  [Laughter] VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Dragging it in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The presence of laughter suggests that there is some disagreement or conflict happening.


Passage number 223.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  The risks to the outlook, though, are skewed further to the downside because of the constraint posed by the zero lower bound.  Risk-management considerations also push in the direction of additional accommodation.  But I’ll talk more about that tomorrow.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement from Mr. Kocherlakota followed by a response from Chair Yellen.


Passage number 224.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair. My views haven’t changed much since the June meeting, and they don’t differ very much from the Tealbook’s forecast.  With respect to economic growth, I think there are both positives and negatives.  Together they add up to perhaps a 2 percent growth rate in the second half of the year, with the risks about balanced around that trajectory. I’d put the outlook for consumer spending and residential investment on the positive side.  Household spending should be well supported over the near term by solid job gains and a saving rate that is higher than what one would expect on the basis of the level of net worth relative to income.  And the Iranian deal, if it holds, increases the likelihood that oil and gasoline prices will stay low for an extended period, which may also help free up some additional spending.  I see several positives with respect to housing, including the relatively low level of housing starts relative to employment growth and the easing of lending standards for residential mortgages evident in the latest Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices.  Housing is a part of the economy—unlike motor vehicle sales, for example—that one can argue is still cyclically depressed. On the negative side, I would expect trade to remain a drag and inventory investment to fall, given the fact that inventory accumulation rates during the first half of the year were quite high.  The biggest risk in my mind, though, remains the employment trend, which has been very sturdy relative to the pace of economic growth.  If that trend stays intact over the next few months—I’m going to speak on the monetary policy part here—then I think the case for monetary policy liftoff will be quite compelling.  But I am reluctant to count on those chickens just yet. With respect to inflation, I continue to become less worried that inflation will remain persistently below 2 percent.  This reflects several factors.  First, the trend of core inflation has flattened out despite the damping effect of lower oil prices and a firmer dollar—influences that will likely prove to be transitory. Second, a tighter labor market is likely to translate soon into higher compensation trends.  While I know that the linkage between wages and inflation is very tenuous, I still believe that pressure on resources does matter in terms of affecting the inflation  outlook.  And, third, my own reading is that there is some scope for higher inflation from a firmer trajectory for shelter and health-care costs.  As we all know, these components have a significant weight in core inflation measures. Now, I do have one nitpick with the Tealbook—as I said, I mostly agree with it.  But Tealbook A, after noting on page 19 that “readings on longer-term inflation expectations have changed little over the intermeeting period,” goes on to say that “some of these measures seem to have edged down during the past handful of years.”  Now, that’s not really new information.  These developments, Tealbook A continues, “suggest a downside risk to our maintained assumption that expectations will remain well anchored.” Well, I’m not sure I share this view— and I’m channeling President Mester a bit here, I think—because the size of these changes is not that large. It’s on the order of 15 to 25 basis points.  And as Loretta pointed out, the University of Michigan measure tends to get bounced around by the trajectory of oil prices.  So some of the decline that you see in the University of Michigan measure may just reflect the oil price trends. Moreover, as President Mester also pointed out, some measures of consumer inflation expectations have moved higher recently.  For example, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Survey of Consumer Expectations has shown a clear uptick in expected inflation at the one-year and three-year time horizons in recent months.  The one-year median expected inflation rate has risen 27 basis points since April, to 3 percent.  And the three-year median expected inflation rate has risen 8 basis points since March, to 3 percent as well. Now, I wouldn’t overemphasize those increases.  They’re not very large, either.  But I think it does push against the notion that there’s compelling evidence that substantial risk to the downside in terms of inflation expectations are emerging.  I just don’t think the data really support that conclusion.Finally, I just want to talk a little bit about this issue of how much excess slack there is in the labor market. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York staff has done a lot of work on the issue of how much hours worked would increase if the other measures of unemployment, like U-6, were to be normalized with the actual level of the unemployment rate measured by U-3.  Ayşegül Şahin, who is sitting over here, has done a lot of work on this.  And when you actually ask yourself the question of how much hours worked would you get if all these other measures normalize, it’s not as much as you might think or hope.  It suggests that maybe the unemployment rate overstates the tightness of the labor market by about ½ percentage point.  In other words, if you could get U-6 down to where you’d expect it to be relative to U-3, you might get about ½ percent of additional hours worked. So it points in the right direction of saying that you have some extra labor market slack, but it’s not a huge increment of slack, in my opinion.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 225.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I agree with those of you who have said that, on balance, the economic picture hasn’t really changed much since June.  But I wanted to underscore the point that President Kocherlakota made that, although it’s reasonably clear that we didn’t begin to sink into a period of substantially reduced growth after the first quarter, this was not a repeat of last year, when really good second and third quarters made up for the very bad first quarter.  So, on net, there has been a loss. I wanted to add a few thoughts on labor markets and international factors to what some of you have already said.  Before going to those thoughts, though, I did want to comment on some of the things that some of you have said already. With respect to proposals to raise the minimum wage and actual minimum wage increases, I think there’s a lot, John, to what you say about past efforts to raise minimum wages.  Having been through a couple of those efforts myself, I found that oftentimes what would happen is that those who favored minimum wage increases would wait until a point at which they could make the argument that a nontrivial portion of people covered by minimum wages were already above that wage. So the net effect on employers would not actually be that great.  One of the salient differences, I think, between the proposals and the things that have been enacted this time around and the past is, that argument isn’t being made.  On the contrary, employers are saying that, basically, they’d have to raise wages for all of their employees. That’s because the political origins of this particular set of initiatives come more from this sense   that, persistently and chronically, wages have not been rising. So we can’t be sure about it, but my guess is that there is some difference between the effect that the minimum wage increases would have now and what I think you quite rightly intuit as past patterns. I have a couple of other things.  First, I don’t know about the rest of you, but I would like to try to encourage the staff to continue to do their own economic forecast rather than to attempt to get themselves close to the median of the Blue Chip.  The whole purpose of what we’re asking them to do is to give us an independent, more or less coherent, picture of what they think is going on in the economy, which then allows us to see whether that’s convincing, and not to try to calibrate it so that the final numbers somehow align well with what others are saying. I would also point out that the Blue Chip is itself a median. There are a bunch of people in the Blue Chip who think unemployment is going to be higher and a bunch of people in the Blue Chip who think unemployment is going to be lower.  It’s interesting that one of the things that, as a whole, the Blue Chip has been consistently wrong about for the past seven years is what’s going to happen to inflation. So, again, while I agree or disagree with particular components of it, I think that it’s really important that we encourage the staff to take an independent view. I’ll make one other comment on that.  Regarding the labor participation rate trend line, again, I don’t think it would be a good idea for the staff to feel that they had to get their trend line to actually track the data for any relatively short period of time.  I believe the coherent argument that has been made by the staff is that, because of the nature of the crisis and the recession, there were substantial dislocations in labor markets, which are only slowly returning to what people would anticipate to be trend.  They’ve adjusted their trend line for labor participation at least twice since I’ve been here, taking into account not only demographics, but also shifts that they’ve seen in the patterns of behavior of middle-aged and older people leaving   the workforce permanently sooner rather than later.  I think recent experience has validated the instinct that the staff had, because, with participation having been more or less flat for a couple of years, it’s actually gotten closer to the trend line, just as they’ve been predicting for several years. I’ll turn now to a couple of things that I had prepared to say.  On labor markets, as many people have commented, we’ve had continued improvement across most dimensions with the notable exception, I still think, of wages.  After an upward tick, average hourly earnings ticked back down again, so they’re in the same 12-month range that they’ve been in for quite some time.  The ECI has gone up, but Eric already made the point I would have made—that the ECI, in particular, incorporates incentive pay, which has actually been pretty significant in a number of industries.  So it may not be as revealing of underlying wage trends as some of the other measures.  Indeed, I was thinking this weekend—in the inevitable seven- to eight-week effort to ask, “What can you say that’s new.”—that I actually now believe that the story of wages in this recovery was written by Samuel Beckett.  This is not an overly literary crowd, I can tell.  [Laughter]  But I will now elaborate, although I appreciate that the Chair got it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is primarily providing their own thoughts and opinions on various topics, such as the minimum wage, economic forecasts, and labor market trends. While they may mention different viewpoints and perspectives, there is no direct disagreement or argument.


Passage number 226.
 MR. LACKER.  It might not be a funny reference.  [Laughter] CHAIR YELLEN. We’re waiting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It includes a lighthearted moment with laughter but does not involve any conflicts or disputes.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 227.
 MR. TARULLO.  Beckett had his boy character appear only twice to announce that Godot would not be arriving today but would surely be arriving the next day, whereas we have heard predictions of accelerating wages and anecdotal reports of same more or less continuously during the past couple of years. Now, while Godot never did arrive, sending Vladimir and Estragon to the point of suicide, most of us probably believe that accelerating wages will.  There have been numerous efforts both inside and outside the System to determine just when that might  be, based on historical correlations between accelerating wage increases in post-recession periods and other labor market indicators. I want to mention a couple of relatively recent efforts by Federal Reserve economists that I found both interesting and well thought through.  But precisely because they turn out, perhaps, not to be correct, I think they’re a cautionary tale about reading too much into any effort to create such correlations. One, which I believe hasn’t been reduced to a paper yet but was presented within various parts of the System earlier this year, suggests that wages begin to accelerate when the post-recession unemployment rate has declined between 70 and 80 percent of the way from its recession high to its pre-recession trough.  The other, which is a little less numerically determinate, maps historical correlations between the quits rate and wage increases and concludes that a rise in the former is a good predictor of a later rise in the latter. That is a Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Fed Letter—it was just posted on the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago’s website.  With respect to the first, if my arithmetic is right—not always a foregone conclusion—we’ve now already retraced more than 80 percent of the increase in unemployment from the pre-recession low to the recession high without noticeable and persistent wage acceleration.  And when I looked at the charts that were presented by the authors of that presentation, by the time that 70 to 80 percent had been reached, there was already a quite persistent and noticeable increase.  With respect to quits, while the quits rate has been rising for some years now, it has only relatively recently gotten back into the lower end of its pre-crisis range.  So it may be a little bit early to judge how well this correlation holds up in the present recovery.  If I read the paper right, President Evans, I think that paper was not actually trying to make a very firm numerical determination but was instead just trying to suggest directionally that this is when you can begin to expect some acceleration of wages.   My point, as in past discussions, is that the origins of the 2007–09 recession and the ensuing recovery in a financial crisis may mean that there will be very different trajectories in the labor market, as there have been in some other areas.  So we should remain open to the possibility, even the likelihood, that things won’t be following the same pattern as they have been in the past several recessions and recoveries, and we have to instead look for nontransitory evidence in the data.  All of that, of course, is against the backdrop of the considerable uncertainty about the relationship between wage acceleration, even when it does occur, and price inflation. Turning to international factors, I want to talk about two that, again, several people have mentioned that carry some downside risk.  The first is China.  Now, I do not pretend to understand what is going on in China, and I certainly don’t have very much confidence in my own assessment of the risks of a significant drop-off in economic growth there.  What I’ve noticed is that people who speak to Chinese officials or who analyze data tend to discount the stock market turmoil and take a relatively optimistic view that China’s growth will stabilize around where it’s now reported to be, whereas people who do business in China tend as a group to be more pessimistic and view the overleveraged stock market as a harbinger of other problems. Being in neither group—I guess that’s not true because at FSB meetings, I talk to Chinese officials—I can readily identify cognitive biases in both groups, so I don’t know whose story is more convincing.  But what I think is relatively clear is that there isn’t much upside risk in China these days. So, while the risks it poses to global economic growth and, through the mechanism of reduced demand for commodities, to downward pressures on inflation may be hard to quantify  for now, those risks are not balanced by any realistic upside risk that, say, Chinese economic growth is going to improve to between 8 and 9 percent over the next couple of years. On the dollar, the Tealbook already projects significant drags on U.S. growth over the next four to six quarters stemming from negative net exports, the reasons for which Steve explained in his introductory remarks.  Because the Tealbook also projects only a small additional increase in the trade-weighted value of the dollar during that period, what they’re projecting is mostly a J-curve effect. But against the backdrop of the Tealbook’s stipulation of a September federal funds rate increase, the Tealbook projection embeds the assumption that most of the capital investment shift associated with divergent monetary policies has already been priced into relative markets.  This may well be the case, but I think there are at least some reasons to think otherwise.  The first, of course, is the fact that rates have been at the zero lower bound here for more than six and a half years.  So there may have developed more entrenchment of positions that haven’t moved so much, even in response to the increasingly explicit predictions of rate rises that many have been announcing. Second, any near-term increase in U.S. rates will have been accompanied by a decrease in effective rates in much of the rest of the world.  The only clear exceptions already are South Africa and Brazil, and the United Kingdom looms out there as potentially an exception along with us.  Accommodation has been enhanced significantly in both the euro zone and Japan through their QE programs.  This is a great statistic:  Rate reductions by central banks in the rest of the world have outnumbered increases 44 to 4 since the beginning of the year.  The 4 are, again, 2 in South Africa and 2 in Brazil.  So I wonder whether the traditional pattern of markets buying on rumors and selling on the fact may not hold true here, and whether there may be the potential for greater cross-border capital flows if we increase rates before either economic or financial conditions have become more mixed in the rest of the world.  The risk here is, I believe, a little more balanced than that with respect to China, because, if the Greek situation continues to be a problem mostly for the Greek people and not for the rest of the euro zone, one can definitely imagine the euro strengthening somewhat.  But I think it very unlikely that there would be a significant depreciation of the dollar when we start raising rates, whereas there is at least a modest risk of a significant appreciation.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker is discussing different theories and opinions about the timing and possibility of accelerating wages, as well as the risks associated with China's economic growth and the value of the dollar. There is also some disagreement about how the markets will react to an increase in interest rates.


Passage number 228.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  You want to be perfectly fresh for something so deep and sophisticated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a straightforward statement about being fresh for something deep and sophisticated.


Passage number 229.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage because "MR" does not provide enough information to determine the presence of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 230.
 WILLIAMS.  Right.  Absolutely.  Thomas, we don’t want to shortchange you at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing agreement and reassurance.


Passage number 231.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  We’re doing this for you, Thomas.  [Laughter] CHAIR YELLEN. We will start off giving Thomas our full attention at 9:00 a.m.  In the meantime, let’s go have a drink.  [Laughter] [Meeting recessed]July 29 Session CHAIR YELLEN.  Good morning, everybody.  This morning we’re going to start off with Thomas’s briefing about monetary policy alternatives.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The laughter and subsequent statement about having a drink indicate a light and casual atmosphere, but there is no obvious disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 232.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Before I begin, I was wondering if I might have an opportunity to ask Thomas a question. CHAIR YELLEN.  Oh, I’m sorry.  I apologize.  I should have allowed questions for Thomas. Let’s do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple request for permission to ask a question.


Passage number 233.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Thanks.  I have a question about the addition of the word “some” in alternative B, paragraph 3.  I wasn’t sure what that was supposed to connote beyond what was already in paragraph 1.  Paragraph 1 describes that labor markets have improved.  We’re getting closer, presumably, to whatever represents maximum employment because of that progress.  So I’m not sure what the word “some” was supposed to connote beyond what was already in paragraph 1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification on the meaning of a specific word in the text.


Passage number 234.
 MR. LAUBACH.  My personal thinking is that it’s not unambiguous that “further improvement in the labor market” has a fixed starting point.  It could be simply measured in terms of further improvement from wherever you are today. I think what the “some” signifies is simply that there is, in fact, implicit in this a fixed starting point, which was when the Committee first adopted this language, and that some of that distance has been traveled and only some of it remains.  That’s what it’s intended to clarify. CHAIR YELLEN. Are there further questions for Thomas before we begin our go-round.  [No response] President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. Mr. Laubach is offering his personal interpretation of the phrase "further improvement in the labor market" and explaining his understanding of what the word "some" signifies. Chair Yellen does not respond with any disagreement or objection.


Passage number 235.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you.  Madam Chair, with the exception of a few months in late 2011 and early 2012, core PCE inflation has been below our adopted target of 2 percent for nearly seven years.  The outlook in Tealbook A is that it will not return to target until the next decade.  I do not see this outcome as consistent with our commitment to keep inflation at 2 percent over the longer run.  How can we do better. The staff provides a clear answer to this question in the excellent optimal control simulations in Tealbook B, in which they put zero weight on unemployment falling below the   natural rate. Basically, we can facilitate a more rapid return of inflation to target if we are not averse to living in an America in which the unemployment rate is below 5 percent for several years.  Now, for those of us in the Ninth District, we can tell you it’s not so bad to have unemployment below 5 percent.  We live with it all the time. So if we’re willing to make policy choices that give rise to unemployment rates in the 4s for an extended period of time, then those policy choices will push inflation back to target in a much more timely fashion. Now, the optimal control exercises also indicate that we could obtain those outcomes, even if we initiate liftoff later this year rather than waiting longer, as long as we raise the federal funds rate very slowly, by about 10 basis points per quarter. But I’m not convinced this “go early and super slowly” approach is the best one.  A key part of what makes these policies work in the simulations is, the agents in the model know that the FOMC is not averse to having unemployment below 5 percent.  In the real world, the public doesn’t know that, and I don’t believe that lifting off in, say, September would signal that clearly.  From this communications point of view, we would be much better off deferring liftoff until, say, the latter portion of next year and then raising the federal funds rate more rapidly than 10 basis points per quarter.  As the footnotes in Tealbook B suggest, we would get pretty similar inflation and unemployment outcomes by doing that—as long as assumptions in the model are met, of course. All of this is based on the modal outlook.  I talked yesterday about some of the downside risks—possibly adverse international outcomes and a further downward slide in inflation expectations.  I thought Governor Brainard’s comments on the dollar were ones that really sharpen the points I was attempting to make about international risks.  Especially in light of the constraints imposed by the zero lower bound, these risks also support deferring liftoff until we have a stronger inflation outlook.  I am sure that some of you, perhaps many of you, are  undoubtedly concerned about other risks:  a possibility that the Phillips curve may prove to be considerably steeper than what the staff has modeled, or that risks to financial stability arise from low interest rates.  These are absolutely legitimate concerns. The Committee meets eight times per year and gets plenty of advance warning for these particular outcomes.  We’ll hear about and see inflationary pressures through the behavior of inflation itself and through our intelligence-gathering efforts.  The QS report, through the diligent work of our staff, will reveal risks to financial stability.  If we feel that the QS report is not designed to elicit the kinds of risks to financial stability that we’re concerned about, we should be letting our staff know what other information they should, in fact, be including in that report. Importantly, not only do we get the information about these risks when they actually materialize, but this Committee also has the tools to deal with these risks, should they transpire.  It can increase rates more rapidly; it can halt reinvestments sooner; and it can, if needed, sell assets.  This is in contrast with the downward risks, concerning which we’re so constrained by the zero lower bound. Madam Chair, I urge the Committee to be willing to pursue our 2 percent inflation objective with urgency, even if that pursuit results in an unemployment rate under 5 percent for an extended period of time.  So I recommend alternative A. While I’m recommending alternative A, I do have a comment about alternative B, which follows up on the question I asked Thomas.  I would suggest not including the word “some” in paragraph 3.  I think that a good discipline on all communication is, we should be adding words if we have a very specific message we want to deliver. I’m not sure what message the Committee is attempting to deliver. If the Committee is attempting to deliver the message that September is very “live” in its thinking, the route you were describing whereby you were going to have a public set of remarks during the intermeeting period seemed like a much more useful way to proceed.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 236.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B.  Between now and the September meeting, we will have two employment reports and further evidence on whether we are experiencing wage and price acceleration consistent with returning PCE inflation to 2 percent in the medium term. While I’m reasonably confident that labor markets will continue to improve, particularly in light of the apparent waning of several important geopolitical concerns, I need to see more data to determine whether we are returning to our 2 percent inflation target within a reasonable horizon.  Although the oil price decline and dollar appreciation since the end of last year are likely to be attenuating, recent movements in oil prices and the exchange rate indicate that these forces may be continuing to influence pricing developments.  The Tealbook has a very gradual return to our inflation target.  I’d like to see a more rapid return, and, currently, that pace remains uncertain. My own view is that, in September, core PCE inflation may be as likely to fall further as to rise—not probabilities consistent with reasonable confidence of a return to target.  The economy is approaching a point at which the Committee will confront a difficult decision at each meeting.  If labor markets continue to improve and the wage and price data show further evidence of inflation returning to target, I could be persuaded that September was the time for liftoff.  However, I can easily imagine that wage and price data will not be improving as hoped, and that a later liftoff would be appropriate. The statement is data dependent, and I believe we should be open minded to reacting only when the data have confirmed the conditions we have set out in our statement. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 237.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 238.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B as written, and I agree with President Rosengren about the use of the word “some.”  I think it does, as Thomas explained, capture the fact that we’ve made significant progress in terms of our employment mandate. Economic conditions look increasingly favorable.  Most important, the labor market has improved steadily this year.  Although we may not be quite there yet, we are finally closing in on full employment.  And, while inflation remains low, the most recent data are consistent with a gradual return to 2 percent.  Of course, with oil prices dropping again and the dollar having edged up some, the return to 2 percent may be delayed a bit longer, but the experience over the past year confirms that those effects will be transitory.  Between now and our next meeting, a deluge of data on wages, prices, spending, and labor market conditions will be released, and this counsels a bit more patience.  But, barring any major surprises, I anticipate that it will be appropriate to raise the target funds rate at our September meeting. Looking ahead to that time, I support the overall approach taken in alternative C.  It provides a smooth transition from past statements, which focus on the conditions for liftoff, to future statements, which will focus on the likely path of policy normalization.  Again, I agree with President Rosengren.  I see this statement, maybe, as the bridge between the past and future statements in which we will be trying to describe the future policy decisions.  But this statement is a transition statement to get us from one point to the next.  But I agree with your point about the need for talking about future policy normalization. In that regard, I have two comments on how we should frame our policy decisions in this post-liftoff era, thinking ahead to the statements of the future once we’ve raised rates. First,   when we’re nipping at the heels of full employment, we’ll need to get away from language that implies that we need to see further improvement in the labor market for rate hikes.  For example, it could well be appropriate in the future to raise rates even if the labor market softens a bit between meetings, assuming I’m talking about a situation in which the unemployment rate is around 5 percent.  Instead, future statement language should focus more, I think, on the overall strength of the labor market—that is, the level, rather than the change.  I guess that’s just a sign of the success I’m foreseeing in terms of our employment mandate over the rest of this year. Second, I’m concerned about how the bracketed “balanced approach” language in paragraph 4 of alternative C could be interpreted in a rising rate environment.  Specifically, this language may pose communication risks when inflation is below target and the unemployment rate is at or below the perceived longer-run natural rate of unemployment, a scenario described by the Chair in her comments yesterday, and a characterization of my own forecast.  Basically, it’s a situation in which we are appropriately pushing unemployment below 5 percent—picking up on the comments of President Kocherlakota, too—in order to bring inflation back to 2 percent, but inflation is still too low. As noted in our consensus statement, “balanced approach” refers to situations in which we’re trading off conflicting goals.  In the circumstances I’m considering here, it’s unclear what we are balancing or trading off.  Does a low unemployment rate on its own require a restrictive policy adjustment that would delay the attainment of our 2 percent inflation objective. This issue is nicely illustrated by the Tealbook optimal control simulation using asymmetric weights on positive and negative unemployment gaps, a simulation that features a more accommodative policy stance and faster attainment of the inflation goal than implied by the standard symmetric quadratic loss function, as President Kocherlakota just mentioned.Economic theory does not provide clear guidance on this issue.  Unquestionably, the unemployment rate can be too low from an efficiency point of view.  However, the longer-run natural rate of unemployment—the unemployment rate consistent with constant inflation—can and likely does differ from the efficient, socially desirable level. In the longer run, our inflation mandate implies that this tension must be resolved in favor of the natural rate of unemployment, and our consensus statement makes that point.  But this doesn’t answer the shorter-run question of how to weigh deviations from our longer-run employment goal in our policy deliberations.  As President Kocherlakota has pointed out in previous meetings and again today, we as a Committee haven’t really discussed this issue at any length, nor have we come to any definitive conclusion. Now, to be clear, I’m not advocating a particular position on the current level of the efficient level of unemployment or the short-term natural rate of unemployment that the Chair mentioned yesterday relative to the longer-run natural rate.  I’m just highlighting an important issue in terms of framing our policy communications because of the uncertainty about how best to think about this.  Because of the high degree of uncertainty associated with the measures of full employment that we’re trying to reach, I am wary of including the “balanced approach” language in the way that is laid out in alternative C.  Astute observers will take notice and may raise sensitive and, ultimately, distracting questions about whether perceived excess employment, which President Kocherlakota says seems to be quite pleasant, is resulting in a tighter setting for monetary policy.  To avoid the potential for such an unforced error, in the parlance of tennis, I prefer the language that emphasizes “economic conditions relative to” rather than the “deviations from,” and prefer not to include the bracketed “balanced approach” language in our future statements as described in alternative C.  Thank you.CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Williams, is expressing his support for alternative B and the overall approach of alternative C. He does raise a concern about the "balanced approach" language in alternative C, but he does so without contention or disagreement.


Passage number 239.
 MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  In my view, the incoming data continue to indicate that the economy can support an increase of 25 basis points in the federal funds rate from today’s very low, essentially zero, level.  Economic growth has strengthened, the labor market has improved notably over the past year, and I expect that to continue.  Continued economic expansion and improvements in the labor market, the stability of longer-term inflation expectations, and recent stabilization in some of the inflation measures make me reasonably confident that inflation will move back to our 2 percent objective over the medium run.  I do believe we need to be data dependent.  But, barring any significant negative surprises, I believe the conditions we’ve indicated for liftoff will have been met by September.  What’s important for me today is that our statement not preclude September as an option for liftoff. Personally, I probably would have preferred that we move further toward laying the foundation for the rationale for liftoff.  As we discussed yesterday, conveying the points that monetary policy needs to be forward looking, and that our inflation models project inflation to return to 2 percent over the medium run even if the current measures of inflation are underrunning 2 percent, is going to be key to that rationale.  Nonetheless, I believe the language in alternative B keeps September alive, so I support it. I appreciate that paragraph 1 gives some indication of the longer-term gains we’ve seen in the labor market, rather than focusing solely on the developments over the intermeeting period.  In paragraph 3, I support adding the word “some” to the liftoff conditions for the labor market.  I think that’s appropriate because it acknowledges the progress we’ve seen, and I agree with Thomas’s explanation of the value of adding that word. With liftoff getting near, I believe it’s appropriate that we consider the language we’ll want to use at the time, and I’m glad the Chair has asked us to comment specifically on alternative C language.  I do think this statement will also serve as a liftoff statement. Paragraph 1 provides a longer-term perspective on economic developments, which is appropriate in our statement, not only at liftoff but also beyond.  As paragraph 3 does, it is important to remind the public that, even after this initial increase in the funds rate, policy will remain highly accommodative and supportive of the economy.  I like not only the addition of “some” to paragraph 3 in alternative B, as I’ve already said, but also the evolution of the statement in alternative C. In paragraph 4 of alternative C, I appreciate the inclusion of a language choice in this version of the statement.  I have a strong preference for saying that we’ll assess “economic conditions relative to” our objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation, rather than “deviations from,” because I think one of the issues the Committee has struggled with over the past few years is how to explain that, while we do have a numerical objective for our price-stability objective, we do not have one for our maximum-employment objective.  I believe speaking about deviations might be misconstrued as implying that we have a numerical goal, and this is the explanation that Thomas gave. My initial thought about our saying in paragraph 4 that we will take a balanced approach to pursuing objectives was that it was okay because this language is used in our Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy statement.  But I want to think about some of the issues that President Williams raised with respect to using this in this statement at this particular time.  So I need to consider that further. I agree that including language that our path is anticipated to be gradual is appropriate.  We’ve been saying that, but I also think that adding the language that it’s data dependent would be helpful.   Finally, because of the scrutiny any change to our statement gets, there will be few times when we can make significant changes to the structure of the statement without risking something being read into it.  Liftoff affords us the opportunity, because the focus is going to be solely on our action.  So this might be a time to return to the structure of making the policy decision the first paragraph of the statement, as we did before the crisis.  Or, as they say in journalism, we might take the opportunity to stop burying the lede.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While there are some specific preferences and considerations mentioned, there is no overall contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is generally supportive of the language and options presented.


Passage number 240.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support the policy decision in alternative B.  I also support the alternative B statement as presented. I see paragraph 1 as a good characterization of the state of the economy.  I like the effect of the phrase “since early this year” in the sentence on underutilization of labor resources.  I think it appropriately widens the aperture in discussing progress and conveys that the Committee is considering and giving weight to accumulated gains, and that it will not be unduly influenced by one month’s data, if they are disappointing.  I also favor the insertion of the word “some” in paragraph 3.  I hope this small change in wording will be seen as a slight foreshadowing of a possible move in September and therefore serve to prepare markets without conveying any sense that liftoff in September is a certainty. Although these messages are subtle, I think the statement positions the policy question appropriately. Regarding alternative C as a template for a liftoff statement, I can envision wording similar to that in paragraphs 1 and 2 working well at the time of liftoff.  I’ll make some small points, however, about paragraphs 3 through 5. Yesterday, I was part of the group that explicitly or implicitly argued for putting balance sheet policy in the background relative to interest rate policy.  Thomas earlier pointed out that the added sentence in paragraph 3 is intended to link the  overall stance of policy with the funds rate as the principal policy tool.  To be consistent with my remarks yesterday, I have to agree with this approach.  I’ll just point out, however, that we may not have totally wrestled to the ground the question of whether the overall stance of policy includes balance sheet policy, and therefore the added sentence might come later. In the same vein, the “balanced approach” wording in paragraph 4, which, at present, I think should stay in—I’m with President Mester in wanting to consider President Williams’s points earlier—and which used to be in the now-eliminated paragraph 6, could be made about an overall approach to setting policy that includes balance sheet policy.  So I raise these points as minor considerations.  On the bracketed choice in paragraph 4, I prefer the broader meaning of “economic conditions relative to” as opposed to the phrase “deviations from.” To summarize, I think alternative C is workable for liftoff purposes, with some consideration of structure and sequencing in paragraphs 3, 4, and 5.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you very much.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 241.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  First, let me say I share the concerns raised by President Kocherlakota.  Until wages start rising, consistent with employment being—however you want to describe it—excessively high and inflation at or above 2 percent, I think there’s a chance the natural rate is less than 5 percent.  So that’s worth watching. I support alternative B.  I don’t prefer including the qualifier “some” in paragraph 3.  I don’t believe it’s necessary, and I think the economic updates in paragraph 1 should be sufficient to capture the evolving fundamentals for our policy decision.  But, having said that, I can certainly live with including “some” in the statement. With regard to the question of whether alternative C contains the appropriate language for when the time does come to raise the target rate, I don’t have any major problems with that  statement, either.  I would prefer a couple of small changes—namely, maintaining the commentary in paragraph 2 that the Committee will be monitoring inflation developments closely.  I think that would be important.  I also would include the language in paragraph 4 regarding taking a balanced approach to our policy objectives. Of course, my comments are premised on the assumption that we actually have reasonable confidence that inflation will be getting back up to 2 percent within a reasonable period of time when we make this policy move.  I could not support the language in the alternative if we were beginning to normalize policy before we were, in fact, reasonably confident of such an outcome.  For me, I’m still skeptical that the data will support reasonable confidence in this inflation outlook by the end of the year, if then. I thought it was interesting that, in the commentary yesterday on the Phillips curve, a number of people mentioned they had—however you want to describe it—confidence or faith that the Phillips curve would reassert itself in terms of inflationary dynamics.  So I went back and revisited what the Phillips curve, as it’s usually employed in the Tealbook, looks like.  On the right side of the equation, you have a number of variables.  One of them is inflation expectations.  Another is some transitory X variables, which, in this case, are going to play the part of oil prices, energy, the dollar—that type of thing.  They’re transitory and should be waning.  Then, of course, there’s resource slack. The resource slack isn’t really contributing very much there one way or another, because we’re close to the natural rate of unemploymenr, and it’s not helping us get to 2 percent until we overshoot.  Even then, it’s not going to help us very much, because the argument itself will be very small.  For anybody who’s done empirical work, it’s just really hard to get any noticeable slope on that, so the actual effect is pretty small. People might remember times when it was larger, but, more recently, it’s very hard to get resultslike those.  So most of the heavy lifting to get us to 2 percent is going to depend on this inflation expectations term and the waning contributions of the transitory factors, the X variables. It’s certainly reasonable that the contributions of the X variables are going to wane, but then that gets us to inflation expectations. I don’t see how you get anything above 1.8 to 2 percent inflation in this kind of environment.  The Tealbook has the—whatever the term is—reference rate for longer-term inflation, which is not exactly longer-term inflation expectations, at about 1.8 percent.  I hope it’s moving up. I understand the empirical reasons why we have longer-term inflation expectations in that equation. It fits better, but the theory is really much more about a shorter-term kind of inflation expectation.  You can understand why that would provide some uplift, the so-called gravitational pull about which we all say, “If it’s moving from the two- to four-year variety of inflation up to the longer term, then that would get us up there.” It’s just really hard to see any risk of inflation being 2 percent or higher in this type of formulation, even if I have pretty good faith in the Phillips curve, unless I foresee pretty substantial overshooting on the resource side.  So I think there’s continued risk here that, when we say our objective is 2 percent, we start our normalization process, and we end up with something that looks like the Tealbook inflation projection, it’s going to be interpreted as indicating that 2 percent looks a lot like a ceiling.  I don’t believe we’re going to get above 2 percent. That’s one of the big risks that I really see with all of this. I continue to be very nervous about that.  But, having said that, I certainly support alternative B today.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Harker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 242.
 MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Although I’m not in favor of adjusting the funds rate at this meeting, both the underlying strength of the economy and my reasonably high level of confidence that inflation will return to target over the medium term incline me toward the view, conditioned on the data we will receive over the next several weeks, that September will be the correct time to lift off. I also favor a gradual path of policy firming, which I believe will be made more likely by an earlier liftoff.  In the current economic environment, a gradual tightening of policy will maintain an accommodative policy stance for some time, which is appropriate in light of what has transpired over the past eight years. While I agree that our statement language should emphasize that policy will remain data dependent, we should also recognize, to a greater degree, that economic conditions are now close to being consistent with our dual mandate.  To that end, I would suggest replacing the fourth sentence of paragraph 1 in alternative B with the fourth sentence of paragraph 1 in alternative C, and that would communicate that sentiment much better. To me, alternative C also represents reasonable statement language for when we decide to liftoff.  It emphasizes two key elements that are recognized as necessary for liftoff—the substantial progress we’ve made on the economic front and our increased confidence that inflation is returning to target. Including these key elements will send a message that the Committee believes the economy is on solid footing and will underscore the confidence the Committee has in continued good economic outcomes.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Harker is expressing his viewpoint and suggestions, but there is no indication of any disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 243.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I have no objection to alternative B today from the standpoint that its posture keeps future meetings open for a decision to raise rates.  Although liftoff is not on the table for this meeting, I could have supported it today, as economic  data received since our June meeting generally confirm that economic growth resumed after a weak first quarter, with further improvement in labor markets and low and stable inflation. Assuming no big surprises in tomorrow’s GDP release, the current expansion is the fifth longest within the 33 U.S. business cycles documented by the NBER.  Not only are policy prescriptions flashing their support of higher rates, but also the Tealbook r* measure remains more than 1 percentage point above the actual real federal funds rate.  Looking back at the past 10 years of Tealbook B and Bluebooks, this is among the most accommodative settings of policy over this period.  Perhaps some of this was warranted, as policy was constrained by the effective lower bound.  But as conditions continue to normalize and this r* measure rises, the additional accommodation provided by the current stance of policy should be factored into our liftoff decision. In terms of the suitability of alternative C for a meeting at which the Committee decides to raise the federal funds rate, I generally support the language shown, although I would keep the language focused on data dependence at that time and avoid references to deviations from our objectives. Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Ms. George expresses her support for alternative B and alternative C, without any opposing views being presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 244.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  At the April meeting, I made the case that conditions warranted higher interest rates.  That case was based on the sustained improvement in real activity we’d seen—strong consumer spending growth and labor market conditions—and the sense that forces damping inflation readings and depressing Q1 economic growth were temporary and likely to pass soon.  The forward guidance we had in place at the time, however, precluded such a move, and the economic consequences of lifting off just a meeting or two later seemed small.  That basic assessment of economic conditions didn’t change for me in June, and,in fact, the data confirmed that transitory factors were dissipating.  I thought a strong case could be made for raising rates then as well, although, again, the consequences of waiting seemed small. As data have come in consistent with our outlook, the case for raising rates has been getting even stronger, making me less and less comfortable with further delay.  Lifting off at a meeting without a prescheduled press conference would be a bit awkward, however, because markets clearly do not expect a move except under unusual circumstances, despite our statements to the contrary.  But absent a significant unexpected turn in the data between now and our September meeting, I would oppose any further delay.  For today, I can support alternative B. By softening the requirement for further labor market improvements, it prepares us for a September liftoff, which I think will be appropriate. When we do lift off in September, I believe the language in alternative C is, for the most part, appropriate.  The one exception to this is in paragraph 3, in which I would delete the last clause of the last sentence, which says “and will continue to support a strong economy.”  At best, this clause is redundant, because we begin by saying “policy remains highly accommodative.” But I actually think it’s a bit worse than redundant, because it’s unbalanced relative to our objectives.  By singling out the real side, it risks reinforcing unrealistic expectations about the real effects of monetary policy in current circumstances.  With that deletion and without a marked change in the data flow, alternative C will work well in September.  In fact, it would work well today, and it would have worked well in June, too. Finally, let me say a word about intermeeting data.  I appreciate that we are and ought to be data dependent, but I don’t think we should insist that the last smidgen of data be an uptick.  We should be mindful of the frequency with which one month’s data reflect noise rather than signal.  Madam Chair, you’ve emphasized the entire path of the federal funds rate.  That perspective suggests a focus on where economic conditions are likely to be a year or two down the road and what rate would be appropriate then, rather than the last month’s smidgen of data.  Similarly, this perspective suggests evaluating current economic conditions in the context of how far we’ve come over the past six and a half years since we reduced rates to zero.  In view of the millions of jobs the economy has added since 2009, it would seem perverse to delay liftoff if August payrolls fell short of expectations by, say, 100,000.  The intermeeting data should be broadly consistent with our assessment of economic trends, and the record that we’ve seen that’s documented those economic trends has included occasional hiccups in the data.  I think we need to be mindful of that as we approach September.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  First Vice President Holcomb.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be seen when Mr. Lacker mentions that he would oppose any further delay in raising interest rates, despite the fact that the markets do not expect a move. He also disagrees with the last clause of a particular sentence in alternative C, stating that it is redundant and unbalanced relative to their objectives.


Passage number 245.
 MS. HOLCOMB.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B, even though its language could go further in acknowledging the progress that’s been made toward meeting the criteria for liftoff. Over the past six weeks, we have had confirmation of a bounceback from the economy’s first-quarter stall, we have had a tentative resolution of some of the international uncertainty with which we were concerned, and we have had direct evidence of further progress toward full employment.  Confirmation that the economy is growing at an above-trend rate should give us increased confidence that inflation is on an upward track.  But we also have the direct evidence from the inflation rates we’ve seen since oil prices bottomed in January.  As mentioned yesterday, these include headline CPI and PCE, core CPI and PCE, and trimmed mean PCE. Our outlooks for GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation over the next year or two are more optimistic than those in the Tealbook.  Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas staff economic forecasts are closer to the June SEP central tendency than they are to the latest Tealbook baseline.  Anticipating stronger GDP growth, a lower path for the unemployment rate, and a higher path for inflation, we attach greater urgency to proceeding with policy normalization. I also think that using language like that in alternative C is appropriate to announce the start of normalization when the time comes. The changes from the draft circulated in June are all sensible and represent positive improvements.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their support for alternative B and explaining their reasoning behind it, without mentioning any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 246.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B for today, and I support the “some” language in paragraph 3.  In my opinion, the Committee is in a good position for a September liftoff, depending on the incoming data.  If we are able to make the move based on relatively good news, it will be a good day for the U.S. economy. I support the idea of starting the normalization process soon and going at a more gradual pace from there, depending on how the economy evolves.  I think we have maintained what are essentially emergency policy settings for a long time—possibly too long.  If we get into a position in which we have to move rates higher at a faster pace, the result may be considerably more volatile for financial markets and for the economy as a whole. Regardless of how monetary policy evolves during the remainder of this year, we have already committed to an exceptionally accommodative policy over the coming quarters and years.  This bet has already been made by this Committee.  In my view, President Kocherlakota will get his wish.  Under reasonable assumptions on labor force participation and the ratio of payroll employment to CPS employment, the U.S. unemployment rate will soon fall well into the 4 percent range and possibly even to 4 percent over the forecast horizon, according to staffanalysis. I also think that inflation will move toward target over the forecast horizon as temporary effects from oil and the dollar abate. If we evaluate outcomes on inflation and unemployment based on a quadratic objective, we have rarely been as close to our goals over the postwar era as we are today.  Yet policy remains at very aggressive settings, with the policy rate at zero and the balance sheet at $4.5 trillion. We would be wise to find an appropriate opportunity to carefully back off these emergency settings.  An appropriate monetary policy will have the important benefit of extending the length of the expansion by moving rates to more normal levels and hedging our bets against imbalances that might develop, as they did during the 1990s and the 2000s.  The financial wealth-to-income ratio is higher today than it was in 1999 or 2007. I have just a few comments on alternative C.  In general, I think this statement will serve us well in the event of liftoff.  In paragraph 3, if I understood President Lacker’s suggestion, I would support truncating the last sentence at “highly accommodative” and simply ending the statement there.  That was your suggestion, I believe.  That would make some sense and is something we could consider.  In paragraph 4, like President Mester, I would prefer the “economic conditions relative to” language as opposed to the “deviations from.”  Despite my nerdiness in liking “deviations” language, I think it’s too nerdy and too technical for a document of this type.  So it would be more appropriate to say “economic conditions relative to.” I also like the “balanced approach” language.  I’ve always felt as though that was excellent language to describe the Committee’s approach, but I want to further consider President Williams’s comments on this.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 247.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 248.
 WILLIAMS.  I could repeat them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 249.
  [Laughter] MR. TARULLO.  Can you give them to us. Actually, if they’re written out, President Williams—several people might feel the same way—it might be really helpful if you could distribute them rather than our having to wait for the transcript.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 250.
 MR. POWELL.  I’ll wait for the transcript.  [Laughter]  I’m sorry.  I couldn’t avoid it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Powell is making a lighthearted remark, which is met with laughter.


Passage number 251.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 252.
 WILLIAMS.  If you were sorry, you wouldn’t have said it.  [Laughter] CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Governor Powell and Williams are engaging in lighthearted banter, which is evident from the laughter in response to Williams' comment. There is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 253.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B today.  If incoming data arrive about as anticipated and the balance of risks doesn’t materially shift in a negative direction, I expect that I will continue to support a September liftoff as a reasonable course of action.  To me, the test of further improvement in the labor market seems to have been met.  Although I believe there’s still some amount of slack, labor market conditions are now certainly more than close enough to full employment to warrant liftoff.  So I would look for continued job gains and other evidence that the labor market continues to tighten.The more difficult question is clearly whether there is a basis for reasonable confidence that inflation will move back to its 2 percent objective in the medium term.  Current readings, especially headline, are well below that objective and will remain so through the end of the year.  However, that is mostly, but not entirely, due to lower oil prices and the stronger dollar, which are transitory factors that I would be inclined to look through.  Underlying core inflation is actually closer to 1.7 percent or so, not that far from our objective.  I’m reasonably confident that inflation will eventually rise toward the 2 percent objective as long as the economy and, especially, the labor market continue to tighten and as the effects of previous commodity price declines and the higher dollar recede. Of course, the recent further commodity price declines and the rise in the dollar make it quite unlikely that we will see much pickup in inflation, if any, by September. Current readings do present a significant communications challenge, and that would be a greater concern for me if I thought that inflation expectations were under serious pressure.  I do not believe so.  Survey measures are stable. Market-based readings declined with the recent declines in oil prices, but only at the short end.  Five-year, five-year-forward breakevens have been, on net, just about stable since the June meeting, and those are the ones that I would tend to look at for longer-term inflation expectations.  As our discussions about when to lift off presumably wind down, I believe it will be important that the Committee’s actions are supportive of its words—specifically, the oft-expressed view that policy will be data driven and not fall into an excessively predictable rate path. Turning to the statements, I would include the word “some,” and I would offer a slightly different reason.  I accept and support the reason that it does acknowledge progress to date.  But in a world in which we’re depending heavily—at least I am—on Phillips curve concepts forbelieving in future inflation, there’s the sense that, even though we may have already met the employment test for raising rates, continued progress in the labor market, along with continuing tightening in the economy, is one of the fundamental things that will give us reasonable confidence about the future course of inflation. I would want to see additional progress, notwithstanding that we may, in my view, have already met the employment part of the test.  So I like “some” for that additional reason. Turning to alternative C, I like the economic growth language in paragraph 3 because I do think, again, economic growth is important for inflation.  If there were a risk of overshooting on inflation or something along those lines, then I would be concerned about too much emphasis on that part of the mandate.  But I don’t see that issue here. In paragraph 4, I prefer the “economic conditions” language to the “deviations” language.  I’m not sure why we need the “balanced approach” language, as there’s a sense that putting in that language implies that there’s some tension between the objectives.  I don’t see that tension here.  So I, too, will review President Williams’s language and want to think further about that.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 254.
 MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I can support alternative B.  The labor market has continued to improve, and I expect to see further progress toward full employment before liftoff begins.  By contrast, inflation has remained notably below our target, with no concrete progress that we can point to.  Furthermore, currently low measures of underlying inflation, subdued wage growth, the limited effect of higher resource utilization on wages thus far in the recovery, and some hints that inflation expectations have moved lower suggest that the movement of inflation toward our target as resource utilization tightens could be quite slow, with risks tilted to the downside.  Together, these conditions do not currently make me reasonably confident that inflation will return to its 2 percent target over the medium term. Let me turn to the important question of whether the improvement in the labor market and the inflation outlook will be sufficient by our next meeting, or is likely to be sufficient, to warrant the commencement of tightening. By the September meeting, we will have received employment reports for July and August, an ECI reading for the second quarter, and second-quarter compensation per hour data as well as revisions to GDP, productivity, and compensation over the past three years.  These will be very important in thinking about labor market conditions and the future trajectory of economic activity. If employment growth increases strongly, slack declines noticeably, nominal wage growth shows more consistent signs of firming, and the economic outlook is favorable, I believe that the labor market will have improved enough for liftoff to occur, but only if inflation also looks set to rise to 2 percent. It’s certainly possible, although it seems less likely, that we will receive data by September that would give me reasonable confidence that inflation will rise to 2 percent over the medium term. On the first day of our September meetings, we’ll receive the CPI for August, and, of course, we’ll already have in hand the July CPI.  We’ll have also received another Michigan survey of inflation expectations for August and a preliminary reading for September as well as another month and a half of data on market-based inflation expectations.  If the staff inflation forecast is correct—and it’s been relatively accurate of late—the most recent estimate of the 12-month change in the core PCE price index will be 1.3 percent at the time of our meeting, the same as the average rate of core inflation over the past three years. If survey- and market-based measures of inflation expectations also remain near their current levels, it would be difficult to justify that our confidence had increased sufficiently to meet the reasonableness test.   Instead, justification would have to come from the strength of the labor market and the belief that this strength will soon show through to inflation with sufficient force to boost inflation to 2 percent over the next two years. Whether labor market developments by September can, by themselves, justify reasonable confidence, which is the underlying premise of the description of economic conditions in alternative C, is a question I will be wrestling with over the next month and a half. Moreover, there remains a fair risk of continuing downward pressure on inflation from dollar appreciation and falling commodity prices, based on the foreign economic outlook.  China is slowing to an unknown degree and appears to be exerting a material influence globally on both commodity prices and the economic growth prospects of commodity exporters.  Economic difficulties in important emerging markets, such as Brazil and Russia, seem likely to continue for some time, and any contribution of Europe to global demand is likely to be quite limited.  When the contrast crystallizes between a United States starting on a tightening path and foreign economies in which monetary accommodation is likely to continue, the risk of additional dollar appreciation may well increase. I’ve heard the case made to lift off in September and then stay on hold for some time.  The risk with that strategy is that markets will surely put great weight on any action we take, but perhaps less on an expected path that is subject to a great deal more questions of interpretation and uncertainty, as I think President Kocherlakota noted earlier.  I do believe September should remain a live option.  But, based on the reading of the data we have available today, along with the additional data that will be available to us at the September, October, and December meetings, as against the substantial uncertainty around the degree of tightening we could seethrough the markets, it would make me want to maintain optionality around December from a risk-management perspective. In that regard, it’s important to address the questions that have arisen about whether we need to view September as the last viable option to move this year.  I find it hard to accept that logic, although, of course, I think it’s important to be mindful of possible end-of-year market dynamics and possible risks around the debt limit.  Nonetheless, I believe we have the tools and the capacity to manage those risks. In short, I would favor liftoff in September only if both inflation and labor market conditions make it compelling, and I’d like to maintain optionality on December.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you very much.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. MS. BRAINARD is simply stating her opinion and reasoning behind her support for alternative B and her preference for maintaining optionality around December.


Passage number 255.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B.  It would be wonderful if the data were sufficiently definitive that we could confidently signal that we’re highly likely to lift off at the next meeting.  That would finally end the suspense. Unfortunately, I don’t think that’s the case.  The growth momentum of the economy is not particularly strong, and inflation remains below our objectives. Most important, relatively small differences in economic growth, productivity, and employment growth have quite important implications for the trajectory of the unemployment rate and the amount of labor slack in the economy, and that then feeds into the appropriate timing of liftoff.  So I, for one, remain very much data dependent in terms of my own thinking about September.  I can imagine scenarios in which it would be easy for me to support liftoff in September, scenarios in which I couldn’t support liftoff, and some in-between ones in which I would have to reflect very carefully about whether it made sense to wait longer.  The key for me will be the state of the labor market, the degree of forward momentum in the economy, and thedegree of downside risk to the economic outlook.  If the risk of a quick return to the effective lower bound were to diminish, that would also influence my thinking. I’m also going to put some weight at the margin on the fact that September does have better characteristics, compared with December, in terms of the timing of the initial liftoff. People will be around after the September meeting.  Markets will be deeper.  In my view, in September, there will be less risk of a messy start to the normalization process compared with December.  I think that’s important because that potentially could affect our credibility in the liftoff process. In terms of alternative B, I think it keeps our options open.  It says we’re making progress toward our objectives, but not so much that we’re highly confident that the conditions will be in place to begin to normalize at the next meeting.  In terms of language, I think the word “some” sends the right message. We’ve made some progress in terms of the labor market, but we’re not quite there yet, and I think market participants will interpret it in the correct way. In terms of alternative C serving as a template for what the statement should look like at liftoff, I’m broadly supportive.  In paragraph 4, I prefer the “economic conditions relative to” phrase compared with the more wonky “deviations from.”  I also think the first sentence of paragraph 3 could be shortened quite a bit. It really reiterates a lot of the thoughts that are in paragraph 2—the “objective of maximum employment” and the expectation that “inflation will rise, over the medium term, to its 2 percent objective.” So I’d like to at least put on the table for consideration something much shorter.  We could just say “our dual-mandate objectives” and shorten that first part of that sentence down significantly.  People know what our dual-mandate objectives are; we’ve said it in paragraph 2.  So I’m not really sure we need to repeat it all in what is a five-line sentence right now.  It’s really quite a run-on type of sentence. In terms of the “balanced approach,” I’m sympathetic with President Williams.  It could be misinterpreted because sometimes our objectives don’t conflict. What does a balanced approach mean in that context. I guess I need to be convinced about what it adds to the statement to feel that it should be in the statement. So I’m slightly leaning against it on that point, but I’d like to see President Williams’s remarks, too.  I’ll take them before the transcript. Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Thanks for a very good discussion of the policy issues that we face.  I heard a couple of suggestions in the go-round for changes but, on balance, quite broad-based support for alternative B as written.  So let me propose that we vote on alternative B as written. Matt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. The speaker expresses their support for alternative B and discusses their thoughts on the timing of liftoff and the language used in the statement. They also mention their leaning against the inclusion of the phrase "balanced approach," but express a willingness to hear President Williams's remarks before making a final decision. Overall, the passage reflects the speaker's personal opinions and considerations rather than a disagreement with others in the discussion.


Passage number 256.
 MR. LUECKE.  Yes. The vote will be on the statement language from alternative B, shown on pages 6 and 7 of Thomas’s handout, and on the directive on page 11 of that handout. Chair Yellen Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes Governor Brainard Yes President Evans Yes Governor Fischer Yes President Lacker Yes President Lockhart Yes Governor Powell Yes Governor Tarullo Yes President Williams Yes CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you all very much.  Now, before we break up, there are a couple of things.  First, the topic of looking at our long-run framework came up yesterday, and I indicated that I wanted to make a couple of comments about that.  So if you don’t mind, I have some brief comments. I definitely think it’s appropriate for us to begin to evaluate the issues that are going to bear on our decisions concerning a long-run implementation framework, in spite of the fact that,  under our baseline outlook, it’s going to be a number of years before we need to make any final decisions.  And I believe we’ve all agreed that we’re going to be learning a great deal about the efficacy of our various policy tools during the normalization process.  But because I think we want to get a head start on this, I’ve asked Thomas and Simon to organize a System effort that will examine a number of important issues. Now, we had quite a lot of previous staff work on this topic.  It was presented to the Committee in 2008, and that provides a solid foundation for the work ahead.  As some of you may recall, the 2008 work focused largely on alternative systems that could be used to target the federal funds rate. I’d expect that the basic issues of what rate we should target and how we should employ our policy tools in doing so will be a key part of the current effort as well.  But as we were discussing yesterday, there are a number of developments since 2008 that I think warrant additional study.  An important one is, I do believe it’s appropriate for us to consider how robust any monetary policy implementation framework is to future adverse shocks that could result in a return to the zero lower bound.  In addition, regulatory and other structural developments since 2008 may be affecting financial institutions and markets in ways that could influence our choice of implementation framework.  In light of our experience of conducting large-scale asset purchases over recent years, we need to give some thought to the long-run structure of our assets and liabilities that best supports our macroeconomic and financial-stability objectives. I think we should aim to benefit as much as we possibly can from the expertise and the insights of staff members across the Federal Reserve System.  On top of that, it may be appropriate to solicit input from academics and others on a number of the broader issues. Certainly, we will also want to consult with experts at other central banks, many of whom have confronted or will be confronting similar questions. Assuming that the Committee is comfortable with initiating a System effort on this set of topics, I’ve asked Thomas and Simon to send a letter soon to all research directors with some additional information on the proposed scope, organization, and timeline of this project.  We would hope to identity over the summer the membership of some of the core working groups that we intend to put together, and we’re thinking tentatively that this is a project that might well run through the end of next year.  I expect that the System groups exploring these topics will be reporting back to the Committee on a periodic basis, and there will be many opportunities for input by FOMC participants throughout this effort.  So I’d be happy to take questions, and Thomas and Simon would as well, if there are any at this stage.  But our plan is to provide additional details shortly to the research directors. Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing the initiation of a System effort to evaluate issues related to a long-run implementation framework for monetary policy. There is no contention or disagreement among the individuals mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 257.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I’m very much supportive of this.  Not to do this would be, I think, a dereliction of duty.  We’re at a particular point here of starting from a very different regime, with a different balance sheet and a different regulatory environment.  So I would encourage the staff and everyone around the table to be very open minded in their view and to look at this issue broadly, without any prejudgment about what we should go to, because there are many things that we’re going to have to balance here.  There’s going to be a lot of learning that we’re going to have to do as we go through the normalization process and see how some of these new tools, in fact, actually work.  So my advice is to look broadly and be open minded, because I believe we should really view this as an opportunity to think about what regime we want to have in place 5 or 10 years from now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing support and encouraging open-mindedness in considering options for the future.


Passage number 258.
 MR. FISCHER.  Madam Chair.  CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fischer is addressing Chair Yellen respectfully.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 259.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thanks.  I also strongly support this initiative.  I just want to get some more defined idea of what will be included.  There’s everything that happens around this table.  Is that part of the framework that you want examined. CHAIR YELLEN.  When you say “everything that happens”—we’re thinking about the operating framework.  When you say “around this table,” do you mean our decisionmaking framework.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fischer indicates support for the initiative but requests clarification on what will be included. Chair Yellen then seeks further clarification on what Mr. Fischer means by "everything that happens" and "around this table."


Passage number 260.
 MR. FISCHER.  Yes. CHAIR YELLEN.  No, it’s not about our decisionmaking framework.  It’s about execution and our operating strategy for monetary policy.  I’m assuming we’re going to stick with the “tried and true” for decisionmaking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The conversation is about the execution and operating strategy for monetary policy, with the assumption that they will stick with the "tried and true" decisionmaking framework.


Passage number 261.
 MR. FISCHER. Okay.  Well, “tried,” anyway.  [Laughter] CHAIR YELLEN.  Or “tried and whatever”—longtime methods for running the Committee.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speakers are engaging in light-hearted banter and there is no indication of a serious disagreement or argument.


Passage number 262.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Thank you, Madam Chair.  I think this is great.  I’m very appreciative of you and the staff for launching this effort.  I’ll commend especially the openness to seeking input from outside constituencies like academics and other central banks.  That could be incredibly informative for this very complicated problem that the Vice Chairman just outlined.  Thanks. CHAIR YELLEN.  Great, thanks. President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Mr. Kocherlakota and Chair Yellen express appreciation and agreement with the efforts being made.


Passage number 263.
 MR. LACKER.  I, too, commend the effort.  I can’t fault making a systematic study of this.  Communication is going to be key.  If we’re going to go outside, I think we want a communications strategy concerning what this is about that’s pretty robust so that it’s not just  dribbling out.  In that regard, a tricky issue is that it was less than a year ago that we adopted a normalization plan.  I take it from what you’re saying that what balance sheet we’re headed to might be on the table.  Is this intended to reopen some of those issues. CHAIR YELLEN.  I think what we said at the time was, the smallest balance sheet consistent with an efficient and effective conduct of monetary policy, and primarily Treasury securities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing support and agreement with the idea of conducting a systematic study and implementing a robust communication strategy. They simply ask for clarification on whether the issues discussed would reopen previous discussions on the balance sheet.


Passage number 264.
 MR. POTTER.  That is a constraint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "That is a constraint" does not indicate contention or disagreement. It is a statement acknowledging or confirming the previous assertion made by someone else.


Passage number 265.
 MR. LACKER. All right. So you don’t view this as reopening that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification on the other person's viewpoint.


Passage number 266.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. No, I don’t think so. CHAIR YELLEN.  I wasn’t thinking of reopening that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their opinion and the other person responds without any disagreement.


