Passage number 1.
 MR. FISCHER.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Without objection.  And now, let me call on Simon to deliver the Desk report.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply involves the chairperson acknowledging a motion and calling on someone to deliver a report.


Passage number 2.
 MR. ROSENGREN. Your chart 18 on the SOMA Treasury security maturities is interesting.  And so, your philosophy on duration as more and more of these securities are coming due—what is the conscious decision for the duration we’re aiming at for the overall SOMA portfolio. Is there a target that we’re hitting.  We haven’t had much of a discussion of the duration of our portfolio, and I’m wondering whether at some point it might be worthwhile discussing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question asking for information and potentially suggesting a future discussion.


Passage number 3.
 MR. POTTER. When we do rollovers, it really depends on Treasury issuance. We roll over into everything they issue except bills.  So we would be adding securities to the portfolio of between 60 and 70 months, depending on what Treasury does.  They might move up above 70, depending on how they assess their split between bills and notes and other issues that they have. But at the point when we’re reinvesting, we are not actively targeting any duration limit from the Desk.  We’re basically just accepting what the Treasury puts out in terms of its duration.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining the process of rollovers and the factors that determine the duration of the securities added to the portfolio.


Passage number 4.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  So the debt management strategy of the Treasury is determining the duration of our portfolio going forward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no explicit contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of fact about the role of the debt management strategy of the Treasury in determining the duration of the portfolio going forward.


Passage number 5.
 MR. POTTER.  No, it’s determining the duration of what we reinvest in.  Because we have a very large amount of Treasuries right now, it won’t have a material effect on the duration of the portfolio in 2016, if we continue doing reinvestments.  Remember that what we are reinvesting has also got zero duration at that point.  So reinvestment will then move up the duration in a mechanical sense, but it’s not as if that’s going to affect the previous thought that we had of holding long-duration assets.  That is still there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply provides an explanation and clarification of the impact of reinvestments on the duration of the portfolio.


Passage number 6.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions for Simon. President Dudley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is simply a conversation between Mr. Rosengren and Chair Yellen, with Chair Yellen asking if there are any further questions for Simon (President Dudley).


Passage number 7.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I just want to clarify.  On panel 17, the Treasury increases its cash balance and that increases the supply of risk-free assets and reduces the demand for overnight RRP.  If the debt limit becomes binding, then Treasury would draw down its cash balance.  And so the demand for our overnight RRP could go up at that point in time.  Is that a reasonable inference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is simply seeking clarification and asking if the given inference is reasonable.


Passage number 8.
 MR. POTTER.  I think there is definitely that direct effect.  And we know that, if this was happening in 2016, there are lots of other changes in money markets.  There’s another issue that we haven’t really faced yet.  Treasury bills are viewed as very safe assets, and there’s only one exception to that:  when Congress and the Treasury can’t really agree on whether to raise thedebt limit.  And then you could see other events happen.  We saw this in 2013—a little bit of aversion to Treasury bills that would mature in the so-called red zone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting information on the direct effect and other changes in money markets, as well as addressing a potential issue related to Treasury bills.


Passage number 9.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. And the overnight RRP might be more attractive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply suggests that the overnight RRP might be more attractive.


Passage number 10.
 MR. POTTER.  It’s possible.  Again, if you look at the holders of Treasury bills, a large amount of the holders are foreign central banks.  So it would depend on their behavior.  They also have the foreign pool as another option at that point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker is stating a fact about the holders of Treasury bills and their behavior. There is no contention or disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 11.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. What I’m trying to drive at is, it seems like it creates a little bit more uncertainty about what the demand for the overnight RRP would be as you go through this period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is simply expressing a subjective opinion or observation without any explicit indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 12.
 MR. POTTER.  There is definitely uncertainty on the operations side for us, always, when the debt limit comes up.  I think the larger uncertainty is going through the debt limit again and what that does for views of U.S. policymaking and the Treasury market in general.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the uncertainty and potential consequences related to the debt limit.


Passage number 13.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Sure, okay.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions for Simon. [No response]  Seeing none, let me just mention that Simon has offered a plan for moving to a calculation of the federal funds rate from the new FR 2420 data collection and simultaneously implementing this new volume-weighted median to calculate the federal funds rate.  I just want to ask around the room whether people are comfortable with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York moving ahead with this plan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply includes a mention of a plan proposed by Simon and asks if people are comfortable with it.


Passage number 14.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not provide any information that indicates contention or disagreement.


Passage number 15.
 WILLIAMS.  Do you want us to raise our hands. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes.  Raise your hands if you’re comfortable.  Okay, great.  Anybody uncomfortable for any reason and want to comment.  [No response]  Okay, very good. For our next topic, let me call on Susan McLaughlin, who is going to discuss the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s counterparty framework review.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The exchange between Williams and Chair Yellen is a simple question and affirmation of raising hands, and there is no response indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 16.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  If we broadened the eligibility requirements, there is a presumption that there would be more primary dealers.  But that implies that someone actually would want to take advantage of it.  So what do we know about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It simply raises a question and asks for information about the topic.


Passage number 17.
 MS. McLAUGHLIN. That’s true. We’ve actually just gotten some data in the past couple of days from the SEC on broker-dealers that we are going to be looking at to try to identify which broker-dealers are actually participants in the Treasury market.  We probably can’t predict who wants to step forward, and we know that some firms in the past who were eligible did not.  But we’ll at least be able to dimension a bit more what a given reduction in the capital requirement, for example, might entail in terms of potential additional counterparties. CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions or comments.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 18.
 MR. POWELL.  Susan, when you say that there may be an evolution in Treasury market structure in a direction that would suggest we need more primary dealers, what are you really thinking about there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Powell is simply asking Susan to clarify her thoughts on the potential evolution of Treasury market structure.


Passage number 19.
 MS. McLAUGHLIN. There could be a number of ways that the markets could evolve.  One could be that large firms are paring back their market-making activity, and smaller firms come in and pick up some of that activity.  It could be that different types of firms beyond the traditional bank and broker-dealer realm we deal with come into the market and do more market making.  I think there are a range of potential outcomes that we could see, and depending on the way that the market could evolve, that would have implications for what we might need to do to adapt our counterparty framework.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Although the passage discusses different possibilities for how the markets could evolve, there is no clear contention or disagreement presented. It is simply a statement of different potential outcomes.


Passage number 20.
 MR. POTTER.  I think one way of trying to think about this is that we’ve been very reactive in the past.  And because of the way trading happens and the end-to-end processing we would like to put in place, we need to plan more in advance for changes and have more flexibility. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Potter is suggesting a new approach, and Chair Yellen responds by acknowledging the need for more advance planning and flexibility. Both statements align with each other.


Passage number 21.
 MR. LACKER.  I have two questions.  Where did the $150 million dollar capital requirement come from.  And just how does that relate to our exposure to them.  How well is it grounded in what we actually need by way of assurance for the transaction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of two questions being asked by Mr. Lacker for clarification on the $150 million dollar capital requirement and how it relates to their exposure and assurance for the transaction.


Passage number 22.
 MS. McLAUGHLIN. The $150 million requirement that we currently have was put in place in early 2010.  And I think it was, to be frank, a result of negotiation and experience with the existing set of firms that we were dealing with. We don’t really view that necessarily as a credit-risk mitigant for counterparties, it’s really more a sign of the development of a firm and the capabilities that it has to operate internal compliance, risk management, et cetera. So I think the exposures that we can have to dealers on a given day are very large relative to that capital.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining the current requirement and their perspective on it.


Passage number 23.
 MR. POTTER.  That’s true.  I think that, if I remember correctly, it was looking at the 30-year Treasury, which has the most price variation in it.  And, really, there’s a replacement cost in the operations, and we’ve been thinking through what that would mean for us.  I think if you look at the history of the primary dealers, there’s always been a feeling that we want some level of capital, and that links into market presence and their ability to execute well for us. I think one of the things we’d like to do is come back and have more detail about some of the risk tolerance there.  And I think, back in 2010—this might not have been prominent in people’s minds, but—the risk tolerance really belongs to the people around this table.  So giving me some clarity as to what we’re willing to accept would be helpful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their thoughts and seeking more information on risk tolerance.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 24.
   MR. LACKER. This connects to this issue you alluded to in the memo in which there’s this sort of imprimatur, but we’re not explicitly examining for the type of maturity and risk-management capabilities you’re talking about.  And there was a time—I think it was in the ’90s, the memo said—when a dealer failed, and we said, “Well, no, it’s not our responsibility to check on their safety and soundness.”  But what you’re telling me is, we really do care.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker is expressing that there was a time when the responsibility to check on the safety and soundness of a dealer did not lie with their institution, but the speaker is suggesting that they do care about the maturity and risk-management capabilities now.


Passage number 25.
 MS. McLAUGHLIN. We do care.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The statement "We do care" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker and possibly others have concern or care about something.


Passage number 26.
 MR. LACKER.  But we don’t want to look as if we’re responsible and we’re actually doing due diligence.  That seems like a really uncomfortable spot.  We either need to be in or out on this, it seems to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, is expressing his concern about appearing responsible while not actually conducting proper due diligence. He emphasizes the need for a clear decision to be made, suggesting a rather uncomfortable position to be in without clear direction. However, there is no explicit disagreement or clash of opposing views present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 27.
 MR. POTTER.  I think we will be coming back to you to try and hone that down.  There is some tension between the role of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York as a direct counterparty and what you might want the risk tolerance to be.  But any way we can make clear that we’re not there in a supervisory role or a safety-and-soundness role would be great. Again, if you look at the history that we produced, this has been a constant tension, because the mere fact that we’re the counterparty and we have to do some due diligence because these are counterparties in a business relationship, but at the same time we’re a central bank with supervisory policies—it’s very hard to separate that, both in the mind of the public and in the mind of the firms that we deal with.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: There is a clear disagreement or tension described in the passage between the role of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York as a direct counterparty and what the speaker would like the risk tolerance to be. The speaker acknowledges that there has been a constant tension in the past because of the difficulty in separating the central bank's role as a counterparty and its supervisory responsibilities.


Passage number 28.
 MR. LACKER.  What do you mean.  What do we need to separate. Safety and soundness is analogous to counterparty risk evaluation. It’s a similar activity.  Why do we have to separate that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. This is a question posed by Mr. Lacker, seeking clarification on why safety and soundness need to be separated. The speaker is providing an explanation and drawing an analogy between safety and soundness and counterparty risk evaluation. However, the passage does not indicate any disagreement or conflicting viewpoints between the two individuals.


Passage number 29.
 MR. POTTER. Can you explain that a little bit more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Potter is simply asking for further clarification or elaboration on a particular topic.


Passage number 30.
   MR. LACKER.  Well, they’re the same things.  We’re checking on their capability in managing risk.  So I don’t see why we have to separate them.  I think we’re on the same page here.  We need to really evaluate what we need to do, and if we need to do the due diligence, then maybe you should evaluate what that would involve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker is expressing agreement and understanding with the other person on the topic of evaluating and managing risk.


Passage number 31.
 MR. POTTER. Yes. But, just to be clear, the Desk does not check the safety and soundness of our counterparties in the way a supervisor would.  We’re looking at them as a business counterparty, which is a very different thing.  I think safety and soundness is what we expect the supervisors to do.  We want our counterparties to deliver on the operations that we have with them in an efficient way. And that’s it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply explaining that the Desk does not evaluate the safety and soundness of their counterparties in the same way that a supervisor would. They focus on the efficiency of the business relationship with their counterparties.


Passage number 32.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay. But that’s a certain level of due diligence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a simple statement acknowledging the completion of a certain level of due diligence.


Passage number 33.
 MR. POTTER.  It is, but it’s a business due diligence, just as any private counterparty would do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the business due diligence being discussed is similar to what any private counterparty would do.


Passage number 34.
 MR. LACKER.  I have another question, Madam Chair.  When you’re a primary dealer, you agree to participate pro rata in Treasury auctions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a question being asked by Mr. Lacker regarding the participation of primary dealers in Treasury auctions.


Passage number 35.
 MS. McLAUGHLIN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 36.
 MR. LACKER. Does it seem attractive to give thought in this process to separating the qualifications for being a counterparty to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in the SOMA from being a Treasury counterparty—because that requirement could be an impediment, conceivably, to broadening the pool.  And I’ll just generally say, I think broadening the pool of participants makes sense.  I think it would help push back against this unfortunate notion out there that we have a cozy club of counterparties. But what would it be like to separate that out and say, “All right, for us, you don’t need this pro rata thing, but to be a Treasury auction participant, you need this pro rata thing, and that’s a separate category”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply poses a question and expresses the speaker's opinion on the matter.


Passage number 37.
 MS. McLAUGHLIN.  I think that’s actually an issue that we talked a lot about early in the review. Why should this role as fiscal agent bind.  I think in the past they’ve worked together because the firms that were particularly desirable for the Treasury as auction participants were also particularly desirable for us.  As you say, that could diverge a bit in the future depending on what happens with respect to market structure. I think, though, we have this role as fiscal agent. We’ve got a very clear indication from the Treasury that they would like us to continue to play this role for them.  We have a lot of expertise on capital markets, we have these relationships with primary dealers, and we have a well-developed infrastructure that’s been built up over a long time that I think would be very costly for them to replicate.  And I think that’s just probably one of many reasons why they have indicated strongly to us that they like to have us continue to play this role.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their view that the Federal Reserve should continue to play the role of fiscal agent for the Treasury, based on the benefits and expertise they bring.


Passage number 38.
 MR. LACKER.  I wasn’t envisioning that we would change that. It’s just that the primary dealers are this group, and then there’s some special subset—we don’t make all of our primary dealers do pro rata bids in the Treasury auction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that the speaker did not envision changing a certain practice, but there is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 39.
 MS. McLAUGHLIN. Yes. We did actually discuss some of these ideas early in the review—for instance, could you have different tiers of membership.  That might be possible in the future.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Ms. McLaughlin simply confirms that they discussed the possibility of having different tiers of membership in the future.


Passage number 40.
  We didn’t feel that this was the right time to go there, but I think it’s something that we do want to— MR. LACKER.  Why.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers express agreement in their desire to go somewhere, but indicate that they don't feel it is the right time to do so.


Passage number 41.
 MS. McLAUGHLIN.  Well, just because we don’t feel yet that we need to branch out well beyond the broker-dealer and bank community that we already deal with.  I think there’s more scope first to bring more of those firms in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Ms. McLaughlin is expressing her opinion that they don't feel the need to expand beyond the broker-dealer and bank community they already deal with. There is no opposing viewpoint mentioned or indicated.


Passage number 42.
MR. POTTER. We ran two pilots with smaller firms, and we looked at the performance of those smaller firms. Based on the performance, we would have to scale up with thousands of firms—the systems cost and the people cost is really high.  I think Susan tried to make clear in the memo that we have to look at the marginal cost of adding counterparties versus the marginal benefit, and what we found is that these large market makers are really efficient for some of the things that we need to do. We found that in the case of MBS.  There’s a footnote on the ECB, which has 2,000 counterparties, of which 350 are regulars in their temporary open market operations.  They’re basically utilizing 60, but really only 20 to do their permanent open market operations right now.  So we’re learning. What I think is—and this goes to Governor Powell’s question—there is a lot of change in the industry right now, and we just need to be flexible, which is why in 2017 we’ll be revisiting some of these issues.  And we’re happy to give you more information on what we thought about the tiering as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting information and acknowledging that there is ongoing change in the industry.


Passage number 43.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay.  You don’t see an obvious impediment to that, other than maybe the Treasury’s objection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking whether there is any obvious obstacle to a certain course of action.


Passage number 44.
 MR. POTTER.  There are many systems and technology and cost impediments relative to the marginal benefit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 45.
 MR. LACKER.  Oh, no, I’m not talking about broadening the pool, per se.  I’m talking about the two tiers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, is expressing a different perspective or opinion than what was previously mentioned.


Passage number 46.
 MR. POTTER. Again, we should be careful.  We have a pretty important public interest in the Treasury market of the United States, and we wouldn’t like to undermine the ability of the Treasury to issue debt at the lowest cost to U.S. taxpayers. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Potter expresses caution and highlights the importance of the Treasury market, while Chair Yellen acknowledges and agrees with his point.


Passage number 47.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The staff asked for reactions to some of the questions they posed.  I would think it would be useful to have further conversation and discussion about both of these topics.  In terms of the first issue about revising eligibility requirements, I welcome what some refer to as trying to be more strategic about the deliberation: What exactly are the risks, and what are we trying to achieve through the program.  The more we can elevate it to that level, I think the more helpful our discussion within the Committee will be, so I encourage the staff to do what they can to help the Committee to get to that level. The same on the transparency front.  Madam Chair, both you and your predecessor have fostered transparency within this Committee.  So an immediate reaction from somebody who participates in these meetings is that, well, we should be transparent.  So, again, I think trying to think about the costs and the benefits—how those changes fit into a more overarching strategic framework, into what we’re trying to accomplish—would be useful.  But it would certainly be useful to have further conversation and discussion about these issues.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Kocherlakota, is expressing agreement and support for further discussion on revising eligibility requirements and improving transparency within the committee.


Passage number 48.
 MS. GEORGE.  I just wanted to add that I support continuing to look at this, including the longer-run issues around these counterparties.  Disclosing the FX counterparties by name, I think, is one step, but I assume you’ve also thought about talking about our procedures for how we select them—so it would be similar to how we treat domestic operations when we describe the selection procedures.  Just listing the names could reinforce this idea that we only deal with a narrow set of players, as opposed to describing the process and procedure more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. GEORGE is expressing support for continuing to look at the issue and suggests disclosing the FX counterparties by name and describing the selection procedures to provide a more comprehensive understanding.


Passage number 49.
 MS. McLAUGHLIN. One thing that we didn’t dwell on as much in the memo, another element of transparency, is that we do have counterparty policies on the website for all of our  OMO counterparties and also currently for FX.  We’re updating that, and we’re also planning to publish one for the foreign reserves management counterparties as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 50.
 MS. GEORGE. I think that would be important. Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. George expresses agreement with the statement made by Chair Yellen, indicating that she thinks it would be important.


Passage number 51.
 MS. BRAINARD.  I want to also support the proposal on transparency.  I don’t see, actually, the costs, and I think the benefits are innumerable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Brainard, expresses support for the proposal on transparency and states that she does not see the costs but believes the benefits are countless.


Passage number 52.
 MR. POTTER.  So, if I gave you the names of these FX counterparties, they’d line up pretty well with a legal action that the Board and the U.S.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement made by Mr. Potter and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 53.
 Department of Justice just took, so there is some— MS. BRAINARD.  I understand that. But the flip side of that is, they are our counterparties currently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is just a statement and understanding of a situation.


Passage number 54.
 MR. POTTER.  That’s right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement of agreement.


Passage number 55.
 MS. BRAINARD.  So we’re not actually changing our interactions with them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker's interactions with others are not being changed.


Passage number 56.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes, exactly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 57.
 MS. BRAINARD. All we’re doing is disclosing to the public the reality, which seems wise to me. CHAIR YELLEN.  Other comments. [No response]  Okay.  Thank you very much.  Before we move to the economic go-round, I need a motion to ratify domestic open market operations since our April meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speakers are discussing the disclosure of information and there are no opposing opinions or conflicting arguments presented.


Passage number 58.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Without objection.  And let me say that our Board meeting has now concluded.  Okay, let’s go to the economic briefings now.  Glenn Follette is going to start us off on the chart show.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The participants are simply discussing the conclusion of a board meeting and transitioning to the next topic of discussion.


Passage number 59.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I thought this was a very rich presentation.  I thank the staff for all the elements of it. I had two quick questions.  One is on figure 5 in exhibit 2 of the “Economic and Financial Situation” presentation.  It’s the exhibit   labeled “Medium Term Outlook” on page 2 of 8, and figure 5 is a wealth-to-income ratio picture.  Have you looked at doing that using medians—using the Survey of Consumer Finances, or something like that, to get a median for a wealth-to-income picture.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker compliments the presentation and asks a question about a specific figure.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 60.
 MR. FOLLETTE.  To look at how the distribution of wealth-to-income is moving.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "To look at how the distribution of wealth-to-income is moving" suggests that there is different or conflicting opinions about the direction or trend of the distribution of wealth-to-income.


Passage number 61.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  To give a little context to my question, I hear persistent and consistent reports from our directors that they’re observing signs of a two-track recovery.  And if that’s what’s going on—if we see growth in inequality that’s large during this recovery period—we might want to be looking at other moments of the distribution of wealth besides simply the mean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing context for their question and mentioning reports they have heard.


Passage number 62.
 MR. FOLLETTE.  Right. It is possible to get some breakdown of wealth by groups—for example, if we use the data from the Survey of Consumer Finances.  The question is whether that wealth distribution is becoming much more concentrated over this time period and whether the MPCs are very different across groups.  And I’m not sure of the answer to either of those questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing uncertainty about the answers to the questions mentioned.


Passage number 63.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I think it would be informative to look at something like the median wealth-to-income ratio or maybe even the median net-worth-to-income ratio to see if we see the same kind of recovery in that as this seems to depict. My other question actually goes all the way to something Simon said, which is about the kind of reversals we’ve seen in German bund yields and the effect of that on broader economic conditions in Europe.  At least for me, the rise of bund yields was very outsized compared with what I would have expected, even in light of the improvement that we’ve seen in the European economy.  Given that, I would think that that might lead to a drag on European economic performance.  Are we seeing anything like that. Is that likely to happen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for more information and clarification.


Passage number 64.
MS. WILSON. We have it built in. We don’t have anything currently, since it just happened, but we have built in a slight drag to our euro-area forecast coming from the tightening of financial conditions.  When we looked at the underlying factors that might explain the large downward movement in bund prices, we could not explain much of the downward movement with these underlying factors.  So, on the move down, we didn’t completely incorporate that into our forecast. We moved slightly in that direction, and now we’ve moved slightly the other way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about the forecasting process and adjustments made in response to changes in financial conditions. There is no conflicting opinion or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 65.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thanks. CHAIR YELLEN.  Additional questions.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 66.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I have a question about the staff’s view on productivity growth.  We’ve had these very bad draws on productivity growth, and you’ve talked about how you expect it to return to its trend rate.  What’s the staff’s underlying story about what we’re seeing. Is it mismeasured GDP.  Is it less capital deepening.  Is it that we just don’t understand it.  Are there competing theories about why we’re seeing such lousy productivity numbers.  And how does that influence how we should think about the outlook.  Which weight do you put on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking about the staff's view on productivity growth and mentions different possible explanations for the "bad draws on productivity growth." This suggests that there may be competing theories or differing opinions about the reasons behind the low productivity numbers.


Passage number 67.
 MR. FOLLETTE. Just as a little background to that, over the forecast period—2015 to 2017—we’ve got productivity growth, in terms of the trend, of around 1.6 percent, which is similar to the pre-1995 experience. What we don’t have is it going back to the experience that we had from 1995 to 2007. Over the course of this recovery so far—as you know—from around 2010 to 2014, we’ve had around 1 percent productivity growth.  So there will be a decent step-up from that.  A portion of that step-up is because there’s more capital deepening in the forecast period than we had before that, and a portion of it probably reflects the idea that some of the scarring of the economy  from the financial crisis fades over time. But most of the forecast step-up reflects the fact that we don’t really understand the slowdown from 2010 to 2014, and we expect some of that to unwind.  I think there is a strong view among people that there is mismeasurement of productivity growth and that some of that has gotten a little bit larger over time as it has become more difficult to measure some of the effects of technological advances on product quality.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing background information and explaining the factors contributing to the forecasted productivity growth. They mention some potential reasons for the slowdown in productivity growth from 2010 to 2014, but there is no explicit disagreement or argument being presented.


Passage number 68.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. But, are we, all of a sudden, then going to measure it better. That’s what you’re implying.  I guess I’m focused more on just the last year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 69.
  We’ve had really poor productivity growth over the last four quarters, and— MR. FOLLETTE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is simply stating a fact about poor productivity growth over the last four quarters. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 70.
  It’s not that much worse than the prior— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. It’s 0.3 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. It simply states a comparison between two things and provides a specific percentage.


Passage number 71.
 MR. FOLLETTE. We’ve had a bad five years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Follette is simply stating that they have had a bad five years.


Passage number 72.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. And the reason why I think it’s so germane is because it’s really relevant to the forecast in terms of how growth translates to labor market improvement.  And so it seems to me you have to have a view on what productivity growth is going to do to understand how growth is going to translate into employment.  It doesn’t sound like we really have a good theory of what we are seeing right now.  Is that unfair.  I mean, I don’t have a good theory either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and does not mention any disagreement or contention with anyone else.


Passage number 73.
 MR. WILCOX. We have a view that performance is not likely to recuperate by going back to its pre-crisis trend rate of increase.  We think it’s not going to remain as bad as it’s been. All of the surprises on trend productivity growth have been to the south of our expectations since the crisis. We’ve attributed quite a bit of that to multifactor productivity growth.  Some of it has been due to a lack of capital deepening.  Our models are not all that surprised by the amount of investment that’s going on at the moment.  We don’t perceive a great big deficit in investment, and some work by Stacey Tevlin and Eugenio Pinto suggests that while the capital stock is growing quite slowly, you can understand that on the basis of two factors.  One is that the overall recovery is itself pretty tepid, and so the standard accelerator mechanism suggests that tepid business investment is warranted. And the other is that the growth of the labor force has slowed a lot.  If you rescale the capital stock on a per capita basis, you find that growth of the capital stock is pretty well within its historical norm. We think there are some very tentative signs that are encouraging about the growth of multifactor productivity.  But we were pretty close this time around to downgrading our assumptions about structural productivity once again.  This would be the nth in a long string of downgradings.  And I don’t think it’s going to take much to cause us to get the plane out and take another few shaves off the slope of that trajectory that Glenn showed in panel 6.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their own views and research findings without mentioning any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 74.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement of gratitude from Chair Yellen to President Williams.


Passage number 75.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without having access to the specific text. Please provide the passage for a more accurate analysis.


Passage number 76.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you.  I have a comment regarding Beth Anne’s equilibrium interest rates.  I wanted to go into some of the econometric technicalities there. If you look at panel 2 in exhibit 8—and this is what you said, but I’d just like to highlight it for everybody else—that dashed line from the DSGE model for the AFEs is a forecast built into the model.  The model has shocks that will fade over time, by assumption, and that’s why it goes back very slowly, as you pointed out, to 2 percent.  But if you notice, in the actual estimates, none of that has yet occurred.  And at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, my colleague, Vasco Cúrdia, looked at a couple of DSGE models—one similar to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s model, another one developed in the Federal Reserve.  And for the United States alone, they show the very same pattern:  a drop for the United States of r* in the DSGE model to basically negative 3 or 4 percent, something like that, and r* remains still at that very low level. So, even though these models tells you we are going to go back to normal by assumption, it is striking that even in the first quarter of 2015, there is absolutely no evidence of a return of r* back to a normal level. So whatever headwinds are holding this down—and in these models, it’s a combination of supply and demand shocks—they are as strong today as they were three to five years ago in the U.S. models.  And this gets me back to Laubach-Williams in panel 3.  Again, in that model—and apparently in your analysis using the AFE version of the model—there is absolutely no sign, even through 2015:Q1, of any waning of these headwinds.  I know it’s not popular to push the secular-stagnation theory, and I’m not really trying to do that—perhaps the lawyer here will question that.  But I think it’s worth reminding ourselves that we still haven’t seen—at least based on DSGE models, the models that the Board uses, the models that we use elsewhere—we haven’t seen any sign of a waning of headwinds yet, based on this method, at least.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply discussing observations and findings from different models, there is no disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 77.
 MR. WILCOX.  Hear, hear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. "Hear, hear" is a phrase used to show agreement or support, rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 78.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 79.
 WILLIAMS.  Oh, don’t you agree I needed a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 80.
 MR. WILCOX.  Well, not entirely.  [Laughter]  I’m not sure that there is a convenient exhibit here.  But, in Claudia Sahm’s Board briefing yesterday, there was a nice exhibit that showed the GDP gap over recent history and the future.  What that GDP gap shows is that we have made a lot of progress—by our estimate, anyway—toward closing resource utilization slack.  And—while I would hesitate to “preach L-W to W”—a sort of mechanical interpretation  is that what that suggests is that you have succeeded—by at least one definition of r*—in getting r below r*, on our projection now at the end of 2018, anyway.  So this is conditional on our projection.  We have the GDP gap a little bit positive, which is to say, actual output is above potential output. Now, you could come back and say, “Well, that’s fine.  That’s all a matter of projection.” But we’ve made a lot of progress over the past several years, and the Tealbook-consistent estimate of r* is something like minus three-tenths at the moment. We’ve got an actual r that’s considerably less than that at the moment. So, I’d hark more to Beth Anne’s admonition that there is a lot of uncertainty that surrounds these estimates.  It’s not apparent to me that we’re operating with an r* that is quite as bleak as what’s shown here.  I think you’re making progress with the current policy setting toward getting resource utilization back up to its sustainable level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is mainly discussing different estimates and projections related to GDP gap and resource utilization.


Passage number 81.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But one doesn’t rule out the other. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes.  They’re not inconsistent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker affirms that the two ideas mentioned are not contradictory and can coexist.


Passage number 82.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is not providing any information or presenting any argument that could lead to contention or disagreement.


Passage number 83.
 WILLIAMS.  The real interest rates are quite negative. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The response of "Yes" from Chair Yellen simply acknowledges or agrees with the statement made by Williams.


Passage number 84.
 MR. WILCOX.  Remember that what’s shown here—again, it is a little ironic, but what’s shown here is the long-run equilibrium r*. So your view would have to be that it’s going to remain permanently that bleak.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement acknowledges that what is being shown is the long-run equilibrium r*. The speaker then presents a view that suggests a permanently bleak future. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 85.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage "MR" lacks context or specific content to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 86.
 WILLIAMS.  Well, that’s the debate, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the debate is about something, without expressing any conflicting opinions or ideas.


Passage number 87.
 MR. WILCOX.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 88.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the provided passage.


Passage number 89.
 WILLIAMS. The one side is that the headwinds will abate, they’ll wane, and we’ll move back to 2 percent or whatever.  And the other is that, for reasons that we don’t fully understand, a number like negative 0.3, like you mentioned, may be around for the next 5 to 10   years.  And I don’t think we have any evidence, at least so far, that distinguishes between those two hypotheses.  That’s all I’m saying.  I’m talking about flat priors.  But I just wanted to make the point that because those dashed lines, which are always shown, can somehow indicate that we’re seeing it come back.  And that’s—what did you say.  That’s “hope ahead of experience.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker presents two different hypotheses regarding the future economic conditions, with one suggesting that the headwinds will abate and the other suggesting negative growth for the next 5 to 10 years. The speaker states that there is no evidence to distinguish between these two hypotheses.


Passage number 90.
” [Laughter] MS. WILSON.  One thing I would note is, one aspect of your approach is that you can decompose the equilibrium rate into the component that’s linked to potential output growth and the component that’s linked to a residual.  And what we’ve seen when we’ve done that is that the part that’s linked to a residual accounts for a large part of the decline.  That is, the decline is not explained by the behavior of potential growth, and that does suggest, I think, greater odds that the decline will be reversed.  There are reasons to think potential output growth could recover, but the residual could also encompass a number of factors—headwinds, a global savings glut, changes in preferences, risk aversion, and deleveraging—that we think may go away.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting observations and possibilities without any conflicting views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 91.
 MR. KAMIN.  It might be also worth noting—returning to panel 2, looking at the cyclical version—that the calculation for AFEs actually bounces back a lot right after the global financial crisis reaches its height in 2008 and 2009.  It then goes back down again, probably largely reflecting the euro crisis and its effects on our AFE aggregate combined, a little bit later, with the effect of the consumption tax increase on Japan.  So both the euro area and Japan have experienced these secondary reverberations that do, to some extent, reflect the initial crisis but could be thought of as additional shocks that maybe the U.S. economy was not subject to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker is suggesting that the euro crisis and the consumption tax increase in Japan are additional shocks that the US economy was not subject to, which implies a disagreement or differing perspective on the impact of these events.


Passage number 92.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is not specific enough for us to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 93.
 WILLIAMS. I would just repeat the point that the U.S.-based model’s r* is still very negative and isn’t subject to that right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states a factual statement without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 94.
 MS. WILSON.  And if you looked at this for Canada, for example, you would see it going back much faster. CHAIR YELLEN. We had two two-handers, President Mester and then President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that two individuals, President Mester and President Kocherlakota, had spoken.


Passage number 95.
 MS. MESTER.  Can you remind me of what the error bands around this estimate were.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple request for information.


Passage number 96.
 MS. WILSON. Huge.  [Laughter]  In Laubach-Williams, they say, for various versions of their model, 0.9 to 2.8 percentage points.  So, huge.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement about the magnitude of the model's results, which is shown through the use of the word "huge" and laughter.


Passage number 97.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  But those error bands are symmetric, right. They go on the downside as well as the upside.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a confirmation or clarification from Mr. Kocherlakota.


Passage number 98.
 MS. WILSON.  Right.  So that creates a big, wide band.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that something creates a big, wide band. There is no contention or disagreement being presented.


Passage number 99.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I think that questioning has exhausted what I wanted to say, Madam Chair.  Thanks. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Other comments or questions.  [No response]  Seeing none, why don’t we begin our go-round on the economy.  We’ll start with President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply shows that Mr. Kocherlakota has finished speaking and there are no comments or questions from others before moving on to discussing the economy.


Passage number 100.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage, "MR," does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 101.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  My forecast does not have a “Golden State” adjustment factor, so it’s not quite as optimistic as President Williams’s.  My SEP submission does not differ significantly from the Tealbook forecast and has not changed much from the March meeting, although I assume in this submission that the first tightening will be in the fourth quarter, not in September.  The biggest change from my previous submission is the marking down of 2015 real GDP growth to reflect the weak data we received for the first half of this year.  The data bearing on second-quarter real GDP growth have been surprisingly weak after allowing for the fact that the bounceback from the array of first-quarter special factors is likely artificially elevating reported growth for the current quarter.  If the Tealbook adjustment to transitory factors is accurate, second-quarter growth adjusted for these factors may fall short of potential growth.  Put differently, the weather and other transitory factors only partly explain the weakness in the first half of the year, since data both before and after the winter storms have remained relatively weak. Although the May retail sales numbers and revisions to earlier months provide some comfort that consumption will not be particularly weak this quarter, it remains slower than I would expect on the basis of its strong fundamental drivers.  The apparent desire of consumers to save rather than spend the windfall generated by lower oil prices puts at risk the consumer-led recovery that I and many others foresaw at the time of the March SEP submission.  The May payroll employment report provides further evidence of healing labor markets.  However, I am cautious about the labor market outlook for several reasons.  The unemployment rate has, at least for the moment, leveled off at 5½ percent—basically unchanged since February. Under my projection of only moderate growth in the second half of this year, we will likely return only gradually to my 5 percent estimate of the full-employment unemployment rate. It is notable that the labor market conditions index shown in the Tealbook indicates only modest growth in the first quarter and is negative for the average of the first two months of this quarter.  Although I would not take too literally the magnitude of the change in labor market conditions implied by the LMCI, I would interpret the index as indicating some slowdown in labor market conditions relative to last year.  And, of course, the labor market conditions would likely slow further if we do not see the expected pickup in growth in the second half of this year. Progress on returning inflation to its 2 percent target over the forecast horizon remains disappointing.  Core PCE inflation over the past year is currently at 1.2 percent, well below what many of us were forecasting at the beginning of this year.  Sifting through the various indicators of price pressures provides little evidence that prices have yet begun trending toward 2 percent. It is still possible that transitory factors, such as exchange rate and energy pass-through, are playing a noticeable role, and that once these factors fade, progress toward our inflation goal will occur.  However, I place some weight on the possibility that the current low inflation readings reflect an anchoring of inflation expectations below our 2 percent target. Another possibility is that the equilibrium unemployment rate is running below my estimate of 5 percent. In light of the uncertainty surrounding the inflation outlook, policy guidance should not just rely, as it does now, on being “reasonably confident that inflation will move back to its 2 percent objective over the medium term.”  Policy should place more weight on data rather than  forecasts that indicate such a return is in train. In a sense, that is why we have moved to data dependence in our policy decisions.  To be specific, becoming reasonably confident that we will trend toward 2 percent inflation requires evidence that core PCE inflation is closer to the 1½ percent growth that we had been expecting earlier this year, that real growth is growing faster than we have seen so far in the first half of this year, and that the growth is sufficiently high to produce a further tightening in labor markets. There have been significant benefits to being as patient as we have been to date.  Broader measures of unemployment have continued to improve, though they still remain elevated.  Tighter labor markets are beginning to provide modest evidence of a gradual increase in nominal wages and compensation.  And we have not tightened financial conditions at a time when Europe is going through a particularly difficult time.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. This can be seen in the statement "My forecast does not have a 'Golden State' adjustment factor, so it's not quite as optimistic as President Williams's." This implies that there is a difference in opinion or outlook between Mr. Rosengren and President Williams.


Passage number 102.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  My base-case economic and policy outlook has growth resuming in the second quarter and accelerating to around 3 percent in the third and fourth quarters.  My base case has job gains continuing at a healthy rate in excess of 200,000 per month and other labor market data indicating that tightening continues.  The base case has household spending picking up in the second quarter, coincident with an acceleration of wage and income growth.  And, finally, my base case has core inflation at least stable, near-term inflation data showing slight firming, and inflation expectations remaining stable. I have been processing both anecdotal inputs and incoming data using this simple test: Does the information, on balance, support my outlook or cast doubt on it. Although there are some encouraging signs, not quite enough conclusive evidence has yet accumulated to give meadequate comfort that my outlook is achievable.  So let me survey quickly some of the information I have put through this test. Our contacts with the business community in my District over the intermeeting period pointed to a somewhat slow, but not unsatisfactory, second quarter.  Sentiment about the pace of business activity in the second half remains positive, with a hint of caution.  The St. Louis and Atlanta Bank boards met together last week.  And President Bullard may have different “takeaways,” but I noted that most directors in attendance indicated they believe the first-quarter weakness was an anomaly, but most—or a majority—would not entirely dismiss the possibility of a prolonged period of weak growth. Those contacts in my District exposed to overseas demand and the dollar exchange value continue to report negative effects.  Our port contacts reported a sharp drop-off in export traffic. Because of the importance of strong consumer spending to my forecast, I have been especially attentive in this recent cycle to reports on the consumer.  Last week’s positive retail spending report was a step in the right direction.  Contacts tied to the new car market continue to report exceptionally brisk sales, along with strong production activity.  But soft-goods retailers continue to see lackluster sales growth, and many expressed disappointment that this year’s lower gasoline prices have yet to translate into a stronger appetite for nondurables.  At the same time, we heard a belief on the part of casual dining and tourism contacts that lower fuel prices are contributing to some strengthening in their sectors.  The picture that comes through is one of a discriminating consumer who is spending very selectively. Perhaps the most significant change of sentiment since the previous meeting relates to labor markets.  The assessment of our District contacts of labor market conditions moved this cycle strongly toward a general description of labor markets as “tight.” This view was broad   based.  We heard more mentions than in the recent past of firms having to boost starting wages to attract new hires, make counteroffers to retain employees, and compete with more liberal benefits and bonus incentives.  Those not yet experiencing these broad pressures noted the inevitability of rising wages.  Overall, I interpret the weight of recent anecdotal inputs from my District contacts as supporting my base case. I won’t belabor the evidence of all of the recent incoming data, but I’ll mention those that have most influenced my reading of the economy.  Early in this quarter, the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta’s GDPNow tracking model was showing second-quarter GDP growth more consistent with the weak first quarter than the hoped-for bounceback.  With the recent trade, jobs, and retail sales reports, our tracker rose markedly and now has second-quarter growth just short of 2 percent.  This rise is encouraging, but we still have second-quarter growth in our forecast at this point at around a 2 percent annual pace—well below what I was looking for. The first half still looks weak.  A wage growth measure recently constructed by my staff that builds on the methods of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco indicates that nominal wage growth is picking up.  We conclude that the improved ECI numbers posted in the first quarter will likely move even higher this quarter.  These indications of wage growth, combined with our latest anecdotal feedback on the subject, form the main reason I believe my base case remains on track. Employing a dashboard approach to inflation, I’ve been somewhat encouraged by indications that shorter-horizon PCE and CPI measures have been firming from their 12-month readings.  I’ve noted that the recent pickup in the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas’ trimmed mean PCE measure and the market-based core PCE number.  I take the recent data in general as encouraging.  As regards my official forecast for this meeting, I lowered my 2015 growth estimate to account for the soft first-quarter number but otherwise haven’t materially changed the projection from that I submitted in March.  My growth projection is ½ percentage point above the revised Tealbook outlook for the year and about 25 basis points higher in 2016 and 2017.  I have inflation running about 25 basis points above the Tealbook over the forecast horizon.  I have the risks to my outlook as balanced for inflation but to the downside for growth, reflecting in part the global economy.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  First Vice President Prichard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement.


Passage number 103.
 MR. PRICHARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Economic activity in the Third District continues to grow modestly.  Our latest Business Outlook Survey, which will be published on Thursday morning of this week, indicates that manufacturing conditions improved in June.  Roughly twice as many respondents reported an increase in activity as indicated a decline in activity.  The current employment index edged down a bit for both May and June but remains positive.  The indexes for current prices paid and received turned positive in June after several months of negative readings that were largely due to the decline in energy prices and the strong dollar.  Contacts continue to be optimistic regarding the near term, as reflected in the index of future general activity.  Fully half of our participants expect an increase in the level of business activity in the next six months, with relatively few forecasting any decline. Conditions in the District’s labor markets continue to improve.  Employment growth edged up 1.8 percent in April and labor force participation rose as well, leaving the unemployment rate roughly unchanged.  Another bright spot in the region is our service sector: The Nonmanufacturing Business Outlook Survey index for current conditions increased substantially in May and remains elevated.  Respondents also continue to be optimistic about allfuture activities.  Anecdotal evidence from our contacts also correctly anticipated the strong retail sales report for May. The multifamily sector led a modest rebound in the housing market in April, with a healthy 3.5 percent increase in the value of residential construction.  However, the overall housing market remains quite depressed.  Single-family permits declined further in April and have been, at best, flat for about the past two years. With the exception of Philadelphia itself, April existing home sales are reported to have slowed in most of the urban areas in our District. Contacts report that homebuilding activity was subdued in May.  House prices appreciated moderately in April, definitely behind the pace of the nation as a whole. Turning to the nation as a whole, we agree with many of President Williams’s observations, especially concerning the seasonal adjustments to GDP—not so much the forecast for the NBA. But we view the decline in GDP in the first quarter as mainly reflecting temporary factors and problems with seasonal adjustment, which I reported at the previous meeting and, again, President Williams expanded on today.  So I remain optimistic that the economy will rebound in the second quarter and the second half of the year.  Indeed, the data on retail and vehicle sales for May suggest the rebound in consumer spending may already be under way. After marking down real GDP growth for the first half of the year, I see real GDP growth picking up in the second half and growing at 2 percent for the year as a whole.  I foresee growth in 2016 slightly above trend at 2.7 percent and then gradually returning to longer-run GDP growth of 2.4 percent in 2017.  I expect the unemployment rate to decline to my estimate of the natural rate of about 5.2 percent by the end of this year and to fall slightly further in 2016 and 2017. Inflation gradually returns to the FOMC’s target over my forecast, although headline inflation runs at only 0.8 percent through 2015 after being flat in the first half due to the fall in  energy prices.  In 2016, inflation accelerates to 1.8 percent and settles at 2 percent at the end of 2017. My view of appropriate monetary policy now envisions a start to normalization in September of this year, with a gradual tightening of policy throughout the forecast horizon.  I anticipate a federal funds rate of 0.63 percent by the end of this year, 2.1 percent by the end of 2016, and 3.63 percent in 2017, which is close to my long-run value of the federal funds rate of 3.75 percent.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  First Vice President Holcomb.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage contains information and observations about economic activity and conditions in the Third District and the nation as a whole, as well as the speaker's forecast and view of appropriate monetary policy. There is no clear contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 104.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any specific text provided.


Passage number 105.
 WILLIAMS.  I think I swore not to talk about r* anymore, but can I have one moment. I actually did not imply in my earlier comment that there was a disparity between the different r* estimates. The model that Thomas and I developed was really looking at a medium or lower frequency object—the permanent component of r*, if you will.  The DSGE models were looking at a higher-frequency, quarter-by-quarter view of what the equilibrium real interest rate is—I think that’s true of what we did in San Francisco and I think that’s true of what the Board staff did.  These are describing different aspects of the same phenomenon—that is, the neutral real interest rate defined in different ways, estimated in different ways, tells you the same thing.  It’s very depressed relative to historical averages—it’s been depressed for many years.  These are different objects that they’re looking at. I actually see the results as being consistent because the fact that one number was minus three and the other number was zero was a somewhat different constant.  So I actually don’t see that as inconsistent.  I think that’s enough.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different models and how they are measuring the same phenomenon, but there is no indication of disagreement or disagreement.


Passage number 106.
 MR. LACKER.  Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 107.
 MR. LACKER. To some extent you’ve illustrated the point I made about the importance of different conceptual approaches to this.  But let me ask you a question about Laubach-   Williams.  If you took your data set and, instead, over the last eight years the funds rate had been 3 percent, would it deliver a low real rate estimate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking a clarifying question about the hypothetical situation.


Passage number 108.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 109.
 WILLIAMS.  What do you mean, if the funds rate had been 3 percent over the last eight years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 110.
 MR. LACKER.  Take your data set.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the given passage without additional context.


Passage number 111.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The abbreviation "MR" does not provide enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 112.
 WILLIAMS.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The explanation for "yes" is missing. Could you please provide more context so I can give a proper response?


Passage number 113.
 MR. LACKER.  Take out the funds rate.  Put in 3 percent instead of 0.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the statement "Take out the funds rate. Put in 3 percent instead of 0." It appears to be a suggestion or proposal without any opposing views mentioned or implied.


Passage number 114.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Assuming that everything else was the same.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting or contradicting ideas. It simply introduces a hypothetical scenario where everything else remains constant.


Passage number 115.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Lacker agrees or affirms something that was previously mentioned.


Passage number 116.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Everything else wouldn’t be the same.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing a general sentiment or belief without any conflicting viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 117.
 MR. LACKER.  No, of course it wouldn’t, but the point is that your estimate is basically saying the real rate has been low lately, which we all know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The statement "your estimate is basically saying the real rate has been low lately" implies a disagreement or contention between the speaker and the person the statement is directed at.


Passage number 118.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is not provided.


Passage number 119.
 WILLIAMS.  No, it isn’t, but maybe—I think that Thomas is planning a future event focused on r*.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Williams, is expressing their belief or speculation about Thomas' future event.


Passage number 120.
 MR. LACKER.  Perhaps you can illuminate us in the future.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. "MR. LACKER. Perhaps you can illuminate us in the future" simply suggests that the speaker is interested in receiving more information or clarification on the topic in question.


Passage number 121.
 MR. LAUBACH. The plan is that we will come back to the Committee in October with a broad discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage describes a plan to come back to the Committee with a broad discussion in October, indicating a collaborative approach without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 122.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 123.
 WILLIAMS.  Good idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. "Good idea" implies agreement and approval.


Passage number 124.
 MR. LAUBACH.  With input from around the System. CHAIR YELLEN.  Very good. President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speakers are showing agreement and positive response to the suggestion made by Mr. Laubach.


Passage number 125.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  You’ll be relieved to know I have nothing to add to that discussion.  [Laughter]The Tenth District economy continues to expand even as low oil prices and weaker farm incomes weigh on several states.  Unemployment remains very low, averaging 4.3 percent for the seven-state region as a whole.  Employment in the energy sector, however, continues to fall, and some District oil and gas firms are at risk of default.  However, the recent rise in oil to $60 per barrel, along with better-than-expected availability of financing, has allowed firms to refrain from making deeper capital spending cuts, and the pace of layoffs has slowed. Some firms even expect a moderate rise in drilling activity in the second half of 2015, although prices need to rise a bit further for activity to be sustainable.  Anecdotes from around the District suggest that some workers laid off in the energy sector have been able to readily find new employment in other sectors, such as trucking and construction. The strong dollar continues to weigh on regional factory activity, but overall services activity and hiring plans remain solid.  Realized and projected farm incomes have declined further as low crop prices persist.  As a result, demand for farm loans rose.  Loan repayment rates softened notably, and crop land values declined in crop-intensive states. On the positive side, rainfall in many parts of the District improved drought conditions dramatically, boosting the outlook for 2015 crop yields. For the national economy, my growth outlook for the medium term is little changed, although I did revise my 2015 forecast to reflect a weaker-than-expected first half.  As others have noted, the slowdown appears to be somewhat overstated by the GDP figures.  Growth in private domestic final demand remains positive and, based on analysis by my staff, is far less prone to having issues with seasonal adjustment than headline GDP.  This measure has increased 3.4 percent over the past four quarters, its fastest pace since 2010, and, importantly, we do not see a significant slowdown in other timely indicators.  For example, daily inflows of withheld  income and employment taxes did not show any slowing or unusual patterns during the first quarter. Consumer spending appears poised to grow.  Vehicle sales surged in May to their highest level in close to a decade, and after revisions, core retail sales over the last three months now look much better than before.  Furthermore, I see upside risk to consumption growth, as stronger nominal wage growth, rising consumer confidence, and savings from lower gasoline prices could boost consumer demand in the second half of this year.  In addition, households’ expected income growth over the next year, as reported in the University of Michigan survey, moved up in June to the highest level since the crisis. The labor market continues to improve, as over 200,000 jobs have been added in 14 out of the last 15 months.  The Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s labor market conditions indicators show that the level of activity improved in May and, importantly, the momentum indicator remained at a high level, suggesting continuing improvement in coming months.  If progress continues at a pace consistent with the past six months, the index tracking the overall level of activity, which covers 24 different labor market indicators, will be back at its historical average in September. I see additional evidence of a well-functioning labor market based on a more detailed look at worker flow data in the Current Population Survey.  Based on my staff’s calculation, the fraction of workers flowing into stable employment—defined as an employment relationship lasting at least three months—is back to pre-recession levels. If job stability reflects a quality match from the perspectives of both the employer and employee, this suggests that the labor market is producing matches of similar quality to the last business cycle peak. My staff has also found in the CPS that employment growth has shifted toward higher skill occupations.I view the risks surrounding my outlook as broadly balanced.  Important downside risks stem primarily from abroad, such as a possible slowing in emerging markets or spillovers associated with the situation in Greece.  On the other hand, possible surprises to consumer spending, housing construction, or wages are upside risks to my growth outlook. Finally, with regard to inflation, the rise in the foreign exchange value of the dollar, the decline in energy prices, and unusually soft medical prices have been pulling down inflation.  As the effects of these temporary factors wane and with the unemployment rate already close to its natural rate, I expect above-trend growth to lead to a strengthening in inflation.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 126.
   VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair. My views can be characterized quite succinctly:  somewhat less confidence on growth and the further improvement in the labor market, and somewhat more confidence that inflation will return to our 2 percent objective over the medium term, assuming that the labor market continues to show further improvement. On the growth side, I think I share the opinions of everyone else that the results have been somewhat disappointing, with growth in the first half now likely to come in at about a little bit over 1 percentage point.  Now, some of this can be attributed to special factors:  the unseasonably cold, snowy winter; residual seasonal adjustment problems; transitory factors such as the sharp decline in oil and gas investment. But all that said, it is disappointing, especially the weaker-than-expected trajectory of consumer spending.  However, last Thursday’s retail sales report for May was strong and there was a sizable upward revision in sales for March, so maybe some of the shortfall in consumer spending relative to expectations is already resolving itself. The consequences of the weakness in economic growth for the labor market had been much milder than one would expect—the circle squared by extraordinarily weak productivity growth—but I don’t believe that productivity growth is going to continue to be so poor.  I suspect that payroll growth will slow markedly unless we get a meaningful pickup in the economic growth rate.  Now, the good news is, I do expect the growth rate to pick up as some of the transitory negative influences on growth fade.  I also take some cheer from the most recent set of employment reports because, with both hours worked being up sharply and wages rising more quickly, that implies we’ll see faster real disposable income growth, which should help sustain consumer spending.  However, I am nervous that if productivity growth returns to a more normal performance, the growth pickup could still not be strong enough to sustain the solid payroll gains that we’ve seen over the past year. So that’s the reason I’ve become slightly less confident that we’ll see further improvement in the labor market over the remainder of the year. Now, with respect to the poor productivity figures that we’ve seen recently—the 0 percent rise in non-farm business productivity over the last four quarters and the sharp decline in the fourth quarter and the first quarter—I asked this question of the staff, but I don’t have a good explanation either. While it’s true that weak capital spending implies less capital deepening and this is having a negative consequence for productivity growth, that, I think, can only explain a portion of the slowdown over the past year. With respect to the collapse of the past two quarters, I think this is even harder to explain.  Even if innovations cease completely, and there’s certainly no evidence of that, productivity growth should keep expanding for quite some time, as earlier innovations diffuse throughout the economy.  Perhaps real GDP growth rates will be revised up, or perhaps the poor performance is a temporary artifact that stems from businesses becoming more confident, hiring more workers, and then this translating into a particularly poor measure of productivity during this transitional period.  But whatever the source, I view this as a conundrum that does increase my uncertainty about the labor market outlook. With respect to inflation, I am becoming more confident, subject to the labor market continuing to improve, that inflation will return toward our 2 percent objective over the medium term, and that this reflects three things. First, we’re seeing further tightening of the labor market, and this seems to be translating to somewhat greater upward pressure on wages.  Second, some of the transitory influences holding down inflation—namely, the earlier decline in oil and gas prices and the effect of the stronger dollar on nonpetroleum import prices—seems likely to dissipate. Evidence of a cyclical recovery in Europe and Japan has led to greater stability in the dollar, for example.  Third, measures of inflation compensation have increased since earlier in the year, with the Board’s five-year, five-year-forward measure of inflation compensation rising by about 25 basis points from its low point in January. So what does this imply for monetary policy. Well, I’ll talk mostly about this tomorrow, but I still think we’re on track for liftoff in September.  I haven’t changed my SEP federal funds rate path from what I submitted at the March meeting:  two rate hikes of 25 basis points each in 2015—one in September and one in December—and I’ll have more to say on that tomorrow. Finally, how should we think about the sharp backup we’ve seen in bond yields recently. My own view is that it’s warranted, and better now than later.  The yields have been pulled down mainly by European QE, which had depressed bond term premiums, and soft Q1 activity measures that implied a potentially later liftoff of U.S. monetary policy.  Even with the rise to a little bit below 2.4 percent, 10-year Treasury yields are not particularly high, especially if you think we’re going to start a journey back to 3½ percent or so for the nominal federal funds rate later this year. Remember, after the taper tantrum we were at about 3 percent.  The current yield curve implies a 10-year Treasury note yield in five years’ time of only about 3 percent.  So even with this backup, we’re not really discounting a big rise in 10-year rates going forward. To me, it’s better to have this occur in steps and away from the date of liftoff rather than one big jump around or following liftoff.  So with the backup in the yields now, we have a yield curve that is quite a bit steeper than normal.  Considerable tightening is already discounted in its shape, so I think that reduces the chance that we’ll see a really sharp rise in yields when we actually do lift off.  At least that’s my hope at this point.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a speech by a Federal Reserve Governor expressing their views on economic growth, the labor market, inflation, and monetary policy. There are some uncertainties and concerns expressed, but no disagreements or arguments.


Passage number 127.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Well, obviously, as I think just about everyone has noted, the data over the course of the last couple of weeks has been very encouraging.  Stan noted that, at the April meeting, there was a lot of concern.  I think, actually, the concern lasted well into May, so I’m a little more cautious than a lot of people in declaring our uneasiness over, just because it really was the retail sales number and the jobs number— which were, again, undoubtedly good—which turned the tide of some fears that we might be backsliding significantly. Having said that, it is hard to argue, certainly, with the jobs number, and I think there is actually a broader story here, which is that the performance of the labor market has not just been on the unemployment rate side.  As several of you have noted, the slack, which many people saw as not reflected in the unemployment rate over the last few years, did turn out to be there, and it, too, now seems to be contracting somewhat.  I take the fact that the labor participation rate has been flat for the last 18 months as actually very good news, because demographics would suggest that during this period labor participation should have been declining, and, thus, the flatness suggests that people are in fact being pulled back into the labor market.  The question of how much additional slack remains, I still think, is a salient one, and not as easy to answer as the unemployment rate itself might suggest.  So I’m slightly more cautious but join in the general view that we are in a much better position today than we might have thought we would be finding ourselves in just a few weeks ago. Like Vice Chairman Dudley, I also think that what has happened with European sovereigns is basically a good news story.  That is, the extension of negative rates along the yield curve in Europe over the first few months of this year was obviously something that was not sustainable, and potentially its reversal could have been quite destabilizing. So the fact that those have reversed, particularly the bund yields—in part because of good economic news in Europe and in part, I think, just because people realize that the positions they were taking were not sustainable in any case—is probably a good thing, notwithstanding the fact that it has been accompanied by a modest amount of tightening of financial conditions in the United States. Having said that, first, I can’t come up with a wholly satisfactory explanation of why the reversal went as far as it did.  Second, I’m not sure that rates can actually go much further up without negating the benefits of QE in Europe, so we may still have the potential for some dollar strengthening, particularly once we’ve raised rates here. And, third, if there are significant problems in Greece, I think all bets are off with respect to what happens to sovereign yields throughout Europe, and certainly with regard to a potential spillover effect on the dollar.The observations about sovereign yields reminds us that a number of questions are lurking just off the path of this prolonged recovery, many of which pertain to the issue of whether developments that predated the crisis have been accelerated or at least become more manifest since then. In recent work by economists throughout the System, there have been three suggestions along these lines, and I will briefly mention them.  First, President Williams has already alluded to the paper by Rob Valletta and Catherine van der List of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, who use a cross-state study to find that some portion of the unusually elevated number of workers who are part time for economic reasons may be due to structural factors, such as industry and age composition.  Noting that the ratio of PTER to unemployed persons has been rising since 2002, they suggest that some of these factors may be persistent, in which case the part-time-for-economic-reasons ratio may not return all the way to its pre-crisis level. Second, Andrew Figura and David Ratner of the Board staff have looked behind the outward shift in the Beveridge curve and argue that the secular decline in the labor share of income from roughly 70 percent to 63 percent since 2000 has been driven by forces that have also increased the incentives for firms to post more jobs.  So, for example, if diminished worker bargaining power is behind the decline in the labor share, then the return to posting vacancies will be higher for employers.  Andrew and David find empirical support for their argument in the fact that industries and states in which the labor share has fallen more have seen higher increases in job postings.  The implication of this research is that even if the long-awaited shift of the Beveridge curve back to its pre-crisis position does not occur, the permanent rightwards movement may not itself reflect an increase in structural unemployment.  And if the curve were eventually to shift back toward its pre-crisis position, the implication would be that the natural   rate is even lower than some expect.  On the other hand, if the labor share of income were to reverse its decline while the curve stays shifted to the right, that would imply a higher natural rate, although I should note that Andrew and David place a substantially lesser likelihood on that third outcome than the first two. The third paper is one by Ekaterina Peneva and Jeremy Rudd of the Board staff that models the relationship of labor cost to price inflation in recent years, finding little evidence that a change in the former has a material effect on the latter.  This is the latest in a line of research that many of us have referred to during these meetings over the last couple of years, suggesting that the past few decades have seen a break in the previous relationship between labor costs and broad price measures.  The authors cast doubt on explanations such as downward nominal wage rigidity for explaining the phenomena that we’ve seen over the past couple of years. Now, not surprisingly, each of these three interesting pieces of research leaves some questions unanswered.  The work on PTER focuses on a pretty short and, in macroeconomic terms, pretty unusual time period.  In addition, some of the factors identified by the authors as structural, such as industry and age composition, tend themselves to move with the business cycle, so it may be a little bit difficult to disentangle what is structural from what is cyclical. The Figura-Ratner work does not directly measure the loss of bargaining power, but instead shows the relationship that’s theoretically consistent with such a shift.  And, of course, the Peneva–Rudd paper itself notes that its undermining of labor costs as a key explanatory factor driving inflation leaves unanswered the question of the most important dynamics that are determining price inflation today. But these three recent lines of research are yet another reminder that relationships observed and established in the pre-crisis period may actually have been changing in ways thatthe Great Recession has made more palpable.  And I mention them today not simply to advertise the interesting work being done around the System, although that’s probably a worthwhile thing to do, but also because I think they’re trying to help inform the monetary policy decisions that we’re going to have to make over the next several meetings.  In particular, the Peneva-Rudd paper, adding itself to that line of research to which I alluded earlier, does for me, at least, put into sharp relief the question of when one can be reasonably confident that inflation will return to the 2 percent target.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN. Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker is providing their own cautious perspective on the recent data, but does not directly disagree with any other statements made in the passage.


Passage number 128.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I will begin, as others have, with the questions that hung in the air at the time of the April meeting.  Specifically, was the first quarter really as bad as it seemed.  And, second, how much signal should we take for the path forward.  I would agree with many voices around the table that incoming data since the April meeting tentatively offer encouraging answers on both questions. The discussion in Tealbook, Book A, on special factors in the first quarter, which I found very useful and thoughtful, suggests that underlying growth was in the range of 1 percent in the first quarter.  Some other outside estimates see an even greater one-time effect and, thus, stronger underlying growth.  So I’m inclined to believe that there was no sharp break in the pace of underlying growth in Q1, especially with real GDI growing at 1.4 percent and monthly payroll gains of nearly 200,000. As for the second quarter and the rest of the year, incoming data have picked up since the April meeting, particularly in those areas in which there had been the worrisome weakness.  The April and May employment reports showed job gains reaccelerating after a lull in March. The May retail sales estimate also struck a significantly more positive note, with solid growth for   May and upward revisions for March and April. And since growth is so heavily dependent on the consumer at the moment, that news was particularly important. The Michigan survey also provided more support for that positive spending narrative, with a significant uptick in confidence and the highest ratings for personal financial prospects and wage expectations since before the crisis.  I also found the staff memo that Glenn Follette had taken part in writing to be striking a generally positive note on labor market conditions as well. Housing starts have also strengthened, and although I don’t expect a lot out of this sector in terms of being a major engine of growth, a small positive contribution is welcome. Turning to my SEP submission, I have marked down a slightly stronger growth rate for real GDP this year than is shown in the Tealbook and about the same as the Tealbook thereafter.  On the unemployment front, I also believe that there is a significant chance that unemployment will drop faster and further than in the baseline forecast, given the payroll and productivity forecasts.  Compared with the relationship we’ve seen over the course of the last couple of years, the Tealbook forecast calls for unemployment to drop significantly more slowly for a given amount of payroll growth for reasons—perfectly possible reasons—that I’ve spent many happy hours discussing with the staff, but I guess I’ll just go for now with what’s been happening for the last couple of years. By putting a little more weight on the recent trend, I’ve got unemployment declining to around 5 percent by the end of this year and dipping below 5 percent in 2016 and 2017.  With the economy slightly tighter, I’ve got inflation getting to 2 percent by 2017. More on that tomorrow.  These changes do happen to bring my forecast into closer alignment with the run of public forecasts I’ve seen, as I think was implicit in Glenn’s earlier presentation.Market expectations for the path of policy rates have moved up significantly since the April meeting, and appropriately so.  Although Treasury rates have run up recently, we’ve seen similar or larger moves often over the last 30 years, even in the good old days before the post-crisis decline in liquidity.  Although volatility in the Treasury securities market has increased in recent months, that leaves the MOVE index, which measures volatility in fixed income markets across the curve, closer to but still below typical volatility levels for the decade before the financial crisis.  And I guess the best way to make sure that we don’t trigger undue increases in volatility is to continue to avoid surprising the markets unnecessarily.  In any event, both short-and long-term rates now seem to me to be better aligned with economic fundamentals than they have been, and that gives me some cause for hope—optimism that we can avoid an episode of harmful volatility. There’s also been much greater volatility in the euro area, particularly in German fixed income markets recently, but this seems to me to relate principally to some correction after the strong initial reaction to the ECB’s quantitative easing program.  And I would echo Governor Tarullo’s and Vice Chairman Dudley’s comments, at least that I don’t take any negative signal for our normalization process—those are my words—from what happened in Europe during the intermeeting period. I will close with the observation that the Tealbook baseline and my SEP submission are based on the assumption that no important fallout arises from the ongoing Greek crisis.  The range of possible outcomes is wide—and of possible implications is even wider.  That situation is likely to continue to complicate the liftoff decision the Committee will face later this year. Of course, it’s also possible that the next three months will clarify the likely path of events.  Time will tell.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of one person's views and observations.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 129.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Well, I just have a question on the tradeoff between data dependence and forward guidance.  When I look at the probability that you have in your top-right panel in exhibit 1, we have a roughly 45 percent probability of moving in September, and presumably, if the data comes in as forecast, that probability would improve on its own as we get into July. I guess the goal would be to get that much closer to 80 or 90 percent, since we wouldn’t be comfortable that 45 or 55 was quite enough.  And I just want to think about what the relative benefit of getting that additional increase would be as we get into September, particularly if the data surprises us in August and we end up having to backtrack.  So we’ve moved into an environment in which we’ve tried to avoid forward guidance, and we’ve really highlighted data dependence in speeches and in what we’ve put into the statement. Can you give me the relative cost and benefit of adding in language that moves away from data dependence—to tip our hat a little bit more—and how much additional benefit we would get from tipping our hat versus what happens if we tip our hat and turn out to be wrong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is questioning the relative benefit and cost of adding language that moves away from data dependence and tips their hand more towards a certain decision. They are discussing the possibility of backtracking if the data surprises them in August.


Passage number 130.
 MR. LAUBACH. So I don’t have a clear view on what should be some kind of target value for this probability.  Would it be ideal if, in fact, market expectations were close to 100 percent right before the meeting. It would seem to me that probably there is going to be some residual uncertainty simply because your assessment of economic conditions and whether they warrant liftoff or not always will involve a certain amount of judgment—that is very difficult to boil down to a simple formula. So my sense is that you wouldn’t want to raise that probability too high, in that you would want to avoid leaving the impression that expectations are being completely piled up on liftoff at a particular meeting—that would be a serious impediment. My thinking here is more that market participants should simply be sufficiently attuned to the fact that you may judge the data as being consistent with liftoff being warranted at that meeting, so that it is not being perceived as a breakdown in communications.  More generally speaking, my sense is that there was a time when forward guidance could be used in a fairly hard data-dependent sense, like we did with your threshold strategy, in which you could make firm commitments that before 6½ was crossed, the conversation would not even begin.  At this point, however, when you are so close to these criteria, I think it is just very difficult to lay out very precise, specific guidance of exactly which economic conditions we will see as warranting liftoff ex ante. I’m afraid I’m not giving you a very precise answer, but I think that probabilities in this range or higher should be fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and opinions on the topic without directly arguing or disagreeing with anyone else.


Passage number 131.
 MR. POTTER.  I could give some history, just quickly.  If we look back to September 2013, the probability of a taper, on average, was around 50 percent.  And at the time, most people thought that the Fed would taper, there was a pretty wide range of views there, and that was about that actual meeting. I think if the average was 70 percent—and the history shows that it doesn’t really get much higher than that unless there’s been a direct telegraphing that it’s going to happen—if there’s still a big wide range of views, so some people are still at 30 and some are at 90 or something, then that’s not a great situation to be in because we don’t know who the marginal investor is.  Is the marginal investor the one at 30 percent or the one at 90 percent. But right now, the spread, which is the only thing I emphasized—nearly everyone is between 30 and 70 percent.  So they think it’s reasonable that the data could come in and you would decide to lift off in September—that’s sort of what you were trying to say on the data dependence.  But the issue of how you’re going to feel at the September meeting about these probabilities, I think, is fundamentally different. I remember Governor Powell trying to think through that for the taper decision, whether 50–50 was reasonable enough or not.  It might be a 50–50 decision in September. CHAIR YELLEN.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a discussion of different probabilities and views regarding a potential taper decision by the Federal Reserve.


Passage number 132.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I just want to add something to that.  The market is going to have an SEP in front of them that they can look at, which has projections for  unemployment, GDP, and inflation.  So if the data evolve in a way consistent with that, they’re going to start putting the pieces together.  I think the issue is going to be, if the data diverge significantly from that forecast, the question is then how much of a divergence do you need before you start to change your expectations.  But I think if you take the SEP as it’s written today, if things evolve pretty much in line with that, then the probability in September is likely going to harden as opposed to dissipate, particularly because the market will have this information in front of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the market's response to projected data and the potential for changing expectations.


Passage number 133.
 MR. POTTER.  I think it really depends on the messaging in July, the minutes, and any speeches that are made, as well, though, how high the probability is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 134.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Of course. CHAIR YELLEN.  Let’s see.  I’ve got two two-handers.  First, President Bullard, then President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speakers are simply mentioning the names of two individuals.


Passage number 135.
 MR. BULLARD.  I just wanted to follow up on what Vice Chairman Dudley said.  I think as you get close to the meeting, the probabilities do tend to coalesce.  There are very few meetings at which you come in and the market is really 50–50 on what we’re going to do, because the data have come in in some way that kind of dictates.  And you can see that for this meeting, where the probability has fallen under 5 percent.  So, basically, everyone in the market decided we’re not going to do anything now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is providing factual information about the probabilities and market consensus leading up to a meeting. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 136.
 MR. POTTER. When I look back, it’s not quite that black or white.  It is definitely true recently that you’ve had the probability close to zero, but in meetings where a big policy action is being taken, it’s not as if everyone is at 100 percent—they might get to 75 or 80.  So it’s not as black and white as the zero at this meeting, for which there’s been less discussion.  If you’re getting close to a policy change, there’s been more discussion, and that tends to push the probability up. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Mr. Potter and Chair Yellen are discussing different aspects of probability in policy meetings.


Passage number 137.
 MR. ROSENGREN. Just a follow-up to what the Vice Chairman said, that one of the changes relative to what we used to do is that we have an SEP now.  It should convey the degree of certainty among the participants around the table with when rates are going to go up.  Regarding the marginal benefit of using language to characterize what’s already embedded in the SEP, I’d just be interested whether you think the SEP adequately gives that degree of certainty or variation based on the participants’ projections for the funds rate, and whether it is actually that much of a benefit to add language from meeting to meeting on top of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is asking for the opinion of the participants on the degree of certainty conveyed by the SEP and whether adding language from meeting to meeting is beneficial. There is no clear disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 138.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think that’s a very fair point. You have this new innovation, so you’re communicating a lot.  Do you actually need something in the statement that reinforces that or not. The problem with the SEP, of course, is that no one knows who the dots are, so there’s still some residual uncertainty in the SEP. Also, the things that you write down in the SEP submissions don’t fully summarize everything that’s relevant to you.  So, for example, the forward momentum in the economy, what was happening in terms of a debt limit, what was happening in terms of the European situation—those could be things that you can’t really factor into the SEP. I was writing some notes to myself about C′ tomorrow, and I think there is a very interesting question that we need to think about:  Do we want forward guidance once we lift off, or is the SEP sufficient to communicate our expectations.  Now, the reason to have forward guidance initially when we take off is, we’re worried a little about a taper tantrum, right. We   want to reassure people in order to underline that, no, we don’t think we’re going to go very fast, so you shouldn’t go very fast either.  But I think it’s a legitimate issue that we need to discuss some more. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contentious or disagreement. It is merely discussing various aspects of the SEP (Summary of Economic Projections) and the need for forward guidance.


Passage number 139.
 MR. FISCHER.  Could I ask, Simon, what exactly is in this chart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without additional context.


Passage number 140.
 Is this the— MR. POTTER.  It’s Thomas’s chart, I think.  Is this the federal funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a dialogue between two individuals discussing a chart and the identity of the federal funds rate. There is no contention or disagreement evident.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 141.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thomas, what’s in these data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that there is a dialogue between two individuals, Mr. Fischer and Thomas, which suggests potential disagreement or contention. However, without further context, it is difficult to determine the specific nature of the disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 142.
  Is this every individual giving a probability of what is— MR. LAUBACH.  Which chart are you looking at.  The upper right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 
There is a disagreement in the passage, as suggested by Mr. Laubach's response indicating uncertainty about which chart is being referred to.


Passage number 143.
 MR. FISCHER. Let’s take the one implied by federal funds futures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting considering the implied federal funds futures.


Passage number 144.
 MR. LAUBACH. That’s a more complicated thing.  So, very quickly, the upper right— the primary dealer survey asks the question two different ways.  It asks each dealer for the modal date for liftoff and it also asks for the whole probability distribution.  And this here is based on averaging over the individual respondents’ probability distributions.  So that’s what you see in the upper right.  In the middle left, this is something based on staff calculations of a so-called step path—namely, what staff is constructing is based on futures data, the probability of individual steps in the funds rate at each meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining different methods and calculations being used.


Passage number 145.
 MR. FISCHER.  So, I am not going around, saying, “I am a September guy and nothing is going to move me off that.” I’m a guy who’s going around, saying, “Well, there’s a 70 percent probability here and a 20 percent there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing their perspective or probability of something.


Passage number 146.
” MR. LAUBACH.  I think that’s most directly addressed by the upper-right chart, because that is telling you that the average dealer is not all centered on one date, but that, in fact, there is a fair dispersion.  The average dealer puts only a 45 percent probability on September and 45   percent distributed over other meetings.  So 45 percent doesn’t strike me as a whole lot of conviction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing their opinion based on their interpretation of the chart.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 147.
  There is, you know, a preponderance, but there’s also a fair probability that— MR. FISCHER.  Do we know where the average dealer puts his money.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement or contention in the passage. The use of phrases like "you know" and "but there's also a fair probability" suggest that the speaker is expressing uncertainty or lack of agreement on the topic being discussed.


Passage number 148.
 MR. POTTER.  We don’t, and that’s one of the issues with this chart. And we faced this during the taper tantrum.  The marginal investor could have a quite different belief from what we’re measuring, which is why we started the Survey of Market Participants—that’s the buy-side survey.  And the two surveys are lining up pretty well right now.  One of the things you might face in September is they look quite different.  And then, how would you feel about what the market reaction is going to be at that time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing potential differences in beliefs and surveys.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 149.
 MR. FISCHER.  All right. So if we can take the average probability distribution at the timing of liftoff, the top-right one, let’s suppose we go along the path we expect to be on and the data are reasonable, if not absolutely decisive.  We’ll have a decision to make in September, but it won’t be totally clear to market participants what we will do.  So the probability weight will pile up a little bit on September from the left, and the question is, what happens on the right in the market.  And if some of them move off to the right—saying, for instance, the Committee is showing some reluctance to pull the trigger or something—then when we do pull the trigger, we’re going to have a lot of noise in the market, I assume.  And if it all piles up on September 16 and 17, because everybody thinks it’s obvious that’s what we are going to do, then we’ll have less noise in the market at the time of the decision. We’ll just have the noise a few weeks before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is potential contention or disagreement among market participants regarding the decision that will be made in September. The speaker mentions that if some participants perceive hesitation from the Committee, there may be noise in the market when the decision is eventually made. Additionally, the speaker suggests that if everyone believes the decision is obvious, there will be less noise at the time of the decision.


Passage number 150.
 MR. LAUBACH.  Well, how much noise it’s going to cause is really an open question, right.  My expectation would be that, of course, if over the next three months, say, the employment reports all come in strong, the inflation data come in strong, you would see a  substantial move of probabilities from the right toward the September bar.  How strong a market reaction that would cause is difficult for me to anticipate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is uncertain about the potential market reaction and is stating their difficulty in anticipating it.


Passage number 151.
 MR. POTTER.  The advantage we have over the slowing of the asset purchase programs is that we have the federal funds futures data.  So that should aggregate in a way some information about who the marginal investor is. The disadvantage we have is, they have to work out where the effective rate will trade within the range.  So we won’t be as precise on this first one to complement what’s in the upper chart.  When the decision was made to taper, the probabilities showed at that meeting were, on average, a 25 percent chance that the taper would happen.  But everyone realized in the next couple of meetings it was going to happen, and you just got over that uncertainty.  In the end, that was quite positive. So, for example, if everyone thinks it’s really between two meetings—September and December, and that’s what we see—it might not matter as much when you actually decide to go.  But if there’s a lot of weight on 2016, then there’s probably an indication in moving of what the reaction function is at that point, which could have implications for the markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the advantages and disadvantages of using federal funds futures data and the uncertainty surrounding the timing of the taper. There is no disagreement or conflicting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 152.
 MR. FISCHER.  So why don’t we leave out the “they don’t know where it’s going to trade in the range.”  Let’s simplify by just assuming that we’re going to fix a number rather than a range because the range adds a level of complication that we don’t want to deal with analytically at the same moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fischer is suggesting simplifying the analysis by fixing a number instead of using a range, and there is no opposition or disagreement expressed in the passage.


Passage number 153.
 MR. POTTER. That would be great, and if we were credible that we could hit that point, that would really help.  But I don’t think at the moment we’re credible that we could hit a point target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Potter acknowledges the idea of hitting a specific point target and expresses doubt about the credibility of achieving it at the moment.


Passage number 154.
 MR. FISCHER.  Okay, Thomas.  I’m finished.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "I'm finished" implies that Mr. Fischer has completed whatever he needed to do or say.


Passage number 155.
 MR. LAUBACH.  One other point, and I may come to regret these words, but my expectation would be that, literally, if the only thing that would shift is, say, probability mass from December toward September, that, in itself, would be my expectation, and it shouldn’t cause a very strong market reaction. I think more interesting is what happens further out along the yield curve because, as you’ve seen from Simon’s charts, a bigger puzzle is why far forward rates are still very low.  So if this was associated with a market pull-up in forward rates further out, it could be because market participants somehow changed their views about the fundamental strength of the economy or because they changed their views about the reaction function.  Then you could get a substantially larger response of longer-term rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their expectation and making an analysis of the market reaction.


Passage number 156.
 MR. FISCHER.  Okay.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple exchange of gratitude and acknowledgment between Mr. Fischer and Chair Yellen.


Passage number 157.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I had a one-hander, but I’ll convert the first part of it into a two-hander to contribute to this really important conversation. I think that I’m more concerned about uncertainties being present in September.  As I listen to you speak, Madam Chair, and I listen to the Vice Chairman speak, I think that a key element that both of you stressed was the disconnect that we’ve seen between the employment data and the data on real activity. We’re going to get a lot of information about employment before our September meeting.  We’re going to get considerably less, I think, about GDP and therefore won’t know how the center of the Committee resolves the potential for ongoing disconnect.  I listen to the nowcast from Atlanta, 2 percent for the second quarter—that might be sort of where we’re at in terms of GDP numbers in September—but we may continue to see ongoing labor market improvement.  How that gets resolved will be very important.  I think that messaging will be very complicated, and so I think there could well be more uncertainties going into the September meeting than we face right now at the June meeting. I had one last thing about that, which is that I think the opportunities for messaging between July and September are more limited just by the nature of the calendar.  We don’t talk as much in that time frame, so I think that will, again, add to the challenge. My second comment was on the interpretation of Thomas’s charts as having to do with telling us that markets have learned to be data dependent and data sensitive in their assessments. I thought that was a nice try, but it was pretty heroic.  One of the plausible theories about what the Committee’s forward guidance did was that it tamped down on the influence of any individual speaker’s effects on market beliefs.  You are basically shutting down the noise factor that comes from having some presidents out there talking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 158.
 MR. LACKER.  Just presidents.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The excerpt does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states "MR. LACKER. Just presidents," which does not show any opposing opinions or conflicting views. It is a brief response without any indication of any disagreement.


Passage number 159.
 MR. POTTER.  It doesn’t apply to the Chair.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 160.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  No, when the Chair speaks, I think it’s much closer to being the heart of the Committee.  The Presidents and the Governors are speaking more for themselves.  So one theory is, we’ve created more noise by getting rid of forward guidance—a lot of data-dependence, so who knows what’s going to happen.  I’ve had the conversation with reporters:  “What do you guys mean by data dependence.” And then I just show them John’s T-shirt, and they say, “Oh, that’s great.  Now I get it.”  [Laughter] So all of this is about unconditional variances, and you’ve nailed it—unconditional variance has gone up.  The only chart that really speaks to the conditional part is the middle one on the right, but it’s weak evidence. My final comment is that there are actually people who have suggested that we have TV cameras brought into the FOMC room to record what’s going on here and show it, probably onC-SPAN 2 or 3.  If we were being broadcast live, Thomas has brought forward the drinking game for our viewers, which is, every time he says “data dependence,” viewers have to take a shot.  [Laughter]  So I can see more hope for this broadcast idea than I had thought before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker is discussing their perspective on the role of the Chair and the Presidents and Governors in the Committee, their thoughts on forward guidance, and a suggestion to broadcast FOMC meetings. There is no indication of disagreement or conflicting views.


Passage number 161.
 MR. FISCHER.  We notice you’re getting out before we implement all of this. [Laughter] CHAIR YELLEN.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement made by Mr. Fischer is met with laughter, indicating a lighthearted response rather than a disagreement. Chair Yellen's response does not indicate any disagreement either.


Passage number 162.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual passage provided. Please include the passage for a more accurate analysis.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 163.
 WILLIAMS.  I have a very pedestrian question, and it’s just a question.  Thomas, you opened this up, but Simon has got to deal with it—it’s on page 14, this issue about the directive. I’m just naïve or ignorant on this.  The existing sentence says, “In particular, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.” I thought that was kind of right, and I thought that would be very right when we raise the range from 25 to 50 basis points.  I thought it was exactly the right sentence, and you’re suggesting striking that out and fixing the next sentence, which is actually the problem:  “The Committee directs the Desk to undertake open market operations as necessary.” I thought we weren’t doing open market operations and we had no plan to do open market operations for the next couple of years in order to hit the range.  My understanding of our policy strategy is, we set IOER, we use overnight reverse repo with some cap.  Now, you can call that— CHAIR YELLEN.  Those are open market operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. Williams is expressing his disagreement with the existing sentence and the suggestion to strike it out and fix the next sentence. Williams believes that open market operations are not necessary or part of their policy strategy, while Chair Yellen argues that they are.


Passage number 164.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 165.
 WILLIAMS.  I know, but that’s not the way it’s been interpreted for the decades in which this kind of statement has been made. I just find it a funny change to make at this time when we have this other statement out there that says our strategy of normalization is to use IOER, to use overnight reverse repo and other facilities, and we’re being very explicit about how these are done, and, really, there’s no active role for open market operations—when I say “active,” I mean the kind of things that we traditionally have done.  So I was curious.  This is a question.  What is wrong with just saying, “The Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with the federal funds rate trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The passage does not contain disagreement or contention. The speaker is expressing curiosity and asking a question about a particular statement.


Passage number 166.
 MR. POTTER. If you say that without anything else, are you saying you would delete the next sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Potter is asking for clarification about the meaning of a statement and suggesting the removal of the following sentence for clarification purposes.


Passage number 167.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is not enough information given in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 168.
 WILLIAMS.  No, I would just modify it in a way that you find appropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is suggesting a modification without any opposing view.


Passage number 169.
 MR. POTTER.  I think when we were thinking about this, this was a “legacy” sentence. So some changes were made to the directive a couple of years ago to modernize the first sentence in it, and in particular when you go to C′, which is on page 15, the idea is that you have the first sentence—that’s what the FOMC seeks.  And then the Committee has directed the Desk to undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate, and these are the open market operations that we’d like to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply describing changes that were made to a directive a couple of years ago. There is no disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 170.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 171.
 WILLIAMS.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is simply stating that someone named Williams is right about something, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 172.
 MR. POTTER.  So it’s supposed to be clear to the market and the public that that’s what we’re talking about, and it still leaves open—if necessary, if it turns out that the federal funds rate is firm in some unusual way—that we have the directive that we could do the more traditional operation, which would be a repo operation.  We’re not sure how effective it would be, but that’s the thinking that we have, and it’s more just trying to clean up the language, and for me this gives a signal of being ready if it was introduced in the directive for the June minutes, because it should be pretty clear to market participants what you could slot in if you did lift off, which is this next statement.  And we’re really not trying to affect directly, each day, the amount of reserves on banks’ balance sheets to achieve that goal. It will be through the open marketoperations of this type, where we’re really interacting with the repo market more to push up rates through arbitrage and other things that are going on, such as interest on excess reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This passage is explaining a potential plan and discussing the thinking and rationale behind it. There is no indication of disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 173.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The given passage does not provide any information or context to indicate any contention or disagreement. Without any conflicting opinions or contrasting viewpoints presented, it is not possible to identify contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 174.
 WILLIAMS.  I understand everything you said.  It just seemed to be a funny thing to be changing now because we put so much effort into this normalization plan, and it looks like there’s something happening here.  I don’t know, but that was just my question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their understanding of what someone else said and expressing their own thoughts and uncertainties about a certain situation. There is no visible conflict or disagreement with anyone.


Passage number 175.
 MR. POTTER. If the Committee directs the Desk to undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain such conditions—that’s conditions in reserve markets—but we’re really doing the effort through the temporary open market operations in the repo market.  That was the thinking.  But I agree with you.  You don’t have to change it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Potter, agrees with the other person's statement and suggests that there is no need for any changes.


Passage number 176.
  You could just leave it in and slot in the— MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting ideas or arguments.


Passage number 177.
 WILLIAMS.  And then change it when we actually lift off.  Okay.  I was just asking the question of why you want to do it now, and you’ve answered.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Williams is asking a question and the other person is providing an answer.


Passage number 178.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context to suggest that there is contention or disagreement. The statement "Mr. Potter. Yes" is not enough to determine the presence of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 179.
 MR. FISCHER.  So the one that matters is C′.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is not expressing any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the factor that matters is "C'".


Passage number 180.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "Yes" indicates agreement or affirmation, not disagreement or contention.


Passage number 181.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement.


Passage number 182.
 WILLIAMS.  What I was confused by was why we would try to do that now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is purely a statement expressing confusion.


Passage number 183.
 MR. POTTER.  Because we’d be ready at every meeting just to slot it in.  Instead of having confusion about other changes, you’re just saying this is the only thing to look at in this directive when you’ve lifted off.  That’s all.  Thomas, do you want to— CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions. Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speakers are discussing a potential change to a directive and how it would simplify the process by eliminating confusion about other changes.


Passage number 184.
 MS. BRAINARD.  I also wonder how much benefit we get from doing a two-step as opposed to doing a one-step when we’re ready to go.  The one-step would be the opportunity to say something about it in the minutes this time so that it will be very clear as to why we’re doingit next time, whereas since we didn’t discuss this in the minutes last time, there may be a little question of, is there some signal associated with this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Ms. Brainard is expressing a wonder or curiosity about the benefit of a two-step process compared to a one-step process. She is discussing potential implications for the minutes and clarity in decision-making. There is no argument or disagreement presented.


Passage number 185.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, as there is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 186.
 WILLIAMS. Yes, that’s what I’m worried about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that someone named Williams is worried about something.


Passage number 187.
 MS. BRAINARD. Do you gain much by doing a two-step. If you don’t, maybe it’s just clearer to signal in the minutes and do the one-step approach.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply inquiring about the effectiveness of a specific approach and suggesting an alternative if the current approach is not beneficial.


Passage number 188.
 MR. LAUBACH.  Just to clarify—at this time, of course, the directive would only appear in the minutes.  The public doesn’t see it before.  The directive comes out in the minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply explaining that the directive only appears in the minutes and is not available to the public before that time. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 189.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Please provide the specific passage for further analysis.


Passage number 190.
 WILLIAMS. Well, they’ll see it three weeks from now. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes, but we would have a discussion of why we made these changes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 191.
 MS. BRAINARD.  I would’ve thought you would have the discussion in the minutes that we had this conversation, and that you would release the C′ when we actually move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 192.
 MR. POTTER.  We could do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "We could do that" by Mr. Potter is not contradictory nor in conflict with any other statement. It simply suggests a possibility or an agreement.


Passage number 193.
 MS. BRAINARD.  I just don’t know whether you lose anything by doing that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and is stating that they don't know if there are negative consequences to a certain action.


Passage number 194.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I’m sympathetic to what President Williams is saying, but I think that changes in the directive are cheap at this stage, from a signaling point of view, because of the consideration Thomas mentioned, that they come out in the minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Kocherlakota, expresses his sympathy and agreement with President Williams, but also adds his own perspective on the cheapness of changes in the directive. The passage does not involve any opposing viewpoints or conflicting arguments.


Passage number 195.
  My own guess is they won’t be viewed so much as signaling— MR. POTTER.  If the implementation note is used and if you waited to make the changes, the first time you would see those changes is at 2:00 p.m. on the day of liftoff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents the speaker's guess about how something will be viewed, as well as a statement about the timing of changes.


Passage number 196.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  If you wait to lift off, then the directive will be brought forward to two o’clock.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a hypothetical situation in a logical manner.


Passage number 197.
 MR. POTTER.  Well, we haven’t had that discussion, but if that was to happen, that would be the case, which is, I think, behind our thinking, but I didn’t explain it as clearly.  Sorry.  In the future, if you did release the directive at the same time in the implementation note, there are lots of things going on. We’re just trying to simplify the noise by putting in changes we could make now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is apologizing for not explaining their thinking clearly and suggesting a way to simplify the situation by making changes.


Passage number 198.
 MS. BRAINARD. But you’re still going to see C′.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement from Ms. Brainard with no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 199.
 MR. POTTER.  You are going to see C′.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 200.
 MS. BRAINARD. Again, I don’t see the value in the interim directive change.  You still have to signal to the markets to expect C′ and the changes that are here.  I think the question is, what’s the most parsimonious, clearest way of introducing the concept that C′ is coming.  And I’m not sure what this other thing does to help with that—I guess that is the question. CHAIR YELLEN. One way or another, there would be some discussion of this matter in the minutes—the intention to make these changes in language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Ms. Brainard, does not see the value in the interim directive change and questions whether it helps in introducing the concept that C' is coming. There is a disagreement between Ms. Brainard and Chair Yellen regarding the effectiveness of the interim directive change.


Passage number 201.
 MS. BRAINARD. With C′.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The sentence appears to be incomplete, so it is not possible to determine any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 202.
 MR. POTTER.  The simplest is when people do the automated track changes when you lift off.  If you’d already done it, there are fewer track changes.  That’s the simplest.  But that you could explain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining a concept or process.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 203.
  It depends if you care about the guys who do that— MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

In the passage, the speaker's opinion is dependent on whether the reader cares about the "guys who do that." There is ambiguity in the statement, as the reader's personal values and beliefs will determine whether they agree or disagree with the speaker.


Passage number 204.
 WILLIAMS.  But this is a completely unimportant change here. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers agree that the change mentioned is unimportant.


Passage number 205.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage consists of only two letters, "MR," which do not present any conflicting or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 206.
 WILLIAMS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 207.
  The one they’re going to read is the— MR. POTTER.  Completely, and we would do some clean-up in the last sentence.  So you could pick and choose as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. 


Passage number 208.
 MR. FISCHER.  All right.  So where are we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contentions or disagreements. It is simply setting up the context for a conversation or discussion.


Passage number 209.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. We’re going to talk about this tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is simply stating that a discussion will occur in the future. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 210.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it is not provided.


Passage number 211.
 WILLIAMS. We’ll talk about this tomorrow.  CHAIR YELLEN.  We haven’t decided. We’ve had preliminary thinking. First Vice President Prichard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speakers are simply discussing a topic and sharing their thoughts and plans for future discussion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 212.
 MR. PRICHARD.  Thank you very much, Madam Chair.  Just a question on C′ itself. It’s on page 12.  The draft C′ statement deletes paragraph 5.  I understand why you want to delete it with the introductory clause, but why wouldn’t the essence of paragraph 5 want to be sustained so that it doesn’t appear that we’re retreating from the two principles that are embodied in paragraph 5.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker (Mr. Prichard) is questioning the deletion of paragraph 5 and suggesting that the essence of paragraph 5 should be retained. This indicates a disagreement or contention between Mr. Prichard and the person who wants to delete the paragraph.


Passage number 213.
 MR. LAUBACH.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without any specific passage to refer to, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 214.
 The spirit of that is arguably in the sentence that begins with “Going forward” because— MR. PRICHARD.  Oh, you brought them forward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 215.
 MR. LAUBACH. “. . . the Committee will adjust its target range for the federal funds rate in response to economic and financial developments and their implications for the economic outlook, to promote maximum employment and 2 percent inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact about the committee's approach to adjusting the target range for the federal funds rate. There is no contention or disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 216.
” MR. PRICHARD.  Okay.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  I think we’ve had a productive day.  We can now go have dinner and a nice drink, then reconvene tomorrow at 9:00 a.m. for our policy round. [Meeting recessed]   June 17 Session CHAIR YELLEN.  Good morning, everybody. PARTICIPANT.  Good morning. CHAIR YELLEN. Unless somebody has a matter of business, I think we are ready to begin our policy round.  And, if you would not mind, I would just like to make a couple of brief comments to start us off.  In particular, I wanted to comment very briefly on the staff’s proposed plan for communicating the details of monetary policy implementation. My personal view is that the plan that Thomas has set out, and that was discussed in the memo, makes a lot of sense.  As Thomas noted, having an implementation note as a separate document keeps the focus of our policy statement on our choice of the federal funds target range and the rationale for that choice rather than getting into the details of implementation.  I think this approach will end up simplifying our communications regarding the stance of policy, and I think the separate note lets us accurately report matters pertaining to the different governance of the different tools and for announcing changes to those tools if they’re required.  Importantly, I think an advantage of having this separate note is that it enables us to publish the domestic policy directive to the Desk at the time our policy statement is released rather than in the minutes, which has long been our practice.  And I think this is an important step forward in transparency. Now, as Thomas noted, we do have an issue to decide today in connection with the directive, and that pertains to whether we should make some of what Thomas called “housekeeping changes” at this meeting that would set us up for making fewer changes to the directive later on, at the time of liftoff. If we do make these changes today, the minutes would make it clear that such changes don’t signal any change in policy.  But I also realize that some observers could over-interpret   these changes.  So, for my part, I can go either way on this.  I don’t think this is a critical issue for us.  One way or another, I think the minutes will summarize the discussion that we have about these housekeeping issues and about the new implementation note, and I think that’s worthwhile, so that if we were to end up making the housekeeping changes and putting out the new note at the time of liftoff, the fact that it would be covered in our meeting minutes means it wouldn’t be a complete surprise to market participants. With those comments as background, I look forward to hearing your views on these issues and, of course, your comments on policy choices we have for today.  Let me start with President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement by Chair Yellen about the agenda for the meeting and her personal views on some matters.


Passage number 217.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support option B.  We certainly would not want our first tightening of monetary policy from the zero lower bound to coincide with the default of a developed country.  Because of the uncertainties abroad, this would not have been the appropriate time for the first tightening, even if the domestic conditions we had set out initially had been met.  However, in my view, both conditions have yet to be met.  Core PCE over the past year, at 1.2 percent, has been falling, not rising, and the U-3 unemployment rate has leveled off rather than continuing to improve. In a low-inflation environment at the zero lower bound, it is instructive that the most common mistakes made by major central banks to date have been premature tightenings.  Japan had a liftoff of rates in August 2000 and again in July 2006, yet both were subsequently reversed, and even today Japan remains far from its inflation goal. Similarly, the ECB tightened in April 2011 before reversing course only seven months later, and Sweden raised rates in July 2010 only to reverse course. None of the central banks that raised rates and then reversed have hit their   inflation targets recently.  To say the least, their reversals of policy and their subsequent inability to hit their inflation targets have not been confidence-building exercises. The inherent asymmetry in our ability to offset shocks when at the zero lower bound is something to be taken very seriously. We have a limited ability to offset unexpected weakness but a nearly limitless ability to offset unexpected strength. We should learn from the mistakes of other central banks and tighten only when we are clearly on track to achieve our dual mandate. The markets place the likelihood of raising rates in September as roughly a coin flip.  We should do nothing to indicate higher odds.  We still need to see further improvement in economic conditions, and I currently expect those conditions to be met sometime after our September meeting. In terms of the areas that the Chair has asked us to discuss, I agree that a separate note on operational tools absolutely makes sense, and I think we should do it.  I would prefer that the changes to the directive be timed at liftoff rather than at the current time.  I am concerned that people will maybe over-interpret the announcement going out with the minutes of this meeting. And, finally, just in terms of the comments regarding data dependence and the tradeoff between data dependence and providing forward guidance, my preference would be that the statement be data dependent and that, to the extent forward guidance is going to be used, it not be used in the statement.  It is much more flexible to do it in a speech than it is in a statement. While I take President Kocherlakota’s comments that the summertime is not a wonderful time to be giving speeches, I’m sure, if need be, the Chair, the Vice Chairman, and others will have the capability to schedule in August if it seems like the probabilities that people are putting on liftoff are dramatically different than we think is appropriate.  I would rather not hardwire things in the statement that could turn out to be negated if data surprised us once again on the weak side.  So  my preference would be to truly keep the statement data dependent and not try to have any forward guidance in the statement.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  First Vice President Prichard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is one person expressing their opinion and providing reasons and examples to support their view.


Passage number 218.
 MR. PRICHARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I also support alternative B as appropriate in light of the mixed developments since our previous meeting.  But I also feel the economy is both gaining traction and showing what could be a sustainable strength to give me confidence for liftoff later this year, assuming continued performance this summer.  Assuming continued strengthening, I feel that we need to demonstrate our confidence in the economy and not risk a delayed liftoff that might needlessly sharpen the pace of tightening once we get started. Financial markets are gearing up for a gradual liftoff but may not be prepared for a more rapid rise.  So we should not test conditions by risking a rapid transition upward. I also support the proposal for communicating the operational details for managing liftoff.  The proposed separate release should minimize the risk that any technical adjustments are incorrectly viewed as revisions to either present or future monetary policy statements, particularly if the adjustments take place between scheduled FOMC meetings. I would note that, for the future, the language regarding the delegated authority to the Chair should be as precise as needed regarding the boundaries of what adjustments would be considered “modest.” I hope we will have a better feel for the kinds of intermeeting adjustments that are regularly needed by the time the Committee chooses to make this delegation, which I fully support. And, finally, whereas this will likely be my last occasion to join the FOMC table, I want to offer three brief observations.  First, I believe the deliberations at this table are perhaps a poster child for what discourse in this fair city should be: informed discussion, honest and transparent debate, excellent staff support, and a place in which diverse and independent views are not only welcomed but sincerely considered. Second, I would note that when I drive my car on any roadway in America, I can know precisely the speed of my travel because of the sophistication and the reliability of the instrumentation in my vehicle.  I find nothing analogous to be true when thinking about the economy.  Reported conditions are constantly revised in a way that should remind us that economic performance is, at best, an estimate—surely more than an educated guess but, nevertheless, not as sure as my speedometer.  People say they can’t fix history, but economists never seem to tire of trying. My third observation is that, as challenging as it is to estimate what’s already happened, I have found it even more difficult to predict the future.  I don’t know if anybody else here feels the same.  For my part, the zero lower bound is a handcuff from which we need to find a plausible and credible set of reasons to break free.  Liftoff has a stigma that must be overcome, much like pulling that first loose tooth from a child. I know that this Committee will continue to lead with confidence to a new soft landing in a more normalized economy.  It has been my honor to have represented the Philadelphia Reserve Bank at these meetings, and I thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you very much.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily a statement of the speaker's personal beliefs and thoughts.


Passage number 219.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is not provided, so it is impossible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 220.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B as written. Much of the apparent weakness in measured first-quarter GDP growth reflected the effects of transitory factors, including residual seasonality.  The recent strength of the data, including the retail sales data and employment data, reaffirm my view that we are on a solid trajectory with good  momentum, and I expect we’ll reach full employment later this year across a wide variety of measures of labor market conditions. Inflation remains too low, however, and while I’m becoming more confident that inflation will resume its approach to our 2 percent target, we’ve been repeatedly disappointed in the past.  As a result, gathering more evidence that inflation is on the right trajectory seems warranted at this stage. That said, I remain convinced that the time for liftoff is fast approaching and that waiting much longer to raise the federal funds rate risks falling behind the curve.  Doing so could ultimately necessitate steeper rate increases after liftoff, which may confuse and disrupt markets here and across the globe. Of course, I understand that our liftoff is a discrete adjustment and one that’s difficult to undertake because of the concern that our actions may prove premature.  Actually, I never even thought about this as pulling a tooth.  So I’m probably even more worried about it now, going back to my childhood.  [Laughter]  But as President Rosengren appropriately said, we can point to numerous cases in the past where other central banks tightened policy too quickly, leading to undesirable outcomes. That said, it is important to remind ourselves that our economic fundamentals are much sounder and our policy stance much more accommodative than in those instances.  Looking ahead to potential future policy statements and the issue of forward guidance, there are two issues of forward guidance on which we want to be clear. President Rosengren, you were talking about the forward guidance in our statements over the next few meetings, and I completely agree with your comments.  We should not be reintroducing near-term forward guidance.  I like how our statements are formulated now. I think there is another issue about forward guidance that is also in this discussion, and this refers to alternative C′, thinking about future language.  In paragraph 3, it says “The   Committee currently anticipates that the economy will evolve in a manner that warrants a gradual increase in the target range for the federal funds rate” and has the other language about low interest rates. I think this is an interesting topic about whether we want to introduce in the future some forward guidance of that type, the “gradual increase.” I think that is something we are going to have to see based on what happens between now and then. I also think that there is the issue that I just mentioned, that the longer we wait to start liftoff, the less likely it is that it will be appropriate to have a gradual increase in the target range of the funds rate.  So I do see the choice of language in the future depending obviously on how long it is until we start liftoff.  If we do it sooner, then I think that would support a gradual increase in the target range.  If we wait significantly longer, then I think that that would not be quite appropriate. In terms of the memo on monetary policy implementation and directives, I’m fully supportive of the approach and the language you mentioned, Madam Chair, and that is described in the memo.  It is good to distinguish clearly between monetary policy decisions and what I would call the technicalities needed to achieve those decisions.  And I think it’s also important that, as the memo notes, this distinction would allow for modest adjustments in implementation, if needed, without necessitating additional FOMC statements.  This ensures that we avoid sending an incorrect signal to the public that monetary policy has somehow changed when actually we’re just making a technical implementation adjustment. Regarding the directive, I agree with your comments, Madam Chair, that it could go either way, but I do tend to lean toward not wanting to put new directive language in this time just out of nervousness that we’re signaling that we’re preparing something, that it might bemisinterpreted. It seems to me that having this discussion in the minutes would be fine, but, again, that’s just my own personal perspective.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses support for alternative B as written and agrees with President Rosengren's comments on forward guidance. The speaker also expresses agreement with the approach and language described in the memo on monetary policy implementation and directives. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 221.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  To start, I support the plans for separate communication regarding our policy implementation tools after liftoff.  And I am okay with the housekeeping changes, but I can go either way, just as you suggested. For today’s decision, I support alternative B as written.  I would note, though, that the recent softer economic data and lack of improvement in core PCE have led me to push back my preferred appropriate monetary policy liftoff date to midyear 2016.  My staff’s DSGE analysis that I talked about yesterday also pushed me in that direction. As you recall, that analysis showed how changes in the Survey of Professional Forecasters’ 10-year CPI inflation outlook and other incoming data are holding back the model’s longer-run inflation outlook. I appreciated the extremely useful and timely Tealbook analysis of the potential downward influences on the long-run equilibrium real interest rate and the policy implications of a lower value for r*. I think most of us are accustomed to simply having a single r* assessment in mind and not really considering the uncertainty surrounding r*, at least as we formulate the models and analytical analyses. A fundamental underpinning for the Committee’s choice of a 2 percent inflation objective back in January 2012 was strong confidence that the long-run equilibrium real rate was 2 percent or higher.  Indeed, in our January 2012 SEP submissions, 16 out of 17 of the long-run federal funds rate dots were consistent with r* being between 2 and 2½ percent. Today the Tealbook assumes r* is 1½ percent, in line with its lower assessment for productivity growth and potential output growth.  And the Committee’s June SEP submissions  show broad agreement on this point, as all but three of the long-run nominal funds rate dots are consistent with an equilibrium real rate between 1¼ and 1¾ percent. Furthermore, there is substantial uncertainty over this assessment.  Larry Summers and Ben Bernanke have debated whether a lower equilibrium rate reflects secular stagnation or a persistent global savings glut, but quantifying the magnitudes of these factors remains an important research objective.  Personally, I think that ascribing a zero effect to these phenomena seems unlikely.  More directly, lower potential output growth also suggests a lower r*. Again, the magnitude is uncertain and depends on the longer-run path for capital deepening, the effects of demographic trends, and whether TFP growth has persistently reverted to the slow-growth era of 1975 through 1995. Yesterday President Lacker made an interesting comment when he pointed out that the interest rate policy rules that we consider have intercepts and error terms that are isomorphic.  You can’t just, by themselves, pick out the contribution because they enter in a linear fashion.  Okay.  But there is more identifying information that can come from these other analyses, like this list of factors that I just mentioned, and I think that it is important to assess that additional information as opposed to just ignoring it. We should take into account the fact that the posterior distribution of long-run r* is widely dispersed and that most of the weight in this distribution is on lower values than we were thinking back in January 2012.  Perhaps the posterior mode for r* is at the Tealbook assessment of 1½ percent.  But for me, 1 percent or below also garners significant weight, and I put far less weight on r* being as high as 2 percent and negligible weights on higher values above 2 percent. This uncertainty has profound implications for monetary policy.  If the long-run equilibrium real rate is substantially lower than 2 percent, then the historically low nominal  funds rate paths that most of us have written down in our SEP submissions are not nearly as accommodative as we might have previously thought.  And, Madam Chair, you alluded to the same phenomenon when you talked about if productivity growth ends up being slower, that means r* will be lower, and, in fact, each and every point of our funds rate settings will be more restrictive. Of course, if economic fundamentals improve strongly, and inflation begins to rise more quickly, I would see that as evidence that the lowest r* values are diminishing in likelihood.  And, you know, this is another refutable implication of the viewpoint I think President Lacker associated with, which is that high r* is quite possible.  In that case, our funds rate would be more accommodative and we ought to see inflation rising much more rapidly to our inflation objective.  That ends up being a testable implication, and we can look for that. But I suspect that won’t be the case.  Most likely, the economy will continue to face many challenging headwinds.  I will look to the data in order to decide these issues, but I want to be clear that the data have already provided a lot of evidence suggesting troubling and highly persistent phenomena that should weigh importantly in our strategies concerning liftoff and the subsequent normalization of policy rates. And just to be completely clear, I think that a full-throated endorsement of our symmetric inflation objective strategy could be a very helpful counterbalance to current and future headwinds. I agree completely with the comments that President Kocherlakota made yesterday regarding risks to our inflation objective and how we should address them. After all, even a 2 percent inflation target gives us uncomfortably little margin to engineer low enough real rates.  We don’t want to make things worse by creating a de facto target below 2 percent.  Thank you, Madam Chair.CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  First Vice President Holcomb.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses support for certain aspects of the policy, but also raises concerns about the recent economic data and disagrees with the assessment of the long-run equilibrium real interest rate. They argue that the uncertainty surrounding the assessment should be taken into account and that a lower equilibrium rate would have profound implications for monetary policy. They also express agreement with President Kocherlakota's comments on risks to the inflation objective.


Passage number 222.
 MS. HOLCOMB.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  In reviewing the policy options in preparation for this meeting, one of our economists posited that we may find ourselves in a situation like that faced by the game warden in the movie Jurassic Park. You may recall the scene in which the warden calmly and deliberately prepares to shoot an approaching velociraptor, only to discover too late that another raptor has snuck up on his flank.  His last words are “clever girl.”  [Laughter] High inflation is the velociraptor that captures our attention as we watch for the right moment to deploy our weapons.  It is still quite far in the distance.  Of greater or equal concern should be the raptor that may be sneaking up on our flank, the raptor that could bring this expansion to a premature or unpleasant end. The worry is that business investment decisions, consumer durable goods purchases, and household and business borrowing commitments undertaken in an artificially favorable financial environment won’t be easily unwound when financial conditions eventually normalize.  It is difficult to achieve smooth convergence in an economy with capital and debt overhangs, and the longer artificially favorable financial conditions persist, the greater these overhangs are likely to become. The damage to the economy from overshooting full employment is cumulative, and as it accumulates, the threat to macroeconomic stability mounts.  In other words, the price to be paid for running the economy hot is not just the risk of a period of above-target inflation.  Even if inflation does not pick up, imbalances are created that are unsustainable. Consequently, the risks associated with too much and too little policy accommodation are not asymmetric as the economy approaches full employment.  Too much accommodation or accommodation   maintained far too long is as risky as too little accommodation, even after factoring in the zero lower bound for interest rates. I noted yesterday that the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas’ staff economic forecasts are generally in the central tendency of the projections submitted in this round of the SEP exercise.  They see the economy pushing past full employment early next year, and inflation, as measured by the Dallas Fed trimmed mean PCE index, reaching 2 percent by the end of 2016.  This is a different outlook than is presented in Tealbook, Book A, and, accordingly, we take a somewhat different view of the policy rule prescriptions in simulations presented in Tealbook B.  Also, for reasons just discussed, we do not see the zero bound as a compelling reason for treating policy risk as asymmetric in an economy that is closing in on full employment.  Accordingly, our view is that the appropriate path for the funds rate is likely to be steeper than is currently expected by the public or is assumed in the Tealbook baseline forecast.  We assess recent developments as providing reassurance that the risk of inflation running persistently below 2 percent has diminished. So I lean toward alternative C.  It best describes our view of the data as the data have evolved since our April meeting, as well as the data’s implications for the outlook and appropriate policy.  However, I will support B, as it keeps our options open to respond to new data.  We have some concern, though, that B has the potential to mislead the public.  According to the SEP package, the majority of participants believes that it will be appropriate to raise the federal funds target range in September of 2015 or earlier.  This indicates substantially greater probability of liftoff by September than after September.  That is not what the private analysts think, according to the charts presented yesterday.  Therefore, communications that help bring public perceptions more in line with those of the Committee will be important.  In response to the request yesterday, I have a couple of comments on alternative C′. First, in paragraph 3, I think it is preferable not to include the statement that “the Committee currently anticipates that the economy will evolve in a manner that warrants a gradual increase in the target range for the federal funds rate,” even if it is true.  It is my understanding that the federal funds rate path prescribed by optimal control techniques and simple Taylor-style policy rules are quite sensitive to financial conditions and the economic outlook, so that the warranted policy rate path could steepen in response to completely plausible changes in circumstances. Saying that the Committee expects a gradual policy rate path without also communicating the substantial sensitivity of that expectation to changes in the outlook could give private decisionmakers a distorted view of how policy may evolve.  If the statement remains, a stronger warning about the degree to which normalization’s pace will be subject to adjustment as the economic outlook changes should also be included.  Overall, we prefer to let private analysts draw their own inferences about the future path of policy from the SEP dot chart. It also seems confusing in paragraph 4 to indicate that reinvesting principal and rolling over maturing Treasuries is designed to “help maintain accommodative financial conditions” in the same communication that conveys the Committee’s decision to reduce accommodation. It would be better to make reference to or include the pertinent language from the Committee’s Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, which states that reinvestments will continue until later in the normalization process. Finally, with respect to the proposals on communicating the details for implementation at liftoff, I think the proposal presented is very sensible, and I support proceeding as described.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 223.
 MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  In my view, the economy can support a 25 basis point increase in the federal funds rate. Inflation is projected to return gradually to our goal over the medium run, and recent inflation developments bolster confidence in that projection.  The economy is at or is very near full employment.  I grant there may be some longer-run issues with underemployment, but monetary policy isn’t the tool to fix those problems. Even after the first increase, monetary policy will remain very accommodative. I share the view of John Williams that if we wait too long to commence liftoff, we may find ourselves having to increase rates on a steeper path than we’ve anticipated and that we’ve conveyed to the markets.  But while I believe the economy could support liftoff at this time, we haven’t prepared the markets and the public for a rate increase today, so I’m not advocating it. That leads me to the policy statement and the choice between alternatives B and C.  I understand some of the reluctance to make changes in the FOMC statement because of the risk that it could change the public’s expectations about policy, which currently incorporate liftoff later this year, but I believe there is also risk if our statements are too static. As liftoff approaches, I believe our statements should evolve to lay the foundation for the rationale for liftoff.  I do think the SEP can reinforce that rationale, but I don’t view the SEP as a substitute for the FOMC statement. We should convey information about how economic conditions have evolved relative to the liftoff conditions we’ve included in the statement since March—namely, further improvement in the labor market and reasonable confidence that inflation will move back to its 2 percent objective over time. If the goal today is to try to maintain the current modal expectation in the market that the economy will likely be ready for liftoff in September, then my preference would be to use someof the alternative C language today.  For example, in paragraph 1, to characterize the labor market, I would prefer to refer to “some improvement in labor market conditions,” as in alternative C, rather than to diminishing “underutilization of labor resources,” as in alternative B, because this language more closely relates to the further improvement language in our liftoff criteria.  In paragraph 2, I’d prefer to give some indication that the risk of inflation running persistently below 2 percent has diminished because this ties directly to reasonable confidence regarding the inflation outlook, another of the liftoff criteria. In paragraph 3, I prefer the alternative C language that modifies the liftoff criteria, adding the word “some” to characterize the improvement we need to see in the labor market.  This acknowledges the improvement in the labor market since the language was adopted in March and that we are closer to meeting the criteria for liftoff.  In addition, I continue to think that providing a longer-run perspective on economic developments than is currently done in paragraph 1 would serve the Committee better as we move toward liftoff and beyond. I do believe we should be data dependent.  Data dependence risks being interpreted as being focused on the short run and being less systematic.  I think we need to use our tools of communication to try to avoid that interpretation.  A longer-run focus, I think, would help in that respect. My hope is that we can move to alternative C language—if not today, then in July—so we’ll have better prepared the public for liftoff in September, should the economy evolve as I anticipate. A delay in making changes to this statement will make it harder to make data-dependent policy choices because we will not have laid the appropriate groundwork with our communication.  Lack of that groundwork could cause us to feel compelled to keep delaying liftoff because of the risk of surprising the markets or, should we move, of causing increased volatility because market expectations aren’t aligned with the policy action.  Neither is a particularly good place to be.  I think we can avoid both situations by appropriately evolving the statement. I don’t have strong preferences about the directive or the housekeeping details, whether they should be included today or we should wait until liftoff. Regarding the monetary policy implementation memo, I am comfortable with the proposed approach of separating the details of implementation from the FOMC statement.  I’m not concerned about the governance aspects surrounding our policy tools. Monetary policy remains the responsibility of the FOMC, and we’ve discussed at earlier meetings regarding normalization that the Board of Governors will be setting the IOER rate to support the policy intentions of the FOMC.  But if separating the FOMC statement from the implementation details would bring less focus to the governance aspects of the tools, as suggested in the memo, that’s an added benefit of the proposal. The only concern I have about the authorizations to the Chair of making modest intermeeting adjustments in the IOER and ON RRP rates is the timing of the resolutions, not the delegation of authority, and so let me just explain what my concern is.  Suppose we haven’t had to make any intermeeting changes in the rates in the early stages of liftoff.  Then if we delegate authority later in the process, will it be read as something has changed, and somehow we’ve lost control or think we’re going to lose control and have to make intermeeting changes. Will it sound like things are getting harder. My one suggestion would be that if we do wait to adopt a resolution as proposed in the staff memo, we mention in the minutes that such delegation of authority to the Chair is expected to come at a later date once liftoff is under way.  The memo also asked for views on when we should indicate that we anticipate a temporary suspension of the aggregate cap on the RRP facility, at the time of liftoff or later. I don’t have strong views on that.  We can convey this information before or after liftoff.  We’ve included in the minutes of the March FOMC meeting that the Committee saw some advantages to a temporary elevation or suspension of the cap.  So I think waiting until liftoff would be fine with me.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you very much.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 224.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support option B for today.  As I said yesterday and I’ve said in the past, with regard to our goal variables, we’re about as close as we’ve ever been in the postwar era.  So I think it’s time that we look for opportunities to move our target policy rate off emergency settings.  We have a zero policy rate, and we have a very large balance sheet.  Those are the same settings that we had when we were much further from our goal variables. Certainly, the data that come in over the summer are going to be mixed, and I think we have to have the idea that we’ll be opportunistic in our first policy move.  Also, once we make the policy move, obviously we’re still going to be very accommodative. We’re trying to hedge our bets in the direction of the economy getting more toward normal, so we’re trying to move policy more toward normal, but we’re still going to be very accommodative. We would like to take opportunities to make these policy moves, and I would very much like to make the first move on the back of good news about the economy.  Prescheduling September is going to work against this principle.  I mean, maybe the data will come in great right before that meeting and that will be perfect, but life often doesn’t work out perfectly.  Anything we can do to try to get to a more flexible approach in which every meeting is, ex ante,   identical I think would be very helpful.  I don’t think the Committee is really ready to think in terms of moving opportunistically, but that’s how we’re going to have to move over the normalization process.  The more we can, in our own minds, get toward that kind of an attitude, and then maybe get to a method that would actually implement that, I think would be helpful. I have two comments on the SEP.  One is about SEP paths being given according to an optimal policy assumption, and the second is about the horizon.  First, I think when we talk about the SEP, we need to clarify to people that the projections are put forward under an optimal policy assumption.  We might all be using different models.  Within those different models, policy might be somewhat different, and so the various forecasts are not all made on the same basis. They are not unconditional forecasts the way private-sector forecasts are, where the private-sector forecaster is also trying to forecast what this Committee will do and will give you an out-and-out forecast that you would then evaluate against mean-squared criterion or something like that. Here we’re saying, given the models we have, we’re putting something in under an optimal policy within that model.  So I’d appreciate it if we’d mention this when we talk about the SEP because I don’t think that they are the same thing as the unconditional forecasts given in the private sector. For me, missing a rate rise means worse outcomes for the economy, according to the model that I’m using.  So if you miss the time when the model said you should have lifted off, then you’re going to get worse outcomes going forward than you otherwise could have achieved if you had raised rates earlier.  But given that you didn’t move, there’s some optimal policy going on from that point.  Over the normalization phase, I think this effect will cause federal funds rate dot paths to shift because we’re not all exactly on the same timing schedule.  So you’ve got these dot paths shifting around.  That may not be indicating a change in the sentiment   of the Committee as to where we are or what we need to do but is a detail of how the SEP is put together.  So I try to emphasize this.  I know that it doesn’t go very far when I talk to people outside this Committee.  I know that we all understand it here, but the SEP is a different object from the private-sector forecasts that are often cited. The second comment on the SEP is that the horizon shifts through the year.  That’s something that we’ve always done, but I think it is kind of odd, and it warps the interpretation of the SEP compared with what it otherwise could be. What people really want to know is, what’s your year-ahead outlook and your two-year-ahead outlook.  We should always be giving them a year-ahead outlook and a two-year-ahead outlook in a format that they can digest and see what we’re saying. What’s happening is, you get a bad first quarter.  Well, everyone has to mark down their forecast for the year if that was unexpected, and then we all think that the future looks worse than we previously said, but that isn’t really what’s going on. We’re saying that that was an unexpected shock, and that the next four quarters and the four quarters beyond that might look roughly the same as they did before, and so that we have not perhaps changed our views that much on how the economy is going to evolve going forward.  So if we could get to something like that in the SEP, it might be an improvement.  I understand that that’s a little bit different from how, let’s say, the IMF would do it, or how other people would do it, but on the other hand, we’re trying to convey what our outlook is, given the data we have today, then going forward from here—four-quarter, eight-quarter horizons. On the other questions about C′ and about the housekeeping changes, I was fine with what the staff proposed.  I don’t have any further comments on that.  I would be happy to do the housekeeping changes at this meeting if people feel like that would get that out of the way, so we didn’t have to do that at the time of the actual rate rise.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses support for option B and argues for a more flexible approach to monetary policy. They also express disagreement with the current format of the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) and suggest changes to improve its interpretation.


Passage number 225.
 MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support the policy decision in alternative B and the statement as written.  As I see things today, I am very hopeful that conditions will gel to allow liftoff in September.  Looking ahead, I am at a similar place as President Mester.  I like the idea of a very soft progression from language like that in alternative B today to alternative C in July as being a sensible approach to providing some slight foreshadowing of liftoff in the July statement, if it seems appropriate.  At the July statement, if the data overall continue to reflect modest continuing improvement, then language along the lines of the changes in paragraphs 2 and 3 in today’s alternative C might provide a hint of forward guidance. I agree with the proposal to separate the rationale for the policy decision from the implementation of the policy decision at liftoff.  In considering the specifics of communication, my guiding principle is “meaningfulness to markets.” The staff has listed several changes to the directive—the so-called housekeeping issues—that are unrelated to liftoff and can be communicated immediately if the Committee so chooses. These details strike me as worthwhile in the interest of clarity and accuracy but not particularly meaningful to market participants.  So I favor holding off and communicating these changes when we publish the implementation note at liftoff. In contrast, it seems to me that the question of when and how to communicate the temporary suspension, at liftoff, of the current overnight reverse repo cap is meaningful to markets.  Reflecting the caution and prudence with which we are preparing operationally forliftoff, I think it would be prudent to signal this decision prior to liftoff. This will allow market participants to plan for the liftoff period and so should help achieve a smooth liftoff.  Presuming a September liftoff, the minutes of this meeting or the July meeting seem to me a good tool to communicate this decision.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their support for a policy decision and making suggestions for how to communicate that decision.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 226.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative C as being consistent with the data-dependent policy and with the statement in the previous FOMC minutes that the Committee’s decision to begin normalizing policy would appropriately be determined on a meeting-by-meeting basis. In terms of the criteria for liftoff, the March meeting minutes noted that further improvement in the labor market, stabilization of energy prices, and a leveling out of the foreign exchange value of the dollar would all be seen as helpful in establishing confidence that inflation would turn up.  Since March, we’ve seen progress around each of those criteria.  Employment growth has averaged 207,000 over the past three months, and broader indicators of labor market activity have registered similar improvement.  Readings on core PCE inflation have remained largely stable on a year-over-year basis since December.  And, since the April meeting, we’ve seen oil prices drift higher while the dollar has been relatively stable, which together give me confidence that transitory effects will dissipate.  In addition, our policy rules continue to point to higher rates, and the byproduct of our highly accommodative policy can be found in the incentives of searching for higher yield and the willingness to take on additional risk when interest rate expectations are flat. With the combination of these factors, and understanding that monetary policy operates with long lags, I believe that it is time to begin the process for normalizing policy. In light of yesterday’s discussion about the implication of alternative values of the long-run federal funds rate, I would note, as I did at the previous meeting, that measures of r* often do not move independently of measures of the output gap.  I understand the correlation may not be perfect, but I think an important scenario to consider, as others have noted, is what a lower r*, driven by lower potential output, implies for monetary policy. Productivity growth has been running far below earlier trends.  This suggests a low r* is likely to be reflective of slowing growth of potential GDP rather than persistent weak demand.  If that’s true, the implications for the output gap and liftoff do not necessarily suggest a later liftoff, so I look forward to further discussion and analysis of this aspect of our policy decisionmaking. In terms of today’s decision, market expectations for liftoff are clearly focused on September, with a skew toward December and even into 2016.  This suggests to me that one soft data point—a soft employment report, similar to what we had in March—could easily push expectations back to December.  Yet for all the hand-wringing about the slowdown in Q1, the employment numbers remained solid and growth seems to be on a relatively firm footing.  Yet the strong employment report in May did little to move expectations forward.  This asymmetry is going to be hard to overcome, and it risks pushing back the date of liftoff as we wait to see a consistent streak of strong data. In terms of the two items that we’ve highlighted, I am fine with a separate implementation note. I think that will serve us well in keeping that separate from the statement. And in terms of the housekeeping changes for the directive, I would be comfortable doing those today with the minutes, noting what their relevance is in terms of future decisions.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker supports alternative C as being consistent with data-dependent policy, but also acknowledges that market expectations are focused on September for liftoff, while also pointing out the risks of pushing back the date of liftoff if there is not consistent strong data.


Passage number 227.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B with the language as drafted in the Tealbook.  I think that is a relatively straightforward decision for today. Looking forward and thinking about the two criteria that we have injected into our decisionmaking for an interest rate increase, I find myself again—as you can probably tell from my remarks yesterday—focused on the apparent breakdown in some of the traditional relationships, both in thinking about labor markets and between wages and price inflation. I think that is posing—for me, at least—a challenge in trying to make a decision about when it would be appropriate to lift off for the first time. With respect to further improvement in labor conditions, taken quite literally, one could say that that criterion had been met almost   successively since we first put it in, since there has been some improvement at each step along the way.  But, obviously, the connotation at least is that the amount of improvement that people are looking for probably depends on the gap that they think exists and how much improvement remains to be done.  And so I think some of you indicate that you think we are very close to or maybe even at the natural rate already, and, therefore, you don’t think there is much room for further improvement.  I think President Lacker said any further improvement was immaterial. So, obviously, if you take that view, it is easier to make a decision.  But if one is somewhat sympathetic, as I am, to some of the arguments that are made in some of the papers that I cited yesterday and have cited in the past—that there may be a nontrivial amount of slack left—then the amount of improvement that I may look to is somewhat greater. With respect to reasonable confidence about inflation, I find that to be an even more slippery criterion to try to get my arms around in terms of making a decision on liftoff.  Here I think most people are probably relying on a fairly widely shared intuition that the progressive removal of slack in the economy will at some point begin to push up inflation.  But that intuition—which may have been based on some elegant stuff that you all studied or wrote about when you were in graduate school or in the pre-crisis, pre-recession era—may have broken down to some extent, at least if the more recent literature can be believed.  And the Peneva-Rudd paper I cited yesterday was the latest in a string of research papers suggesting that that may be the case. Now, why is that important to me. Well, it is important because even though I think we all agree that further removal of slack in the economy—as imperfectly reflected in the tightening of labor market conditions—should translate into upward pressure on inflation at some point, the “how much” and “when” actually matter a good deal.  And if we no longer have a kind of reasonably well-understood relationship between the progression of wages and the progression of prices, then it makes it a more difficult judgment.  So if, for example, it were a longer period of time that it took for tighter labor markets and rising wages to translate into price inflation, that would mean there would be a longer period during which exogenous shocks of some sort might adversely affect the economy.  And so I might be more concerned that moving more quickly would put the economy at some risk and not be necessary, really, to stave off inflation. Now, that can go in the other direction as well.  As I think President Williams pointed out a meeting or two ago, when you break that relationship, and you don’t have something to substitute for it, it may be that price inflation could begin to be apparent even in the absence of demonstrable growth in nominal wages.  And the reasonable confidence people may have could take root a little bit more quickly, even in the absence of higher nominal wage growth.  But I do find it a bit disconcerting to have not even a rough calibration of “when” and “how much” is necessary in order to induce that reasonable confidence.  As President Williams said yesterday, it is hard to avoid the recognition that we keep falling short on the inflation target.  I guess that has affected the way I am thinking about liftoff.  But precisely because there isn’t a nice linear relationship to fit any of this into, it doesn’t predetermine the position I will have in September, or any later meeting, for that matter. With regard to the issues that have been raised, as I have said in the past, I hope we rely principally on paragraphs 1 and 2 to communicate future intentions.  I agree with those who think that we shouldn’t be relying simply on the recitation of the past, which is paragraph 1.  Stating where we expect the economy to go, which is what paragraph 2 is about, should provide some measure of signal and communication to markets so that they can then adjust their assessments of how soon we are likely to move.What has always made me a bit nervous about changes in paragraph 3 is my “kitchen timer” analogy, that making a change in paragraph 3 gets people to think, okay, it’s one meeting or it’s two meetings from now.  I will say that, on that scale, the insertion of “some” to characterize the degree of labor market improvement would not be the worst offender.  There have been things proposed in the past which I think would have been worse.  But I would still tend to shy away from it a little bit. I am sympathetic to what President Kocherlakota said about how it would be better if we had a somewhat more precise set of criteria in paragraph 3, but I fear that trying to make that change now would just result in more confusion rather than more clarity. I am all with those who think we should be putting more emphasis on paragraph 2 and not leaving that boilerplate, but at least have a higher hurdle with respect to paragraph 3. I join the consensus that a separate note makes sense.  And, Madam Chair, I am more than indifferent on all of the timing questions, so—[laughter]—on that one, I go with your judgment.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 228.
MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you.  I support alternative B.  I believe there is value to watchful waiting while additional data help clarify the economy’s underlying momentum.  This value is heightened by the asymmetry of risk-management considerations.  The combination of the statement and the SEP release conveys that approach nicely, I think. As I discussed yesterday, the pace of economic improvement slowed at the beginning of the year, and it is as yet unclear how strong or persistent the forces holding back stronger growth are likely to be.  The labor force participation rate and the share of employees working part time for economic reasons suggest that slack remains, although the strength of job openings, the recent reacceleration in payrolls, and some hopeful signs on wages suggest slack is diminishing at a good pace. In contrast, although inflation has rebounded from the low levels at the turn of the year, measures of core inflation remain stubbornly below our target, and not noticeably different from the average subpar pace of inflation over the recovery.  And the puzzling disconnect between tepid aggregate growth and stronger labor market improvement complicates our task.  With remaining slack, and inflation persistently below our target, it is important that reasonably robust increases in aggregate demand be maintained going forward to promote the further improvement in labor market conditions and the movement of inflation back toward 2 percent that are our conditions for liftoff. The totality of data that we have received so far on economic activity in the first half raises some questions about the sufficiency of growth in demand and whether that growth will be maintained.  So I am not yet reasonably confident that we will soon achieve our targets.  Moreover, uncertainty over Greek default is becoming more acute.  This raises the risk of market disruptions over the coming days and weeks.   That said, it is not difficult to imagine a flow of data over the next few months that would leave me reasonably confident, such that liftoff by September is appropriate.  However, if the data take longer to convince, October or December might look more compelling, while recognizing there are some special features in late December that require careful consideration, including light trading and year-end dynamics. Separately, I am comfortable with the staff recommendation to issue, upon liftoff, a policy implementation note to accompany and complement the FOMC statement, which would separate the statement of monetary policy from the operational details necessary to implement that policy. In addition, on balance, I would prefer not to undertake housekeeping changes to the directive at this time, as I don’t see any compelling benefit.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Brainard expresses her support for alternative B and discusses her reasoning for this support. She also discusses her views on the economy and the timing of liftoff. There is no indication of disagreement or contention with any other participants in the conversation.


Passage number 229.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair. I support alternative B in the statement as written.  As I noted yesterday, I still think September liftoff is the most likely, and I think that’s appropriate in light of what data we’ve seen.  Obviously, we’re still data driven. In considering a September liftoff versus later, I would like to build on something that Governor Brainard brought up, a consideration that makes September more attractive to me—the fact that markets will be considerably thinner and more likely to be affected by balance sheet constraints in December compared with September.  So if it is a close call, I would much prefer to move in September rather than commence liftoff in December.  In my mind, a December liftoff would likely be sloppier because trading activity would be depressed.  Trading desks would be thinly staffed, and balance sheet constraints would likely exert more of an effect at year-end than at other times.  Obviously, it also might be easier for us to assemble for videoconferences in late September than in late December, but I would say that’s a less important consideration. So what about an October liftoff if we’re not quite there in September. Well, I don’t think there’s anything wrong with October per se, but I think it’s really unlikely that we’re going to actually decide to lift off in a non-press-conference meeting, even though we’ve said that all meetings are live. Why do I reach that conclusion.  As I see it, the bar to lifting off at a press conference meeting is lower than at a non-press-conference meeting. To lift off at a non-press-conference meeting, you have to get sufficient news over the interval between the two meetings to get over that higher bar.  I just don’t think that’s very likely.  The data are unlikely to come in so one-sided to push the motivation up sufficiently to transition from “no” at a press conference meeting to “yes” at a non-press-conference meeting six or seven weeks later.  I think we just need to understand that it’s highly unlikely we’re going to move in October. Now, obviously, you could decide to announce a press conference for the October meeting and move in October, but I think this sends an awkward signal as well.  Why the urgency.  What has changed that made September a no-go but October so necessary that you have to schedule a special press conference.  You want a smooth liftoff without a lot of drama.  I think it’s better if the liftoff doesn’t seem to have a sense of urgency driving it. So the bottom line for me is, yes, we can certainly lift off in a non-press-conference meeting, but will we.  I doubt it, and given that, I think the choice may come down to September or December, hence my focus on the relative attractiveness of September versus December. In terms of C′, I have a very favorable reaction to the way it has been done, separating the monetary policy decision from the tactics of how to actually achieve it.  I think it’s a stronger  and cleaner communication.  Do we want to have forward guidance in terms of the likely path of interest rates post liftoff.  This is a much tougher call for me.  It does reduce the risk of a taper tantrum somewhat by underlining the fact that we think it will be gradual. But it is a very soft commitment.  All it says is, we “currently anticipate that,” which can already be inferred from the SEP.  And while the rate at which we raise the federal funds rate might be gradual, we might not raise it gradually, depending on how the economy or financial conditions evolve. I worry a little bit that if we put that in the statement, it could be taken as a stronger commitment than it actually is, or we could get to a meeting and say we really want to raise the federal funds rate 50 basis points but we said we were going to raise it gradually, so now we don’t want to do 50 basis points.  I think that would be unfortunate.  So the bottom line for me is that I would slightly prefer not having it in the statement. Finally, there’s a part of the directive that I think is a little awkward in the sense that it basically says we’re going to offer overnight RRP “in amounts no greater than the available amount of Treasury securities held outright in the System Open Market Account.”  Well, I think it would be really good to actually have a footnote or a number to refer to—it’s a really big number, so I think it’s very important for that to be clear to people. CHAIR YELLEN.  Simon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their support for alternative B and providing their reasoning for their opinion. They also express their preference for a September liftoff over a December liftoff and offer their thoughts on including forward guidance in the statement. There is no indication of disagreement or conflicting opinions in this passage.


Passage number 230.
 MR. POTTER.  I think the plan is that we’ll have a Desk statement at the same time, and there will be clarity there.  And the number that we’ve discussed, if you went this route, would be $2 trillion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Potter's thoughts on the plan and the discussed number.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 231.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes, I prefer that to be as explicit as possible so the public doesn’t read it and then think, “Now, what’s that number, exactly.”  Because it’s effectively uncapped, subject to this very large number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses a preference for explicitness in order to prevent the public from misinterpreting the number. This suggests that there may be differing opinions or potential conflicts regarding how the number should be communicated.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 232.
  MR. POTTER.  So the difficulty, if you chose to say it was uncapped, is that we want to make it look like it’s uncapped even though it’s capped at a finite amount.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. 

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Potter, is suggesting that there is a difficulty in making something appear as though it is uncapped, even though it is actually limited to a finite amount. This implies that there is a disagreement or conflict between what is intended to be portrayed and the actual limitations set in place.


Passage number 233.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Right.  I want to be as explicit as possible about the number.  I also think we could probably write better language here.  “In amounts no greater than the available amount”—that’s two uses of “amount” in six words, so maybe we need a little more work on the drafting there, but that’s a very small point. As far as cleaning up the directive at this meeting so there’s less going on when we actually do liftoff, I slightly favor that, but I would defer to the Chair’s judgment. And, finally, should we communicate in the minutes that there’s going to be no cap initially.  Absolutely, we should communicate that in the minutes, because you don’t want people going into the September meeting not knowing whether there will or will not be a cap.  That will actually influence their behavior going into the meeting and how they think they’re going to do their business postmeeting, if we actually do lift off, so I think that needs to be widely understood before we actually lift off. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Yes, President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a discussion about language and communication.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 234.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I want to object a little bit to Vice Chairman Dudley’s characterization of the Committee as not being able to move at various meetings.  This Committee has moved and can move at any meeting and should feel free to do so, and to tie us up in knots about one meeting out of the year as our one chance to move, I think, is a ridiculous characterization of U.S. monetary policy.  We can move.  We have moved in the past, and if the data call for it, then we should do it.  I understand what he’s saying about considerations about this, but it’s too much.  It’s like we’ve been laying on the couch too long, and we’re not used to being able to get up and run around the block.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard objects to Vice Chairman Dudley's characterization of the Committee as unable to move at various meetings. He argues that the Committee has moved and can move at any meeting and should feel free to do so. Mr. Bullard believes that tying the Committee up in knots about one meeting out of the year is a ridiculous characterization of U.S. monetary policy. He emphasizes that if the data call for it, the Committee should move and argues that Vice Chairman Dudley's concerns are excessive.


Passage number 235.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think you’ve mischaracterized what I said, Jim.  Just for the record, I think you very much mischaracterized what I said.  All I said was, these are considerations that could affect the timing of the Committee’s decisions. Obviously, the Committee can move at any meeting.  Whether they actually choose to do so is a different issue. CHAIR YELLEN.  Further comments. [No response]  Okay.  Let’s start with the statement for today.  I certainly did hear around the table a few people who lean in the direction of either outright preferring alternative C or who would like to import some of the language from alternative C and bring it into B.  But as I listen to most of you weigh in on the statement for today, I heard relatively limited support for making those changes and pretty broad-based support for B with the language that we have here.  And so I think what I’d like to do is propose alternative B without changes for today. With respect to the implementation note and whether it’s a good idea to have that, I actually heard unanimous support for a separate implementation note, so that’s good.  I think we can decide that we should go ahead in that general way. Now, in terms of changing the directive today, some of you did not say whether you supported it. [Laughter]  I tried to count reasonably carefully how people felt, and I did count more people saying “No” than “Yes.”  A bunch of people said they could go either way.  I think my inclination in view of that would be not to make changes today.  President Lacker may be taking another look at some of the wording regarding open market operations.  One way or another, I think the minutes for today will note that we discussed these matters and alert the public.  From the staff point of view, do you consider that acceptable. Because I think the Committee is pretty flexible on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It mentions that there were some people who preferred alternative C or wanted to incorporate its language into alternative B, but it states that there was broad-based support for alternative B as it was. It also mentions that there was unanimous support for a separate implementation note. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 236.
 MR. LAUBACH.  Absolutely.  I mean, the minutes can lay the groundwork. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Why don’t we leave the directive unchanged for today.  And that means that what I’d like to do is have Matt take the roll call for a vote on alternative B as written, and the directive, which is the top version on page 14 of Thomas’s handout.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


