Passage number 1.
 MR. FISCHER.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  And without objection.  I would like to note that First Vice President Mark Mullinix is representing the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond at today’s meeting, and we anticipate that he will do so until a new president of that Reserve Bank has been selected and is in office. Mark has attended a number of FOMC meetings previously.  Mark, we welcome you to the FOMC table. Also, I’m pleased to note that First Vice President Gooding is again representing the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. Raphael Bostic is scheduled to assume office as president on June 5, and we look forward to working with him soon.  Marie, thank you for your contributions to the Committee’s deliberations in the interim. We appreciate it. And now let’s turn to our first agenda item, which is “Financial Developments and Open Market Operations.” Simon will start us off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply provides information and welcomes new members to the meeting.


Passage number 2.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Simon, on the swap lines, do we have criteria that are listed somewhere regarding why this particular set of central banks outside of the NAFA agreement is the one that we want swap lines with, as opposed to some other set of central banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about the criteria for selecting the set of central banks for swap lines.


Passage number 3.
 MR. POTTER.  We do.  I think that if you look at our website, it goes through the history of the swap lines, particularly the ones that we created in 2008, and the metric we’ve used is in terms of large financial centers.  The five central banks that we have the standing arrangements with satisfy that in, obviously, a particular order, with London being the most important financial center outside the United States.  I’d say for the goal of these swap lines, which is to support credit formation in the United States, it’s clear that banks in those regions are important in our credit formation, not only those in Europe and Japan, but also those in Canada, whose banks are large players in our markets as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 4.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Any other questions for Simon.  [No response]  Okay.  If there are no further questions, I’m now going to ask for separate votes on the renewal of the NAFA arrangements and the liquidity swap arrangements.  Of course, only current FOMC members may vote.  Let’s start with the NAFA arrangements, our standing swap lines with Canada and Mexico.  Do I have a motion to approve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for votes on the renewal of certain arrangements.


Passage number 5.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So moved.   CHAIR YELLEN.  Are there any comments. [No response]  All in favor.  [Chorus of ayes]  Any opposed.  [No response] The renewal of the NAFA swap arrangements is approved.  Now for renewal of the liquidity swap arrangements.  Do I have a motion to approve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The motion to approve is met with no opposition or comments, and there is unanimous agreement to renew the swap arrangements.


Passage number 6.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Any comments on these. [No response] All in favor.  [Chorus of ayes]  Any opposed.  [No response] Okay.  The renewal of the liquidity swap arrangements is approved.  And, finally, we need a vote to ratify the Domestic Open Market Operations conducted since the March meeting.  Do I have a motion to approve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply presents a series of motions being approved without any comments or opposition.


Passage number 7.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  All in favor.  [Chorus of ayes]  Any opposed.  [No response]  Thank you. Okay.  We’re ready to move on to our next agenda item, “Economic and Financial Situation.” David Wilcox is going to start us off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The participants in the meeting are all in favor of moving on to the next agenda item, and there is no opposing response.


Passage number 8.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I have a question for David about investment spending.  How is the staff thinking about how the political uncertainty could be affecting investment.  You would think that when there’s a lot of uncertainty about trade policy or tax policy, the option value of potentially delaying investment might go up.  Are we seeing any evidence of that.  And how are you thinking about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is simply a question about investment spending and political uncertainty.


Passage number 9.
 MR. WILCOX.  I’ll offer a thought or two and then see whether my colleagues might have something to add.  First of all, it is pretty hard to measure uncertainty. Some of the various indicators that we look at point in different directions. Traditional financial market indicators are pretty low at the moment, puzzlingly so.  That could be because indicators like the VIX and the implied option volatility on bonds have a short horizon, and they may not anticipate that that uncertainty will be resolved over the period covered by the relevant contract.  My recollection is that the Baker, Bloom, and Davis index has been more volatile and a little higher, but it doesn’t point to any red flags.  Credit spreads in bond markets are pretty low.  That said, one has to wonder whether those indicators are just fundamentally missing the point about the extent of policy uncertainty. Broadly speaking, investment hasn’t been hugely surprisingly weak for us, and, again, we continue to think that a major influence in holding down investment is the slow growth of the labor force.  If you just compute the rate of growth of the capital stock using historical averages, it is pretty slow. If you adjust for the rate of growth of potential workers, it looks at the moment like it’s currently about at the sample average. Bill.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 10.
  MR. WASCHER. The only thing I would add is that the GDP numbers for Q1 actually gave us a positive surprise on investment.  We had been writing a pretty modest pace of investment for this year, and we were positively surprised by the Q1 data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that there was a positive surprise in the Q1 GDP numbers related to investment.


Passage number 11.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kashkari.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 12.
 MR. KASHKARI.  David, you ticked down your estimate of the natural rate of unemployment and ticked up labor force participation.  Could you talk to me about that a little bit.  Obviously a critical determination for us is where the natural rate is.  Nobody knows for sure.  As I’ve read the history of the Committee over the past 30 or 40 years, it seems like when the Committee errs, it errs in overestimating the natural rate rather than underestimating it. I’m just curious if you could talk about your confidence in our current assessment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is expressing curiosity and seeking information about the natural rate of unemployment and labor force participation.


Passage number 13.
 MR. WASCHER.  I’ll take this one. Let me start with the participation rate, because there I think the story is a little bit clearer. The participation rate had been moving relatively sideways and against the downward trend, and it moved up above our estimate of a trend to a place at which we were a little uncomfortable with how wide that gap had become.  Because of that, we reexamined some of our underlying trend estimates, which we do by demographic group, and it looked to us like we had a trend for the younger group, the 16-to-24 year olds, that was too negative.  That trend is a much more difficult for us to estimate because it’s hard to determine the cohort effects.  We don’t have very much information on them.  And so about three-fourths of the upward revision we made to the trend, which is pretty small, is the result of raising the trend for the 16-to-24-year-old group. In addition, at the previous FOMC meeting President Harker mentioned evidence from research at the Philadelphia Federal Reserve that some people were returning to the labor force   from disability, and we looked into that.  We looked at the work that Shigeru Fujita of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia had done, and we were convinced that some of that was going on.  So that was another source of an upward revision to the trend. We had previously viewed people moving from the labor force or unemployment to disability as a permanent state.  It’s still pretty persistent, but it looked like it was a little less permanent than we had thought before, and that made us comfortable revising up our trend participation rate a little bit. The natural rate, I think, was a harder call for us. The inflation data don’t give us a lot of signal about the natural rate because the short-run Phillips curve is so flat. Certainly, on the price side that is true.  Using the wage data, the Phillips curve is not quite as flat, and there, actually, our models, as David mentioned, haven’t really been surprised given our current estimate of the natural rate and low productivity growth.  But, nonetheless, we were trying to get our estimate of the output gap in line with our estimate of slack in the labor market, in order to reduce what we refer to as an “Okun’s law error” that would have become uncomfortably large absent any changes.  And so it just seemed to us like it was also a sensible thing to do—to nudge down slightly our estimate of the natural rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the reasoning behind their decision to revise their estimates of the participation rate and the natural rate.


Passage number 14.
 MR. KASHKARI.  Can I follow up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any contentious or disagreeing statements or actions. It appears to be a neutral statement or question.


Passage number 15.
 MR. WILCOX.  In terms of the level of confidence, what would you estimate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is a simple statement of a question being asked. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention between individuals.


Passage number 16.
 MR. WASCHER.  I believe Thomas is going to show in his briefing a confidence band surrounding one of our model estimates of the natural rate, and it’s pretty wide.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Wascher, is merely stating his belief that Thomas will present a confidence band surrounding a model estimate of the natural rate, and describes it as "pretty wide." There is no indication of disagreement or contention between the speaker and Thomas.


Passage number 17.
 MR. WILCOX. Like a percentage point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Like a percentage point" is simply providing a comparison or analogy, rather than expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 18.
 MR. WASCHER.  Maybe a percentage point each way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a suggestion or estimation of a percentage point change, rather than a point of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 19.
  MR. KASHKARI. Okay, that was going to be my follow-up.  Is it conceivable that two years from now we look back, and though we thought it was 4.9, it was really 4.5.  Is that very possible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kashkari is asking a question seeking confirmation or agreement on the possibility of a different outcome.


Passage number 20.
 MR. WILCOX.  Absolutely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 21.
 MR. KASHKARI.  Okay.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 22.
 MR. WILCOX. The only way in which I think I would respectfully disagree with the premise of your question is that my recollection is that, speaking for the staff, toward the end of expansions, I think we tend to get a little enthusiastic about the natural rate.  We don’t see inflation emerging, and in the past couple of cycles we’ve pushed down the natural rate as an explanation why those inflationary pressures are more muted than one would have believed, given a higher natural rate.  Retrospectively, we’ve tended to go back and boost our estimates of the natural rate because in the rearview mirror it appears that the economy actually was a little overheated, generally speaking, as the economy went into recession. So, this time around, I think we’ve been reserved in our approach to revising down our estimate of the natural rate, not only hoping not to commit some new error this time but also keeping very much in mind the fact that the errors from our wage and price indexes really aren’t calling for a downward revision in the natural rate at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is describing the staff's tendency to be overly optimistic about the natural rate during the end of expansions, but now they are being more reserved in their approach.


Passage number 23.
 MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Other questions" suggests that the discussion is moving on to a different topic or allowing others to ask questions.


Passage number 24.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  This is a follow-up question on the staff output gap, which is panel 5 on the forecast summary page. Again, there are no confidence bounds.  It doesn’t look like this output gap would be statistically significant, where we are today.  Would it become statistically significant by the end of the forecast horizon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact about the lack of confidence bounds and the statistic significance of the output gap, without any expression of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 25.
MR. WILCOX.  I don’t have confidence intervals for the measure that’s shown on the left.  It parallels pretty closely the one in panel 4 on the right.  Thomas, do you have one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wilcox states that he does not have confidence intervals for the measure shown on the left, while Thomas is asked if he has one. This suggests a disagreement or lack of agreement between Mr. Wilcox and Thomas regarding the availability of confidence intervals.


Passage number 26.
 MR. LAUBACH.  Not for the output gap.  I only have the confidence bound for the natural rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their own situation or limitation regarding the confidence bound for the natural rate, without opposing or disagreeing with anyone else.


Passage number 27.
 MR. WILCOX.  However, an Okun’s-law multiple will work pretty well here.  Unless Bill Wascher can beat me to the draw, I’ll just say that if the confidence interval around the unemployment rate is a percentage point, then I would guess that it might be as large as 2 percentage points around the output gap estimate that comes from the state-space model.  By 2018, I think it would be on the verge of becoming statistically significant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing a potential estimate and prediction, but there is no explicit contention or disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 28.
 MR. BULLARD. And then I have a question on the foreign financial stability, which is the matrix on the last slide in the “Material for Briefing on the International Outlook.”  For April 2017, we have South Korea ranked as “low,” and I just wondered:  That country has had a big political scandal, and there obviously have also been a lot of tensions on the peninsula.  Are those things outside the purview of what we would put in this matrix, or would you put them at least at “moderate” on the basis of those developments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and seeking clarification.


Passage number 29.
 MS. WILSON. It’s definitely true that you’re not the first to play this up.  We don’t have the risk of nuclear war here in our matrix.  There are a number of things, purely on the financial side, that we think look good in South Korea.  The financial sector has moderate risk.  The banking sector seems in fairly good shape.  Sovereign debt levels are low, and it’s running a sizable current account surplus. Valuation pressures are moderate, and it has relatively robust institutions. So those have all contributed to our assessment of “low” overall. One thing we haven’t seen at this point is a really big spillover of that risk into financial markets.  If we were starting to see that risk really push down asset prices and weigh on the   exchange rate, we would probably reconsider.  But it’s so speculative that, in terms of financial-stability risk that would spill over to the United States, it’s hard to put that into the matrix at this point without more signals from financial markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily providing information and discussing the assessment of the financial sector in South Korea.


Passage number 30.
 MR. BULLARD. Okay, so is this meant to reflect the potential for financial instability in that particular country to spill over to the United States, or is it a statement about whether that country, just taken on its own, faces financial-stability risk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question clarifying whether the statement refers to the potential spillover effect on the United States or the financial stability risk faced by the country on its own.


Passage number 31.
 MS. WILSON. It’s a little of both. The countries chosen in our matrix are determined both in terms of their overall size—their financial markets, their GDP, their engagement, and their connection to the global financial and economic system—as well as their linkages— importantly, their linkages to the United States.  So that’s part of why we have chosen them, and they are weighted in a way that will try to capture those interlinkages.  When we do our assessments, we are assessing the financial stability—in particular, characteristics that we think will have more international implications.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 32.
 MR. BULLARD.  It’s a little of both.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 33.
 MS. BRAINARD.  I just have a comment to say I think I’m probably one of the people that you’re referring to who has raised this.  The won has depreciated very substantially in a very short period in response to some geostrategic concerns, so I would also question that judgment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Brainard, is challenging or questioning the judgment made by someone regarding the depreciation of the won in response to geostrategic concerns.


Passage number 34.
 MS. WILSON. Okay. CHAIR YELLEN.  Any other comments or questions.  [No response]  Okay.  We now have an opportunity for people to comment on financial-stability-related issues.  A number of people have indicated a desire to do so.  And if anyone else wants to join the list, just raise your hand.  We’ll start with President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 35.
   MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Discussion of GSE reform seems to have been pushed back as other more pressing initiatives are receiving more attention.  However, GSE reform poses a potential risk that has received relatively little attention to date.  The GSEs, including their securitized vehicles, hold approximately 44 percent of multifamily loans.  The GSE holdings of multifamily loans significantly exceed the holdings of banks, which hold approximately 36 percent of multifamily loans outstanding.  Should GSE reform get serious, one can imagine a fairly significant shock to the sector, especially if reform proposals require the GSEs to reduce or eliminate their holdings of multifamily loans. In light of the risk that prices in this sector are already a bit “rich,” as we heard earlier, as indicated by their low cap rates, one can easily imagine proponents of reform asking whether it is wise for the GSEs to have such a large footprint in the multifamily mortgage market.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining the potential risks of GSE reform and the concerns that proponents of reform may have.


Passage number 36.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or statements that suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 37.
 WILLIAMS. Thank you, Madam Chair.  I was going to comment, or maybe it’s actually a question.  It relates to the QS report—so this is probably for Rochelle—and it’s really more of a broad question about how do we think about price-to-book ratios for large banks.  In the QS report on page 14 of 97, you reported that financial leverage in the banking sector remains low and pointed to chart 3-2 on page 15 of 97, which shows the price-to-book ratios for selected bank holding companies. I have two specific questions about just how to think about price-to-book ratios in terms of thinking about risks to the banking system.  The first question is about the large foreign banks.  Many of them have price-to-book ratios well below one even today.  What does that mean for the resilience of these banks in the financial system.  How do we think about banks that have such  low price-to-book ratios in terms of their vulnerabilities and in terms of their ability to survive in a very stressed environment. My second, very related question concerns the domestic banks, as even there we are seeing significant improvement.  Price-to-book ratios are now at levels of about 1 or above that, but still well below the levels—about 2 or higher—that we saw before the financial crisis.  And, again, I’m just trying to think, what do I make of that. Is that just a reflection of a stricter regulatory environment.  Is it about new business models or changes in business models in those large banks.  Is it just part of a “new normal” for the financial system.  And, if anything, what is this telling me about, again, vulnerabilities or resilience in terms of the large banks and the broader financial system. Those are my questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is asking questions and seeking clarification on the topic of price-to-book ratios for large banks.


Passage number 38.
 MS. EDGE. Comparing it with, say, the past, the higher values in the past probably do reflect risk perceptions that were maybe being out of line and not properly seeing the risk that was there in the earlier environment. It’s obviously an indicator of profitability, and it’s an indicator of ability to raise equity. So higher price-to-book ratios, say above 1, would suggest a better ability for raising equity.  And lower price-to-book ratios would reflect difficulties with actual profitability and difficulties in raising equity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 39.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 40.
 WILLIAMS. My question, really, is, while we focus a lot on regulatory capital and capital ratios, should we be more focused on this. Is it telling us something different that maybe we should be spending more time thinking about.  I don’t have an answer for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Williams, is simply expressing a question and stating that they do not have an answer for it.


Passage number 41.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Let me contribute one gratuitous observation.  I think there’s a high correlation between return on equity and price-to-book and, to your point, profitability.  It says more about that they just can’t earn.  Back before the crisis, there were just much higher returns on equities.  And, normally, especially with banks, there’s a very high correlation.  The European  banks in particular have lower returns on equities, but even the U.S.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing an observation and explaining the correlation between return on equity and price-to-book ratio, specifically in the context of banks.


Passage number 42.
 banks are struggling to get above 10, and I think that may explain most of it VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  If I can just add something. There is also still a lot of embedded legal risk in the valuations.  So if you have legal costs that are probably to come that aren’t really reflected yet in legal reserves, that’s something that is probably important for some banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing reasons for why banks may be struggling financially, including the challenge of surpassing a threshold of 10 and the presence of embedded legal risks. They are not presenting conflicting viewpoints or arguing against a particular perspective.


Passage number 43.
 MR. LEHNERT.  President Williams, this is all actually my fault.  I apologize. I really wanted to put this chart in there.  This was something that was raised in the second half of last year as a potential vulnerability of the U.S. banking system.  There was a Brookings paper on this co-authored by Larry Summers with Natasha Sarin, so it seemed important to pay attention to it. Like Rochelle said, the connection between, let’s say, immediate resilience and this measure is a little murky. A low price-to-book ratio is evidence that you are going to have trouble raising capital in private markets. Of course, a high price-to-book ratio could arise in part because you are overly optimistic.  But, in principle, one ought to find it easier to attract private capital. And your final question, what’s a good market-based measure of leverage.  I think one that is strongly preferred is something like a CDS spread that is more conceptually aligned with solvency risk in these institutions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own perspective and providing information about a potential vulnerability of the U.S. banking system. They also mention a potential measure of leverage that they think is preferred. There is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 44.
 MR. FISCHER.  Two questions.  One for Andreas and one for President Kaplan.  Are we happy with the quality of CDS spreads. Do we know they are good, and we can base policy on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking two questions and seeking information or confirmation from Andreas and President Kaplan.


Passage number 45.
 MR. LEHNERT.  Do you mean the integrity of the underlying data sources and the market participants who are executing the transactions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking for clarification or confirmation about the meaning of a specific term.


Passage number 46.
   MR. FISCHER. No.  I mean the estimates. The markets make estimates.  They don’t always make good estimates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement discussing the estimates made by markets, acknowledging that not all estimates made by markets are accurate.


Passage number 47.
 MR. LEHNERT.  They have seemed responsive to reasonable market events.  They, of course, embed the market price of risk in the assessment of the probabilities of various bad events that can influence banks, and, certainly, they were in some sense too low—out of whack with physical probabilities—before the crisis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any contention or disagreement. It is describing a statement made by Mr. Lehnert about the responsiveness of banks to market events and the assessment of risk probabilities.


Passage number 48.
 MR. FISCHER.  Okay.  And for President Kaplan, I’m puzzled as to what rates of return we expect banks to make.  If I can make 10 percent, just barely make 10 percent, I’d probably be quite happy.  What do you think they should be making.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fischer expresses his confusion and asks for President Kaplan's opinion on what rates of return banks should be making.


Passage number 49.
 MR. KAPLAN.  There is no answer to that.  It’s a function of market conditions.  But I would say, to the extent that you’ve got a relatively flatter yield curve and some of the other market dynamics we have, it’s not surprising.  Also, you’d expect them to be a little higher if the banks are fee-generating, which enables the big banks to earn lots of fees on asset management and investment banking and really doesn’t take a lot of capital. The only concern I have for especially small, mid-sized banks and other banks about having an ROE under 10 percent is whether they are taking duration risk and other risks in their investment portfolio in order to make up for the lack of profitability in their other lines. That’s the part for me that makes me a little nervous.  When I see what they’re doing with that excess deposit account, I fear people may be taking undue risks that may come back to bite them.  But what’s the right ROE.  It’s a function of the environment.  My guess is, in this environment, these banks are adapting—we were talking about this last night—about as well as could be expected.  The concern is the way they’re adapting, especially small, mid-sized banks that don’thave fee-earning potential and are not in the asset-management business or banking business.  They are probably doing some things with the investment account that they may regret later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is primarily the speaker's statement of their own concerns and observations.


Passage number 50.
 MR. FISCHER.  Okay.  Thanks. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Fischer, you’re on the list.  Did you have a comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The conversation is respectful and there is no indication of any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 51.
 MR. FISCHER.  Oh, I have lots of comments.  Sorry. CHAIR YELLEN.  Please proceed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fischer states that he has lots of comments, and Chair Yellen gives him permission to proceed.


Passage number 52.
 MR. FISCHER.  The “QS Assessment of Financial Stability” is an impressive survey covering not only the U.S. financial system in considerable detail, but also including assessments of financial stability in other leading advanced and emerging market countries.  And the staff who worked on this assessment deserve our thanks. On balance, the summary of financial stability in the United States is encouraging.  The overall staff assessment of the level of vulnerability of the U.S. financial system is “moderate,” as it has been since the current scale was adopted in 2014.  In addition, the international financial stability matrix of the 13 foreign countries, 7 advanced economies and 6 emerging market economies, also receives an overall summary grade of “moderate.”  The only problem with the 13 foreign countries is that the standalone assessment of the vulnerability of the financial sector is the most conspicuous exception to their doing well.  Only 4 of the 13 countries earn the “moderate” grade, and Italy and China are awarded red flags for the most serious vulnerabilities. The two other countries that received red flags are surprising: Canada and Switzerland.  But it’s less surprising when you realize those are for their housing sectors; Hong Kong is the third red housing flag.  These evaluations are not, I think, undertaken mainly to increase our expertise on the global economy, but rather because they are used in evaluating the vulnerability level of the foreign assets held by U.S. banks. Beyond the international aspect, the QS identifies weaknesses in the U.S. financial system, and the staff has not hesitated to describe some of them in the QS.  In particular, the survey notes that prices of risky assets are high across a range of markets, including those for corporate debt, equities, and commercial real estate. But, to encourage us, the staff also points out that fundamentals are good, and they include a judgment that prices of homes remain within the range suggested by their rents.  I think we are now beginning to see signs of house prices starting to rise more rapidly, and, in any case, housing is always the sector that bears careful watching. The staff suggests that the ratio of credit to GDP remains below a range of plausible estimates of the trend, although there is a question of whether from the viewpoint of financial stability there should be a positive trend in the ratio of credit to GDP, particularly at a time when the short-term real interest rate is low and likely to rise. The staff analysis goes beyond looking at macro-level indicators of vulnerability and in a more detailed analysis concludes that credit losses resulting from declines in asset prices will not hit any critical node in the financial system particularly hard.  The optimism of that answer would be reduced by a significantly more rapid rise in short-term and other interest rates, but the staff makes the valid point that because recent stress tests have built in big drops in property and equity prices, resilience against such shocks is likely to be high and less worrisome.  The report also discusses the question of what would happen if asset prices continued to rise.  It suggests that this would lead to an increase in the demand for credit and notes that the United States lacks the macroprudential tools in the real estate market that many other countries have.  But on a “one hand and on the other” comment, the staff notes that there are absolutely no signs of a credit boom at present.   The staff has also turned its attention to examining the risks that could arise outside the regulated banking system—that is, in the shadow banking system—a term that the staff dislikes for its connotation that there is something shadowy about the nonregulated financial system.  In this regard, it reports with care on the success of the reform of money funds while warning that vigilance continues to be needed, for money managers have an inherent obligation to seek higher returns, although we remind ourselves that it’s without increasing risk excessively.  The staff is concerned that money might begin to return to prime funds and other more opaque vehicles that in effect have fixed nominal asset values. In Rochelle’s presentation today, she made the case that the Federal Home Loan Banks have recently increased the degree of maturity transformation they undertake.  The staff, as on most phenomena that worry them slightly, does not believe that the present levels of maturity transformation present a major financial stability problem, but they are clearly on guard watching current developments and warning that stress at the FHLBs could be transmitted to other parts of the financial system. And they are also reaching out to the FHFA, the primary regulator on these issues.  This is very useful work, and the staff deserves our commendation again for exploring and exposing difficulties that arise from the powers of the FHLBs. In other words, the work of the regulator is never done.  Successes in maintaining stability are rarely noted, which implies that the best regulators should prefer not to have their names in the newspapers too often.  Rather, their best rewards are the recognition of their achievements by those who understand the forces threatening financial stability that always operate in the economy and hope for the silence of the dog that doesn’t bark in the night. One final word to all of us.  We are entering a period in which the balance of forces between those who have sought to bring financial stability through structural changes in the  financial system and those who have forgotten the lessons of 10 years ago and the massive losses that the GFC inflicted on so many United States citizens and residents is turning in favor of those who forget or tend to ignore history.  We all have to be on guard, for that is the greatest threat to financial stability that we now face. Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  I agree. President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Fischer, is expressing agreement and support for the "QS Assessment of Financial Stability" and commending the staff for their work. He also acknowledges some weaknesses in the U.S. financial system and highlights the need for vigilance and caution. Overall, he emphasizes the importance of maintaining financial stability and recognizing the lessons learned from past crises. Chair Yellen also agrees with Mr. Fischer's remarks.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 53.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I, too, want to thank the staff for their ongoing work on the QS assessment.  I find these helpful, and especially the Federal Home Loan Bank analysis this time. I want to echo, a little bit, the comments of Governor Fischer. When I look at the report on leverage in the financial sector remaining low and capital ratios at the bank holding companies that are high by historical standards, as it relates to the largest firms, I find this encouraging.  But I’d have to say, my own level of concern about this vulnerability has gone up in light of some of the discussions we hear today about potential regulatory reform, which of course is yet to be fully defined. It’s true that the largest banking firms were considered to have high capital ratios by historical standards, certainly in a relative sense, given levels in 2008 that required taxpayer support.  But judging their capital be adequate relative to the risk they pose to the broader economy is going to warrant ongoing scrutiny.  When you look at international accounting standards, which restrict the netting of derivatives, these largest firms hold an equity-to-asset ratio of 6 percent, while the smallest U.S. banks, by the same measure, hold more than 10 percent.  I would also note that if you go back to the time before government safety nets, these largest firms held between 12 and 15 percent.  The other important characteristic in this report is the vulnerability associated with interconnectedness.  And on this dimension, again, I think it’s reassuring to see a decline in intrafinancial system assets and liabilities as a result of regulations such as capital surcharges, liquidity coverage ratios, net stable funding ratios, and reductions in bilaterally cleared derivatives. So the report’s conclusion that these firms are less connected seems right to me. But, again, in a relative sense, as their assets compose a greater share of GDP, it seems to me that the economy remains vulnerable to these linkages, and it’s a reminder of the ongoing importance of applying strong capital regulation and supervision to these firms.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard, did you want to comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Ms. George, expresses her concern about the vulnerability of the financial sector and the need for ongoing scrutiny of the capital ratios of large banking firms. She disagrees with the notion that high capital ratios alone are sufficient and argues for strong capital regulation and supervision.


Passage number 54.
 MS. BRAINARD.  Yes.  Thank you.  Well, my comments follow directly from both Governor Fischer and President George.  The quarterly assessment highlights “rich” asset valuations as a source of notable concern while noting that financial sector leverage and maturity transformation are well contained. History suggests that elevated asset valuations pose a considerably greater risk to financial stability when they’re associated with high leverage, especially in the financial sector.  Because today these elevated valuations are occurring against a backdrop of well-capitalized core financial institutions, which are managing their liquidity and their risks much more carefully and transparently than before the crisis, it’s plausible that the overall risk to the financial system is only moderate. At a time when many of the regulatory changes enacted since the crisis are coming under critical scrutiny in the policy arena, it’s important to emphasize that our large banks did not become well capitalized by accident.  Enhanced prudential standards, including the higher capital requirements and supervisory stress tests, as well as liquidity requirements and CLAR stress tests have been instrumental in bringing about this improved situation.  Tough resolution planning  requirements and orderly liquidation authority are critical requisites for assessing financial stability risks to be moderate today. As memories of the crisis fade, public perceptions of the need for these rigorous prudential standards for the large, complex banking organizations may, too, fade.  As we have seen previously, this impulse to soften standards can contribute to the cyclicality of the financial system. And, as we know from experience, it is precisely when asset prices are high that future losses are also likely to be building and the loss-absorbing capacity of thick capital buffers is likely to be most important. What implications does this have for our monetary policy deliberations today.  Although monetary policy could have some effect in moderating asset prices, it is a very blunt instrument, and, arguably, would be unwarranted in current circumstances in no small part because we have a rich set of micro- and some macroprudential tools that are better targeted to combating these risks, and we are using them vigorously.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Is there anybody else who would like to weigh in on financial stability. [No response]  Okay.  I suggest we take a break.  How about 15 minutes. There’s coffee and so forth outside, and we’ll come back and then begin our economic go-round. [Coffee break] CHAIR YELLEN.  Would this motley crew please come to order. [Laughter] I think we will get going on our economic go-round, starting with President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement of agreement and support for the measures taken to improve financial stability.


Passage number 55.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair. The FOMC’s statement that we will discuss tomorrow highlights the fact that the Committee views the slowing in real GDP growth during the first quarter as likely to be transitory.  I agree with that assessment. My forecast has been for consumption-led growth over this year.  This forecast is quite consistent with the strong underlying fundamentals supporting the consumer, including high readings on consumer confidence and household net worth and with continued growth in real disposable income, supported in part by payroll employment growth that continues to be well above its steady-state level. Thus, I view the disappointing first-quarter consumption reading as likely reflecting temporary factors such as residual seasonality, delayed tax refunds, and distortive weather. Consistent with this expectation, the Blue Chip forecast of private forecasters, like my own forecast, expects both consumption and real GDP to bounce back in the second quarter.  Beyond the expected bounceback this quarter, my outlook has real GDP growing somewhat above 2 percent over the next couple of years, again, consistent with the consensus of the Blue Chipforecast.  With the low rates of population and productivity growth that I expect, my estimate of potential real GDP growth is only 1¾ percent. This implies that the projected path of GDP growth should lead to a further tightening of labor markets. Given my estimate of the natural rate of unemployment of about 4.7 percent and with the current unemployment rate already at 4½ percent, my forecast anticipates additional overshooting of full employment.  Specifically, my modal forecast of the unemployment rate by the end of 2019 stands at 4.1 percent, just 0.1 percentage point higher than the Tealbook.  A modal unemployment forecast that low entails a significant probability that the unemployment rate could fall below even 4 percent over the forecast horizon. How serious is it to have unemployment fall so far below the Committee’s median estimate of the sustainable unemployment rate.  The Federal Reserve Bank of Boston staff has been revisiting Phillips curve estimates in the region of very low unemployment rates. Their work found that the Phillips curve may well have a steeper slope at very low unemployment rates, which implies a larger response of inflation to very low levels of unemployment. Their work highlights a risk that inflation may not be as well behaved as envisioned in the baseline Tealbook forecast, especially as we approach these levels of unemployment.  I would also note that the various inflation models that our bank runs that do not have this threshold effect in the Phillips curve imply inflation rates somewhat higher than the Tealbook. Like the median forecast of the Survey of Professional Forecasters, we see core PCE inflation on a Q4-by-Q4 basis stepping up from 1.7 percent in 2016 to 1.9 percent this year.  In support of that forecast, the most recent trends in compensation from the employment cost index and average hourly earnings are quite consistent with modest tightening in labor markets.  Regardless of the sensitivity of inflation to an unemployment rate gap, I continue to be concerned that allowing the unemployment rate to get so low will result in a heightened probability of a recession that ultimately leaves us well below full employment. Prudent risk management suggests that we follow a path that does not let the unemployment rate fall too much further.  That is why my forecast is predicated on announcing the start of the balance sheet reduction this summer, not this fall, and why I have three, rather than two, increases in the federal funds rate based into my forecast. It is also worth noting that in the various optimal policy simulations in Tealbook A, the prospect of an overshoot of unemployment implies a federal funds rate much higher than our estimates of the equilibrium federal funds.  For example, in the extended Tealbook forecast, the federal funds rate consistent with optimal policy exceeds 4 percent in the outyears.  Of course, these simulations embed the assumption that none of the upside risks to economic growth materialize, but risks may increasingly be skewed to the upside, which could result in an even lower forecast of the unemployment rate. With respect to these upside risks, while I have some fiscal stimulus in my forecast, the possibility of a large tax cut financed by deficit spending seems to be increasing rather than decreasing. Rebounding economic growth in other countries also poses upside risks.  While U.S. stock prices have been rising, European and emerging market stock prices have been rising even more quickly, reflecting an investor perspective that expects much better outcomes for many of our trading partners. Finally, I would note that through much of this recovery, unemployment has surprised us on the downside.  Earlier, some of the surprises were due to disappointing readings for labor force participation, but more recently the downward trend in the unemployment rate has occurred despite better-than-expected outcomes for the labor force.  Although the relative strength of the   participation rate could be interpreted as a success in terms of a monetary policy strategy that probes for better labor market outcomes, the economy now appears to have exceeded full employment.  As a result, probing under current conditions should proceed more cautiously, as continued downward surprises in the unemployment rate would move us still further from what we expect to be sustainable. I will discuss the implications of that tomorrow.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the FOMC's assessment of the slowing in real GDP growth as transitory and provides supporting evidence for this view. The speaker also expresses concern about allowing the unemployment rate to fall too low and suggests a more cautious approach to monetary policy.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 56.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  My directors and other contacts continue to be upbeat and even a bit more positive than in March.  Much of this optimism is still driven by as-yet-unrealized hopes for the future.  However, I did hear a few more reports this time of firms actually experiencing increases in demand.  Among manufacturers, order books were up for some heavy equipment producers, notably those supplying the construction sector, and both Caterpillar and ArcelorMittal reported signs of some recovery in oil and gas activities. Caterpillar also noted that international demand had improved, particularly in China, where it expected government policies to support strong sales of construction equipment for at least another few months.  This is the peak construction season there, I’m told. In contrast, Ford and GM were less positive this round.  In March, our contacts had hoped that sales would stabilize near the 17½ million pace seen in January and February, but March and April sales were disappointing, which leaves them with some decisions to make about production plans.  That said, they still expect 2017 sales at the 17¼ million pace, only a little below the record for the previous two years.  Furthermore, other business reports discounted the first-quarter slowdown in overall consumer spending.  Notably, my director from Discover Financial was pretty upbeat and indicated that credit card receipts seem more robust than the NIPA consumption data.  Labor markets appear to be moving forward at a pace similar to recent months, and this would tighten conditions further.  I continue to hear many of the same old complaints about shortages of skilled workers, but I also heard a few more stories about businesses actually doing something about it.  For example, there were more reports of firms trying to fill shortages of skilled labor by expanding training programs, often in conjunction with community colleges, and some temp help and placement firms said that they have convinced more of their client companies of the need to boost wages if they want to get and keep their jobs filled.  One agency in Michigan told customers they would no longer accept any orders for light industrial office or service workers at under $11 per hour.  This compares with a minimum wage of $8.90.  This firm regularly adjusts such wage cutoff points to match market conditions.  When wages are below the threshold, turnover is too great and it finds it too tough to meet its hiring and retention guarantees to its clients. Turning to the national outlook, we made only minor changes to our real GDP growth projections.  And like the Tealbook, we nudged our core inflation outlook down 0.1 percentage point this year, but we still expect inflation will sustainably reach our 2 percent objective by 2019. My uncertainty over all of these forecasts is a bit higher than it was in March.  First, I’m a little concerned that the weak first-quarter consumption figure may contain more signal than assumed in our outlook.  The softer April motor vehicle numbers reinforce this perception a bit. Second, in my outlook I continue to assume a modest fiscal stimulus that begins later this year with a boost in defense spending and then adds in tax cuts of some form in 2018.  But the Administration’s opening bid makes our tax cut assumption seem paltry.  On the other hand, it’snot clear what kind of tax package is going to get through the Congress or when we might see it.  So uncertainty over fiscal policy is even higher now than before. Finally, on inflation, there is the downward surprise in the March releases.  I do not want to read too much into one month, so for now I am willing to put it aside and await more data.  But the March surprise does make me a bit more uncertain about the current trajectory of inflation. I hope we will have enough information in hand at our June meeting to know whether the recent consumption and inflation data were just temporary hiccups or something more that would require a change to our baseline forecast.  And maybe we’ll have more clarity by then on the fiscal policy picture as well.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be seen in the contrasting statements about the outlook for the automotive industry. While some contacts remain optimistic about sales and expect them to reach a record pace, there are reports from Ford and GM that sales have been disappointing and may require changes in production plans.


Passage number 57.
 MR. MULLINIX.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The broad contours of my outlook for economic activity are very similar to those presented by the staff.  I view real GDP as growing above the underlying trend determined by productivity and labor force growth—a situation that has persisted for some time now.  With employment growth continuing to run above growth in the working-age population, labor markets have passed from a phase of improvement to one of tightening. I am perhaps a bit more confident that inflation is essentially returning to its target, and I expect it to fluctuate around 2 percent in the coming years.  As this “steady as she goes” picture might suggest, I also believe the recent softness in consumption to be temporary.  The healthy fundamentals underpinning household spending— growth of real disposable income and high levels of household wealth—should support consumption growth.  Real disposable income growth has been mainly supported by employment gains, not so much by real-wage gains.  Like the Tealbook, I attribute relatively low real-wage growth to low productivity growth.  In fact, for the past three years, real-wage growth has exceeded labor productivity growth, and the wage share in GDP has been increasing, as usually happens in an expansion when labor markets are getting tight. Recent information from the Fifth District supports the view that first-quarter weakness in GDP is temporary.  Our business activity surveys have been strong in recent months, reaching multiyear highs.  Furthermore, in the first four months of 2017, the composite index of manufacturing was consistently strong, more so than it has been for a few years.  In general, reports on manufacturing were very upbeat, but some concern was expressed regarding higher commodity prices, health-care costs, and potential trade policy changes. Concerning wage gains, a number of large employers reported that they are budgeting for 3 percent average compensation growth in 2017.  However, a staffing firm reported that even though labor markets were tight, their clients would rather leave positions unfilled than pay a higher wage.  These clients may believe that they cannot pass on the higher wages as price increases, and some of our directors have also expressed this concern. One building materials manufacturer, however, did so at year-end and reported virtually no effect on year-to-date orders. In my assessment, the bottom line is that both the national and regional data attest to the fundamental strength of the U.S. economy.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kaplan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their agreement with the staff's outlook for economic activity and presents their own viewpoints and observations as supportive evidence.


Passage number 58.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Since the March meeting, we’ve seen a meaningful tightening in labor markets in the household survey but inflation data that call into question how much further inflation will increase this year, if at all. We’ve also had a relatively weak report on first-quarter real GDP, although that weakness seems likely to be transitory.  Because it is hard for me to see a clear theme or direction in those data, I do see the outlook as broadly unchanged, albeit less certain. Starting with the labor market:  In March, the unemployment rate fell to 4½ percent, below the staff’s estimate of the natural rate as well as the median SEP estimate of the natural rate. The labor force participation rate remains at 63 percent, moving above the staff’s current estimate of its trend, as it did late in the past two cycles.  A key question is whether the unexpectedly large decline in unemployment is noise or whether it points to a more rapid tightening in labor market conditions.  The fact that the 12-month decline in unemployment is actually smaller in relation to real GDP growth than in recent years suggests that the drop may be real.  However, an outsized portion of the decline was among the ever-volatile teenage group, suggesting the possibility of a rebound.  While only time will tell, there is a good chance that the decline does not represent statistical noise and that there will be a further decline in the unemployment rate over the rest of the year if we continue to see moderate gains in demand. Speaking of demand, real GDP increased at only a 0.7 percent rate in the first quarter compared with 1.9 percent over the past four quarters.  However, private domestic final purchases—a more reliable indicator of demand than GDP—rose at a 2.2 percent rate in the first quarter, suggesting that the underlying momentum in the economy was still solid.  PDFP did, however, slow relative to the fourth quarter, as consumption rose at an annual rate of only 0.3 percent compared with 3 percent for 2016.  Much of the shortfall reflected declines in motor vehicle purchases and energy services. In addition, retail sales posted anemic gains.  Consumption expenditures of nonprofits actually fell, although those are very poorly measured.  On balance, I see this shortfall in consumption as likely to be statistical noise rather than evidence of a more persistent slowdown.  The fundamentals that matter for consumption—solid employment gains, a high wealth-to-income ratio, and elevated sentiment—should continue to support spending.   In contrast, business investment made an outsized contribution to GDP growth in the first quarter, although some of that reflects a perhaps transitory increase in drilling and mining.  Even if we ignore drilling and mining, business investment posted its first solid increase since 2015.  This pickup in investment has been global and reflects stronger economic growth around the world.  The improving global picture represents an improvement in the balance of risks.  Higher investment would be a significant positive for our economy and others around the world in view of the very weak performance of productivity over the past six years and years of weak investment. The pickup in investment may also reflect the increased business optimism seen in a variety of surveys.  Higher consumer confidence, however, has not yet shown up in consumption.  Stronger demand from the rise in confidence among both consumers and businesses remains an upside risk for demand.  To me, the placeholder of a tax cut of about 1 percent of GDP still feels like a safe place to be while events unfold.  Disappointment on tax and regulatory reforms, however, could undermine confidence in equity valuations and represent a downside risk, as was highlighted in one of the Tealbook simulations.  In sum, I see good prospects for further moderate growth, with evenly balanced upside and downside risks and some further tightening in labor markets. On inflation, the March data were weak. The 12-month change in core through March was only 1.6 percent, the same as a year ago.  Core prices actually fell in March, although to some extent that was a reversal of January’s high reading.  Both readings appear to have been driven by transitory factors. The Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas trimmed-mean series provides a systematic way of excluding these transitory blips, and that series through March showed that underlying inflation over the past year has edged up and is now at 1.8 percent.  Consequently, I suspect that the recent movements in core PCE prices are noisy, that we are still on an upward trend, and that PCE prices will move up as this noise dissipates and import prices firm. To conclude:  We are at, or close to, full employment, and labor markets may be tightening more rapidly than expected, but inflation is not accelerating and, indeed, may have paused on its gradual upward march.  The continued low readings on inflation, although a weak signal in light of the flatness of the Phillips curve, present the possibility that the natural rate could be a bit lower than current estimates.  Overall, I see this pattern as supporting the case for continued gradual rate increases, as we will soon discuss.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Harker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It provides a summary of various economic indicators and the speaker's interpretation of those indicators.


Passage number 59.
 MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Over the intermeeting period, economic activity in the Third District has continued to grow at a moderate pace. Our labor market now looks more like that of the nation, with employment growing a bit more than 1 percent over the past three months.  Additionally, the unemployment rate has ticked down and is now only 0.1 percentage point above that for the rest of the nation. Employment growth has been especially strong in eds and meds, in leisure and hospitality, and in mining and construction.  And claims for unemployment insurance have been steadily falling. However, conditions in South Jersey remain distressed, but on a sunnier note, Camden, New Jersey, finally seems to be undergoing a sustained revival, and that’s with the help of more than $1 billion in state tax credits and several billion dollars of private investment that’s now going into the city.  It’s sort of becoming the Hoboken or Jersey City of Philadelphia in some ways.  [Laughter] Our manufacturing survey retrenched a bit in April, but the current activity index still remains solidly in expansionary territory.  Inventories are rising, and employment is strengthening as well. In a special question, approximately half of all firms indicated that they   would be expanding capital expenditures this year, although most indicated that the expansion would not come until the second half of this year.  Only 17 percent indicated they would be decreasing their 2017 capital expenditures relative to what they invested in 2016.  One of our contacts who manages a diverse manufacturing company is reporting a strong order book for March and April.  With the exception of autos, his industrial components division is doing very well, and most of the CEOs he deals with are looking forward to a good year.  Although activity is strong, there are no price pressures.  The only part of costs that are rising is the wages component. Increases in volume that help offset large fixed overheads are more than making up for the wage increases. Services appear to be growing, but the pattern in retail sales is like a seesaw—one month up and the next month down.  Employment in our services sector is healthy, and both manufacturing and service-sector contacts remain very optimistic about the future.  The same is true of consumers.  Local builders are experiencing a moderate improvement in traffic, contract signings are up, and there are construction backlogs.  The existing home market is extraordinarily tight, with houses listed on Friday, viewed on Saturday, and sold by Sunday.  Nonresidential investment is improving robustly, with 19 percent growth in March following a 12 percent increase in February.  Most of the growth is in the commercial sector, and we have seen very little infrastructure investment. Loan growth has been strong, especially in the C&I and commercial real estate sectors of the market.  Credit card loans are falling as households continue to pay down debt.  Further, our bankers are reporting delinquency rates at all-time lows.  So the regional outlook looks quite positive, and overall we are seeing modest to moderate economic growth that is fairly broad based.  Regarding the nation, my economic outlook is little changed and not significantly different from that of the Board staff in the Tealbook.  I, like many others, believe that the weakness in the first quarter will be transitory, and that some of the weakness is due to the recurrent problems in seasonal adjustment. I am still anticipating real GDP growth of a bit more than 2 percent this year and then gradually returning to trend, which I consider to be roughly 2 percent. Because of the large amount of uncertainty, I continue not to factor in any prospective changes in fiscal policy. With respect to unemployment, I project an unemployment rate falling to 4.4 percent or lower by year’s end and remaining there in 2018.  On the inflation front, my forecast is a bit stronger than that of the staff, with headline PCE prices rising 1.9 percent this year and reaching its targeted rate in 2018.  Finally, with respect to monetary policy, I anticipate that it will be appropriate for us to raise rates two more times over the course of this year as well as to cease reinvestment.  More to come on the latter issue tomorrow.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Harker, is providing an update on economic conditions in the Third District and expressing his outlook for the national economy. He does not mention or engage with any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 60.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  We continue to be faced by the contrast between hard and soft data on the economy—a contrast that began to develop within hours of it becoming clear that Donald Trump would be the next President of the United States. We have all said that this contrast cannot persist forever.  Some say that, at some stage, the soft data will have to converge to the hard data; more careful people say that at some stage the soft and hard data will have to converge. At present, we face two questions.  First, is the extremely slow real GDP growth in the first quarter a signal of an overall economic slowdown or weakness, or just the usual first-quarter blues, with an unusual weather pattern thrown in to complicate the issue. And, second, over a slightly longer period, will the growth rate of economic activity rise to meet the optimism of thesoft data, or will the soft data decline in the opposite direction.  In other words, should we think that GDP growth over the next few years will be closer to 3 percent than to 2 percent. On the first question—that is, what’s going to happen the remainder of this year— alternative B and almost all of the other forecasters view the recent weakness in GDP growth as likely being transitory.  They see a short period of rapid growth—more than 3 percent in the second quarter and 2½ percent in the second half of the year—that will bring the growth rate for the year to slightly above 2 percent. That forecast is based on a number of positive signals, including a long-awaited pickup in investment, including in housing; increases in oil production; and a strengthening global economy, with trade growth picking up, and with Europe, Latin America, and, to an extent, China all expecting more rapid economic growth than last year—and for the exciting, unexpected icing on the cake, with the IMF raising its forecast of global growth for the first time in years to a rate closer to pre–Great Recession levels. While much has been said about the disconnect between hard and soft data, we will, of course, be better off if the outcome is that the hard data rise to the level of the soft.  However, doubts about the capacity of the Administration to gain support for its policies have begun to increase, and the soft data have begun to decline toward the hard data, as can be seen in chart 3 on exhibit 1 of Simon Potter’s presentation.  For the hard data to rise to the level of the soft data, spending and investment need to rise.  That is more likely to happen and to persist for some time if the fiscal package that is beginning to take shape includes major supply-side elements. The labor market continues to be a source of strength for the short-run recovery, but this is not a new development.  The strength of the labor market is reflected in both the flattening of the declining trend in the labor force participation rate and the unemployment rate itself, now at 4½ percent, almost ½ percentage point below the staff’s estimate of the natural rate andsomewhat below the median estimate of FOMC participants’ estimates of the longer-run unemployment rate.  The staff forecast has the unemployment rate falling below 4 percent by 2019, a sizable overshoot of the projected natural rate.  But as has been pointed out previously, all the hard work of getting unemployment back to its natural rate without a recession occurs outside the forecast period. The tightness of the labor market has coincided with a small pickup in nominal wage growth, with Friday’s first-quarter employment cost index coming in with the strongest quarterly increase since the end of 2007.  However, before we get too excited about the reemergence of the long-dormant Phillips curve, it should be acknowledged that increased minimum wage requirements likely played an important role in the first quarter, although one could no doubt plausibly argue that minimum wage hikes are easier to implement in a tight labor market than in a loose one. Stronger wage growth is not apparent in core PCE inflation, which fell back to 1.6 percent in March.  However, as noted by the staff, this decline in part reflects idiosyncratic developments in the pricing of cell phone service plans, which are unlikely to continue.  Nevertheless, core and actual PCE inflation are projected by the staff to be somewhat below 2 percent this year and next, while CPI inflation is projected to exceed 2 percent in both 2017 and 2018.  Overall, I view inflation as being very close to our target. Although we are close to our targets, policy appears quite accommodative, with negative real short-term rates.  Of course, the degree of accommodation provided by negative real rates is importantly affected by the level of the neutral rate—that is, r*. In view of the uncertainty regarding r* projections as well as the possibility of a rapid shift in the headwinds that have been   depressing the neutral rate—to my mind, on account of an increase in positive animal spirits— we have to be cautious in our assessment of just how accommodative or tight our policy is. As for longer-run growth, my view is that the economy will continue to grow at around 2 percent, perhaps a little bit above that, with growth in 2018 dependent on the size and details of the fiscal package that has begun to take shape in the past few weeks, and longer-run growth dependent on the behavior of the rate of productivity growth—a variable that is even more difficult than most to predict. And if I may, I’d like to conclude by noting another sign of springtime in America.  It is an April 21 report by Jan Hatzius and others from an investment bank titled “The Return of the Missing Growth.” May it be so.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Acting President Gooding.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 61.
 MS. GOODING.  In general, Sixth District contacts noted that after a weak January and an even weaker February, activity rebounded in March.  However, their sense was the rebound was just enough to eke out a slight gain for the quarter, consistent with last Friday’s GDP report. The uncertainty theme expressed by our contacts in the period leading up to the January and March FOMC meetings continues.  Most contacts are holding back on major expansion plans, waiting for a desirable set of tax and regulatory policies that they hope will materialize. Though this upside risk is still the dominant view among our contacts and directors, in this cycle we began to pick up a downside risk wait-and-see theme associated in particular with emerging and potential changes in trade policy and international relations.  District firms that engage in international trade or have globally integrated supply chains report that global demand appears to be accelerating.  But, despite the improvement in the global outlook, we heard multiple reports ofreluctance to expand or initiate significant capital investments out of concern that changes in trade policy may negatively affect the demand for U.S. exports. A troubling example of potential problems on the trade front came from our Travel and Tourism Advisory Council.  Contacts affiliated with destinations that primarily cater to domestic tourists continue to report strong demand.  In contrast, contacts that cater to foreign travelers noted a sharp falloff in international visitors in areas that are popular with foreign tourists. Though there may be multiple reasons for this development, our contacts definitely perceive that the emerging stances on trade and immigration policy have diminished the interest in the United States as a destination for foreign travelers.  Tourism is just a piece of a broader issue. Across contacts in many sectors, there is a growing concern that policy developments will have a negative effect on the environment for conducting international business. Turning to the labor market, reports of tightening conditions continue.  Nonetheless, wage growth appears to be generally stable.  Overall, I have left my outlook largely unchanged.  Like the Tealbook, I am discounting much of the weakness in the first-quarter data. It appears that delayed tax refunds, unusually warm weather in January and February, and possible residual seasonality have affected the top-line GDP figure.  On the seasonality point, however, we have noted that much of the first-quarter weakness was due to a sharp decline in consumption growth. Previous work by the Board’s staff and the Bureau of Economic Analysis suggests that consumption expenditures is a component of GDP that has not, in the past, exhibited significant residual seasonality.  I’m concerned about the outlook for consumer spending but not enough to shake me from my baseline forecast. On inflation, I view much of the recent softness as transitory.  Still, price pressure appeared to be muted, even after excluding some of the most unusual price swings, as captured,   for example, by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas trimmed mean inflation measure. I am sticking to my previous forecast of near 2 percent inflation over the balance of the year.  However, the latest fallback in both headline and core inflation adds yet another month to the surfeit of below-target inflation readings we have experienced since the last recession.  This is unwelcome if the public does not see the inflation target as truly symmetric.  I will have more to say on this topic in the policy round tomorrow.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The passage discusses both positive and negative factors affecting the economy and expresses both optimism and concern about the future. For example, there is an uptick in activity in March, but there is also uncertainty and a reluctance to expand due to potential changes in trade policy. Additionally, there is stable wage growth but concerns about the outlook for consumer spending and muted price pressures. Overall, the passage presents both positive and negative viewpoints, indicating some disagreement or contrasting perspectives.


Passage number 62.
 MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  In terms of the Ninth District economy, moderate economic growth continues, labor markets remain tight, and respondents to a business conditions survey in the District reported being generally optimistic about future hiring plans. Survey respondents reported generally modest wage growth at around 2 to 3 percent, with faster growth of around 5 percent in the IT, engineering, health-care, and nursing sectors.  Home sales and home construction are very strong.  Year-to-date, permitted housing units in the Twin Cities are up about 60 percent over the year.  Construction costs are rising at about a 5 percent rate, while commercial and nonresidential construction is slowing. In terms of the national economy, since the previous meeting, as others have noted, the incoming data on real activity have been very weak.  Real GDP growth at only a 0.7 percent rate in Q1 contrasts with a forecast of 1.4 percent in the March Tealbook and 2 percent in the January Tealbook.  The staff takes the weak Q1 as entirely transitory and has actually marked upmodestly its GDP growth forecast for 2017 as a whole.  In contrast, I think we should take some negative signal from the incoming hard data and, in light of the new data, it is difficult for me to take too seriously the concerns that the economy may be overheating. In terms of the labor markets, there have been some interesting developments since the last meeting.  Labor force participation remains strong.  I continue to see scope for rising labor force participation, especially among prime-age workers.  As we discussed earlier, I’m happy to see that the staff has become somewhat more optimistic about trend labor force participation.  On the other hand, the unemployment rate fell 0.2 percentage point to 4.5 percent in March.  As you’ve heard me say for the past year, I’ve been telling a story of rising labor force participation that can accommodate a lot of new jobs without increasing wage pressure. This fall in the unemployment rate is the first sign that I have seen that this story might be coming to a conclusion.  However, I believe there’s considerable uncertainty about both the natural rate of unemployment and longer-run trend in labor force participation. In terms of inflation, this is where we have had the most news since our previous meeting.  The core CPI in March was weak.  This was just one monthly observation, but it’s the most negative monthly number since 1982.  Yesterday’s 12-month PCE inflation of 1.56 percent is down from 1.77 percent in March.  Market-based measures of expected inflation are basically flat to down since the December and March FOMC meetings, and implied forward inflation rates are generally running below 2 percent.  Survey-based measures of inflation are also flat to down, while nominal wage growth has shown some signs of life, but it has certainly not gone to rates that are concerning.  Taken together, my reading of this data is that we still have not reached our 2 percent target for inflation, and we may not even be making progress toward that goal.In terms of uncertainty, there’s a lot of uncertainty regarding domestic policy, tax reform, and health care in particular.  In my own view, the likelihood of major domestic policy reforms has declined.  I think if markets have learned something over the past few months it’s that even with one party holding the White House and the Congress, legislation is really hard.  Weak Q1 data raise uncertainty about employment and the inflation outlook.  And to the positive, the initial resolution of the French elections plus a stronger euro should boost U.S. exports, partially offset by weak Q1 growth in France and the United Kingdom. Regarding financial markets, 10-year Treasury yields are down, in part reflecting lower expected inflation.  The stock market has risen, again reflecting speculation about possible tax reform, but again I don’t have any confidence in markets’ ability to guess or predict future fiscal policy actions.  So I don’t take too much signal from the stock market. In conclusion, data since the previous meeting have been weak.  The job market looks strong, but there are worrying signs that inflation might not be on track to target.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 63.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it seems to be missing the necessary context for analysis.


Passage number 64.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Despite some ups and downs in the recent data, the economy’s underlying moderate expansion appears to still be on track.  I continue to expect real GDP to grow 1¾ percent this year and next, just a touch above my estimated longer-run trend.  The labor market also continues to improve, with the unemployment rate at 4½ percent.  We have now reached or exceeded everyone’s longer-run estimate of full employment from the March SEP.  And headline inflation looks likely to remain just shy of 2 percent this year before edging up and closing in on our target on a sustained basis next year. In keeping with tradition, first-quarter real GDP growth disappointed; also in keeping with tradition, the causes appear to be transitory.  The weakness reflected that pesky residual   seasonality that I’ve talked about a lot in the past, as well as some other one-off factors, such as weather and delays in tax refunds for lower-income households.  As these effects go into reverse, I expect a significant bounceback in real GDP growth in the second and third quarters of this year.  Improving orders and shipments of core capital goods portend further improvement in equipment spending, and the fundamental drivers of consumer spending remain solid, with a buoyant labor market boosting household income and surveys indicating that consumers remain generally optimistic. My business contacts share this optimism.  We had the honor last month of hosting the Chair, along with our five Boards of Directors and other members of our Fed family, at our annual meeting.  Basically, reports at that event noted no drop-off in activity. Retail contacts reported healthy sales projections, albeit with a continuing shift from storefront to online sales. These online sales may be bad for malls, but they’re increasing demand for package delivery services.  One such delivery company from my District expects double-digit growth in business related to e-commerce. The labor market remains robust, with job growth averaging about 160,000 jobs a month over the past six months.  This is well above the steady-state pace and served to wring out the last pockets of slack in the economy. As a result, broader measures of labor market slack, including the U-4 and U-5 measures of underemployment, are nearly all back to pre-recession norms, and labor force participation has picked up despite considerable downward pressure arising from retirements of baby boomers.  Leading indicators of labor market health, including quits and posted job openings, confirm that labor market conditions are on course to continue to improve.   Risks to this outlook appear to be well balanced.  Despite the usual geopolitical hot spots, global growth prospects have surprised on the upside.  And there’s still considerable uncertainty about fiscal policy, but that, if anything, suggests an upside risk and—I agree with the earlier comments—a potentially significant upside risk to the outlook for economic growth. Regarding inflation, the price data in the first quarter, like the real GDP data, were pushed around by transitory factors.  However, the underlying dynamics of a gradual increase in inflation remain in place and may, indeed, have intensified. The fall in the dollar over the intermeeting period, coupled with the strong labor market reports and signs of building wage pressures, give me more confidence that inflation will be back to target by next year. We are currently about as close as we’ve ever been to simultaneously achieving our inflation and full employment mandates, and yet the economy appears on track to outpace potential for the foreseeable future. The Tealbook’s interpretation is this will lead to boom conditions for the next few years, with the unemployment rate plummeting to 4 percent in 2019, despite four funds rate increases this year, another four rate increases next year, and a complete cessation of reinvestments later this year. I would like to follow on President Rosengren’s comments and highlight the fact that under this sizable overshoot of full employment, the Tealbook projects real GDP growth of only 1¼ percent for several years in a row to get the economy back to a sustainable level of employment.  That persistent sluggish growth puts the economy at considerable risk.  Even a small shock could tip us into recession. When you’re docking a boat, you don’t run it in fast toward shore and assume you can reverse the engine hard later on.  That may look good in a James Bond movie—in fact, it does look good in a James Bond movie, I’ve watched some of those—but in the real world it relies on  everything going perfectly and can easily run afoul.  So instead, the cardinal rule of docking is never approach a dock any faster than you’re willing to hit it.  Similarly, in achieving sustainable growth, it is better to close in on the target gradually and avoid substantial overshooting, and this recommends trying to rein in the boom to avoid the bust.  Acting in small steps now can avoid having to make large and potentially destabilizing corrections later. Summing up, with the unemployment rate at 4½ percent, we’ve already overshot full employment, and 2 percent inflation is in the offing.  This is more or less where we expected to be and positions us well for continuing our process of normalizing policy this year.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses confidence in the economy's moderate expansion, improvement in the labor market, and the likelihood of inflation reaching the target. The speaker also acknowledges the potential risks of overshooting and suggests gradual measures to avoid destabilizing corrections in the future.


Passage number 65.
 MR. KASHKARI.  Just a follow-up to the earlier question I asked David about the natural rate of unemployment. Your chart here shows what seems to be symmetric—I think President Williams wants to jump in—error bars around that or maybe even skewed a little bit to the upside.  When I think about the likely mistake we might be making on the natural rate ofunemployment, in light of persistent low wage increases and persistent low inflation, intuitively it feels like if we’re making a mistake of overestimating the natural rate of unemployment, but the error bars look symmetric.  I’m just wondering, are there any data you could point to or is there a story you could tell on why, a year or two from now, we might look back and realize, well, it was really 5½, it wasn’t 4.9.  How do we explain making the opposite error that I’m concerned about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification and raising a potential concern.


Passage number 66.
 MR. LAUBACH.  So the best idea I could come up with is to look back in the past to see whether you observe, depending on in which phase of the business cycle you are, that you were making systematic revisions ex post in one direction or another.  This type of model framework here lends itself to that because you can compare real-time estimates with ex post estimates and see whether, in fact, you see a systematic revision pattern.  I haven’t done such an analysis, so I can’t unfortunately give you the answer to that question, but that’s something one could look at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing a potential idea for analysis and acknowledges that they have not done the analysis themselves.


Passage number 67.
 MR. KASHKARI.  Okay.  And are there any other real-time economic data that you are looking at that would say, “Hey, maybe this is higher than we think”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a straightforward question asking if there are any other real-time economic data that the person is considering.


Passage number 68.
 MR. LAUBACH. I think I’ll punt that question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is indicating that they do not want to answer the question and instead will avoid it.


Passage number 69.
 MR. WILCOX.  At the risk of repeating myself, the facts haven’t changed since an hour or two ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that the facts have not changed since an hour or two ago without any opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 70.
  [Laughter] MR. KASHKARI.  It takes me a few times, David, so go ahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement expressing that the speaker needs a few attempts to understand something. The use of "[Laughter]" suggests a lighthearted and friendly atmosphere.


Passage number 71.
 MR. WILCOX.  If you squint pretty hard, you’ll see that this model kicks out an estimate that’s a little above 5 percent, for what it’s worth.  If taken literally, it’s looking at signals, including albeit faint signals from inflation, and inferring that the natural rate is a little higher than what we have penciled in at 4.9 percent.  I think this model’s point estimate is at about 5.15 or 5.20 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 72.
MR. KAPLAN.  I’ll just ask a follow-up to that.  If it’s your view that the natural rate of unemployment is really just under 5 percent, you would expect us to start seeing more intensifying price pressures than what we’re seeing.  The definition of “natural rate” is the rate at which you would expect to start seeing price pressures, and maybe we will start seeing them, but they’ve been muted.  What does that tell you about the appropriate natural rate.  Does it make you want to rethink or maybe revise your views.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The speaker expresses doubt and disagreement about the appropriate natural rate of unemployment and suggests that the current lack of price pressures may necessitate a revision of their views.


Passage number 73.
 MR. WILCOX. The sad fact, inferentially, is that it doesn’t tell you a lot.  The Phillips curve is so flat at this point—that’s the nub of the matter—that we think inflation gives you a little bit of purchase on the natural rate, but it doesn’t give you much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any evident contention or disagreement. It is a statement presenting a sad fact about the Phillips curve and inflation's impact on the natural rate.


Passage number 74.
 MR. KAPLAN.  So if that’s true, I’ll ask a dumb question backing up.  How are you defining the “natural rate” then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kaplan is asking a question to seek clarification on how the "natural rate" is being defined.


Passage number 75.
 MR. WILCOX.  Well, we’re relying partly on those faint signals.  The signals are a little less faint with regard to compensation inflation, but this is the reason why the confidence interval out of this model is so wide.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about relying on faint signals and explaining why the confidence interval is wide.


Passage number 76.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is just a statement of agreement or understanding between speakers.


Passage number 77.
 MR. EVANS.  If I could just follow up—this is not really going to change anything that you said.  Your measure of inflation expectations is a little bit lower than the ultimate target, I believe.  Doesn’t that factor into this a little bit. I don’t know if your model takes that into account and how that affects the natural rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification about whether the model takes into account the measure of inflation expectations that is slightly lower than the ultimate target.


Passage number 78.
 MR. WILCOX.  I don’t remember the details of how inflation expectations—John Roberts, by any chance do you remember how inflation expectations are handled in this specification of the state-space model.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for help in remembering something.


Passage number 79.
MR. ROBERTS.  Yes.  President Evans, your intuition is correct.  Inflation expectations in this model, I believe, is the staff estimate, which is about 1.8 percent.  So if you use 2 percent, you get that much lower an estimate of the natural rate, a little bit lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply agreeing with President Evans and adding additional information.


Passage number 80.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay. CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states that President Bullard has the opportunity to ask questions.


Passage number 81.
 MR. BULLARD.  Yes, this is for Thomas Laubach.  I’m looking at these alternatives, and at the very end of our statement, on reinvestment policy it says, “This policy, by keeping the Committee’s holdings of longer-term securities at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative financial conditions.”  Should we be thinking about ways to rethink what we say about the balance sheet as we go forward, thinking about changing the reinvestment policy possibly later this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is simply asking a question and seeking clarification about the possibility of rethinking the balance sheet and reinvestment policy.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 82.
 MR. LAUBACH. As you surely noticed, there are some suggestions to that effect in the staff memo that was sent on April 21.  I guess one of the issues that you are going to discuss tomorrow is when is the appropriate time to send what signal through the statement.  The staff in its proposal for the communications basically chose the same structure as in the original normalization principles of keeping the question of the appropriate timing of any change in reinvestment policy out of the “principles,” let’s call them, and assuming that it would be handled in paragraph 5 of the statement. And then there is the question, at which stage do you want to send signals.  For example, if you were to put out principles of the nature that we discussed in the memo, one of the questions for you is whether you would then make a first change to paragraph 5 or whether you would wait until you feel more confident that you are going to make a change fairly soon.  That’s one of the issues, I think, in front of you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker mentions that there are suggestions in the staff memo regarding when to send signals and make changes to reinvestment policy, implying that there is disagreement or debate about the appropriate timing.


Passage number 83.
MR. BULLARD.  I guess looking at your panel 4 on the natural rate of interest, you said, well, we might have to think differently about how we’re describing policy, but then you also have the balance sheet portion of the policy.  So, in our statement, the policy rate and the size of the balance sheet jointly determine how we describe how accommodative policy is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply pointing out that the natural rate of interest and the size of the balance sheet both play a role in determining how accommodative policy is described.


Passage number 84.
 MR. LAUBACH. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 85.
 MR. BULLARD.  But you could say the size of the balance sheet would be big anyway and so it wouldn’t matter that much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard is expressing his opinion that the size of the balance sheet doesn't matter much, while someone else may have a different viewpoint on the matter.


Passage number 86.
 MR. LAUBACH.  Well, I should point out that, mechanically, the Laubach–Williams estimates are affected by the balance sheet policy because insofar as the balance sheet leads to more accommodative financial conditions, that, in turn, will be reflected in stronger economic activity that our estimates would pick up as a higher r*. If everything works as it should, a greater accommodation provided through the balance sheet would be reflected in the stronger economic activity that this simple mechanism would then translate into a higher r* estimate. So this r* ought to already reflect the accommodation provided through the balance sheet, not something that you would need to adjust for in addition.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 87.
 MR. BULLARD.  I’m not sure that comes across in our public communication.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard simply expresses uncertainty about the effectiveness of their public communication.


Passage number 88.
 MR. LAUBACH.  Well, this is just one particular model.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker is discussing one particular model.


Passage number 89.
 MR. BULLARD. Yes, sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Bullard simply responds affirmatively to something.


Passage number 90.
 MR. LAUBACH.  I’m not saying that you would necessarily need to make this model your own.  Conceptually, you’re right.  It’s important to be clear what the concept of neutral is that you have in mind.  And, in this particular case, it is a concept of neutral that already looks at all instruments combined.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Laubach acknowledges the correctness of the other person's perspective and suggests that they clarify their concept of neutrality.


Passage number 91.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you.  CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions. [No response]  Seeing none, I think we’re ready to adjourn.  We will reconvene at 9:00 a.m. for the policy go-round and then the reinvestment discussion. [Meeting recessed]   May 3 Session CHAIR YELLEN.  Good morning, everybody.  I think we’re ready to start off our policy go-round.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple exchange of information.


Passage number 92.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B as written.  The market places a relatively high probability on an increase of 25 basis points in June, and I think that is appropriate. As a result, there is no need at this time to provide a stronger signal that we will act in June.  This also affords us the flexibility to observe whether the expected rebound in second-quarter economic activity occurs. While I’m not terribly concerned about a repeat of the first-quarter weakness, we cannot completely rule it out at this point.  I would also hope that the Committee considers moving the announcement of balance sheet shrinkage to this summer.  With the unemployment rate at 4½ percent and inflation now fluctuating around 2 percent, I am concerned that we risk a serious overshoot of what is sustainable. I currently still support a gradual approach to normalization.  A path of either three or four increases per year is quite gradual by historical standards, but should the unemployment rate fall more quickly and wages accelerate more than currently expected in the latter half of this year, we risk needing to abandon such a gradual approach.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kashkari.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing support for alternative B and providing reasons for the support.


Passage number 93.
 MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B.  At the end of my comments I’m going to make a suggestion on one word change that I’d ask the Committee to consider. In thinking about the appropriate policy, I continue to focus on three key indicators as evidence of whether this labor force participation story is continuing or has “room to run.” Those are core inflation, inflation expectations, and the headline unemployment rate.  Since our   previous meeting, core inflation and inflation expectations have moved in the wrong direction.  On the other hand, the headline unemployment rate has declined.  These indicators are sending somewhat mixed signals. To me, the bigger picture is little changed, which is that inflationary pressures remain very subdued, suggesting economic slack might remain.  June will be an important meeting, and, in my view, it will not be appropriate to raise the funds rate unless we see more progress toward our inflation objective. I support alternative B because I don’t think it’s boxing us in.  As President Rosengren said, I think that we have time to look at the data to see how they unfold before we make a decision about June.  In terms of the actual statement in alternative B, the one word I would ask us to consider removing is the word “wealth” from paragraph 1.  The way it reads is, “Household spending rose only modestly, but households’ real income and wealth continued to rise and consumer sentiment remained high.” When I read this, “wealth” jumped out at me as a reference to the stock market, and that made me uncomfortable.  I asked my staff to look back over time, and I think 2011 was the last time the word “wealth” was included in a statement. I’m sensitive to it because there are many market participants who think that there’s a “Fed put,” and I felt like this was giving them more ammunition for their view that we are targeting the stock market, which I know we’re not.  I know it includes both housing and the stock market wealth, but when I think about what’s changed in the statement since March, it just struck me as an unusual addition, as not a lot has changed since March. I’ll support the statement either way, but I would ask the Committee to consider dropping the word “wealth.” Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses support for alternative B and suggests a change to the wording of the statement, but there is no direct disagreement or contention with any other individual.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 94.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Yesterday’s discussion revealed an FOMC that views the first quarter of 2017 as, on the whole, consistent with continuing our plan of   following a data-dependent path of increasing the federal funds rate gradually until we reach the point when we should stop doing that.  However, in view of the weakness of first-quarter real GDP growth and questions about the ability of the Administration to implement its ambitious plans for the economy, there was no enthusiasm at all for increasing the interest rate at this meeting.  In paragraphs 1 through 3, alternative B makes a strong case for not acting on the interest rate now while leaving open the possibility of continuing on the path of having three changes in the interest rate in 2017 that emerged from the December 2016 SEP.  That seems to be the right decision and the right explanation for the decision, and I therefore support alternative B. I’d like now to return to an issue I raised at the March FOMC meeting and essentially repeat what I said a month and a half ago, with a few changes to update my statement. We’re very close to attaining both our unemployment and inflation goals.  The real interest rate will still be negative if and after we raise the rate in June. And r* has probably risen in the aftermath of a change in animal spirits, a change that, for its validation, still awaits policy actions consistent with a new implied higher r*, but that has had a significant effect on stock market and other asset valuations.  There’s a term we can use instead of “wealth”:  “asset values.”  “Further, the expected growth rate of the rest of the world’s economy has risen,” and that’s a quote. Then I added, “Of course, there are storm clouds on the horizon, particularly those related to potential political developments in Europe, in the critical round of elections that will continue until near the end of the year.”  While those storm clouds have begun to dissipate, and we hope they’ll dissipate further following France’s election on Sunday, they are still a big issue in this Committee’s deliberations. The staff forecast takes us to an unemployment rate that might very well be close to 4 percent by 2020.  The staff calculation is that u*, the full employment rate of unemployment, is 4.9 percent. So why are we heading off on a long journey to increase the divergence between u and u* before returning u to u* on a path that is not specified in the table in the current Tealbook, but that is discussed on page 24 of Tealbook A. Well, after helpful discussions with the staff in March, I understand that we need that decrease in unemployment to get the inflation rate up to 2 percent, and, taking into account what we now believe about the Phillips curve, that makes arithmetic sense. So far, so good.  Now, suppose we faced the opposite problem and that we currently had an inflation rate of 2.3 percent with an unemployment rate of 5.2 percent.  We’d need a higher unemployment rate in order to reduce the inflation rate and would presumably head off on a trajectory to 5.9 percent unemployment in order to get to the inflation target, by the logic of the path we’re presenting in the Tealbook.  Would we think it makes sense to raise the unemployment rate to well above u* to get rid of 0.3 percentage point of inflation.  I don’t think so, and I doubt anyone else here thinks so either. So what should we do.  In the interest of near brevity, I will not repeat the four possibilities I raised in March.  I will repeat one of them and have added a fifth.  Repetition:  We could look at episodes similar to those that would be implied by an economy behaving like the economy at the beginning of Tealbook A.  A large and talented team of Federal Reserve economists has done that.  And their bottom line is that we are unable to draw clear conclusions. My conclusion from that is that working with certainty equivalence of a distance that’s quite far from the optimum is very dangerous and that the uncertainties about what could happen on a path that goes from 4.9 to 4.0 percent are very large and have to be factored into our policies. And then I’ve added another thing we could do.  We could undertake a policy of opportunistic optimization—something that I now believe somebody said was introduced to this body by Don Kohn—in which you wait for opportunities to reduce the gaps between where the economy is and the bliss point, but rule out ambitious paths that history tells us have only a low chance of succeeding. It’s well known that the Federal Reserve has, in the past, typically operated by tending to move the interest rate in a serially correlated fashion from one range to another.  One can imagine that being an optimal approach.  It may be optimal when the distance from the target is large, but it is not clearly optimal when you’re very close to the target and you’re going to depart very far from the target. I believe we need to consider how this Committee should best set interest rates in years to come in a way that preferably does not include more long marches.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Harker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Fischer, expresses disagreement with the decision to not increase the interest rate at this meeting. He argues that the economy is close to the unemployment and inflation goals, and suggests alternative approaches to setting interest rates in the future.


Passage number 95.
 MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B at this meeting.  The economy has weakened a bit, and the latest readings on inflation are not showing any significant acceleration—actually, just the opposite.  Although I believe that both the real and nominal signals we are receiving will prove to be transitory, I can see no convincing case for removing additional accommodation at this meeting. We will have a lot more data in June to gauge the case for additional firming.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses their support for alternative B, citing the weakening of the economy and the lack of significant inflation acceleration. They also mention the need for more data in June to evaluate the need for further action. There is no disagreement or contention in this passage.


Passage number 96.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  By moving somewhat unexpectedly at the March FOMC meeting, the Committee has set an approximate expectation of calendar-based policy moves during the remainder of 2017.  Calendar-based strategies have not served the   Committee well in recent years, as the data often do not cooperate in a way that confirms previously set plans.  It is possible that we will be at such a juncture at our June meeting. Alternative B is characterizing recent readings on the economy as “mixed,” but that the data will firm in coming months.  It is entirely possible that the data will not firm to the extent we expect. I would be looking for indications consistent with at least 3.3 percent real GDP growth at an annual rate in Q2 in order to offset the weak 0.7 percent reading in Q1 and restore the 2 percent growth path for the first half of the year. In addition, I think we will want to be able to tell a better story about inflation than we can today.  If these indications from the data are not forthcoming during the coming weeks, then I think we will need to consider delaying a further rate hike until a more appropriate time. If we go ahead in June without the appropriate data in hand, I think we will be more “hawkish” than we intend, further flattening the yield curve, lowering inflation expectations further, and putting downward instead of upward pressure on actual inflation.  In order to be able to handle this possibility appropriately, I think we should be willing to consider using the July meeting instead, should that become a more appropriate timing.  We should also be willing to delay any further increase in the policy rate into the second half of the year. More generally, I think the FOMC is somewhat overcommitted to a sequence of policy rate moves over the forecast horizon that appear to be unnecessary and could potentially cause significant problems for the U.S. economy.  I guess this is what Governor Fischer called a “long march.”  I do not think the current constellation of real GDP growth and inflation data provides a rationale for 200 basis points of policy moves in the near future.  Labor market data may appear to be stronger, but I think they are better interpreted as being consistent with a balanced growthpath.  Even very low unemployment, should it develop, would likely not trigger meaningful inflation, given current Phillips-curve estimates. I think alternative B does a reasonable job of describing the policy situation for today.  However, I continue to think that the statement has internal contradictions in that balance sheet policy is not coherently described, as we are in a period of policy rate normalization. During the period of near-zero policy rates, the Committee argued that the large balance sheet put downward pressure on medium- and longer-term yields. This remains in the statement in the last sentence.  However, during the period of a rising policy rate, which we are in now, it may no longer make sense for us to put downward pressure on medium- and longer-term yields at the same time as we are trying to raise the general level of all rates by raising the policy rate. In conventional descriptions of how monetary policy works, the fact that an increase of the policy rate is transmitted further out along the yield curve is what gives monetary policy its punch.  To be apparently partially undoing this conventional effect through current balance sheet policy is a kind of twist operation, which I think does not have a basis in received monetary theory.  To fix this, I think we should, at a minimum, end our reinvestment policy as soon as practicable in order to produce a partial reduction in the downward pressure on medium- and longer-term yields we were previously applying. Even with that move, however, the large balance sheet will remain for some time, and some of the yield effects will remain. I also agree with President Kashkari’s suggestion to drop “wealth” from the statement.  I did not realize it had been such a long time since we had referred to wealth.  I do think that it’s always risky for the Committee to explicitly refer to elements of the economy that might be tied closely to the stock market.  Obviously, the stock market can go up, it can go down, and peoplewould start to wonder what our reaction might be should the air come out of the current valuations in the market.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Acting President Gooding.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any direct contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 97.
 MS. GOODING.  Thank you.  My economic projections have not changed materially since the previous meeting, and I currently assume two additional rate increases this year. After our move in March, I think it is appropriate to be patient and wait for more evidence on the underlying strength in economic activity and inflation before pulling the trigger on the next rate increase. Therefore, I support the policy action in alternative B, and I’m fine with the language in the current draft statement, although I would be fine with the change that President Kashkari mentioned as well. As I suggested yesterday, I do think the effort to convince the public that our inflation goal is truly symmetric may be challenging as we continue the process of removing policy accommodation.  Over the intermeeting period, my staff included a special question in the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Business Inflation Expectation survey asking about firms’ perceptions of the FOMC’s tolerance for inflation above or below its target.  Only 25 percent of respondents indicated they believed the Committee’s inflation goal is symmetric.  The modal response, from 38 percent of respondents, was the opinion that the FOMC has greater concern about inflation running above its target than it does about inflation running below target. We conducted the same poll of our directors at last week’s Atlanta board meeting.  The majority of our board members, including representatives from our five branches, responded that they also believe the FOMC has greater tolerance for inflation below target than above target.  When we pushed on why, the response was basically that inflation has been running below 2 percent for a long time, yet the FOMC has tightened policy, so it seems it doesn’t want to risk   inflation getting above 2 percent.  I’ll note that our survey was taken after the March statement in which the symmetry language was included.  Our survey results suggest to me that communications about the symmetry of our inflation goal have not completely taken hold, and that’s something that the Committee may want to consider in the future.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. Ms. Gooding expresses concern about the public's understanding of the Federal Reserve's inflation goal, suggesting that there may be a lack of communication or clarity on this issue. She cites survey results that indicate a majority of respondents believe the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has greater tolerance for inflation below target than above target. This suggests a disagreement or contention within the FOMC about the perception of the public regarding the FOMC's inflation goal.


Passage number 98.
 MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  At our previous meeting, I said it was time for a change in our mindset.  Earlier in the expansion, when we were further from our goals, we focused on the risks in moving rates up too quickly, and the base case in our discussion was no change in rates.  Only if the data came in sufficiently strong would we act to raise rates.  Now we’re at, or perhaps a bit beyond, maximum employment, with job gains well above the trend pace.  Inflation is near 2 percent, and the risks surrounding the outlook are broadly balanced.  With monetary policy still accommodative, the base case for discussion is appropriately the gradual upward path of interest rates consistent with our medium-run outlook. Because the gradual path may not entail a move at each meeting, the question is not whether to take the next step on the path but whether today is the day to do it.  Although a 25 basis point move today is consistent with my outlook, which is little changed since our previous meeting, the public is not expecting the Committee to act today, in view of the weaker first-quarter readings and the fact that the Committee’s communications haven’t prepared the public for an increase today.  I understand the rationale for pausing today, as indicated in alternative B.  However, if the economy evolves over the intermeeting period as expected, I’d be very uncomfortable if that pause turned into a longer delay.  We’ve gotten the public to understand that an upward path to policy is the most likely path, given the outlook, and even whywe think that path is appropriate—namely, because it balances the risks and makes it more likely that the expansion will continue, and our monetary policy goals will be met. I anticipate that the Committee will raise the funds rate in June unless the data come in significantly weaker than expected, resulting in a material change in the medium-run outlook.  So it’s important that today’s statement not undermine that likely scenario and lower expectations for a June increase.  Of course, it is difficult to discern how market participants and the broader public will react to any postmeeting FOMC statement.  As I’ve discussed at previous meetings, I think our statements tend to put too much emphasis on short-run movements in the data and not enough on how we’re interpreting movements in economic and financial conditions for the medium-run outlook.  If we don’t provide an interpretation, the public will create their own—one that may or may not be consistent with ours. Let me offer three observations of the language in alternative B.  First, paragraph 1 in alternative B focuses attentions on the short-run movements in economic growth and inflation.  The addition in paragraph 2 tends to qualify this with respect to economic growth by pointing out that the Committee views slower growth in the first quarter as likely transitory, but no such interpretation is given for the inflation numbers mentioned in paragraph 1.  This seems like an important omission that could well be noticed.  This may flatten the market’s expected policy rate path. Two, aside from the attention on one month’s change, I find the inflation language in paragraph 1 problematic for another reason.  When we discussed the introduction of the language on core inflation into the statement last time, I expressed some concern that we may end up confusing the public into thinking we have changed our longer-run inflation objective from headline to core PCE inflation. I remain concerned that references to core inflation, particularly   with the current wording’s focus on the monthly change, will be confusing to the public.  We haven’t explained why we look at core inflation measures.  In future statements or communications, I’d like to clarify that we look at core inflation because it helps us get a sense of where our goal variable—headline PCE inflation—is headed on a sustained basis. And, three, the Committee has indicated elsewhere, including the March press briefing and minutes, that the reinvestment policy is under discussion.  I think it’s time to mention this fact in the Committee’s statement. This seems like a particularly opportune time, as the Committee anticipates releasing more information on the reinvestment policy plan perhaps as early as June. I do realize that the minutes will summarize today’s reinvestment discussion, but I think a mention in the statement would receive more attention and, therefore, be more transparent.  We might consider adding a sentence at the end of paragraph 5 that says, “The Committee continues to discuss its existing reinvestment policy and will communicate any change to this policy well in advance of implementation.”  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 99.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’ll support alternative B.  I can support it as written, or I could support it with the exclusion of “wealth” from paragraph 1, as President Kashkari suggested. The economy is performing about in line with expectations.  If that remains the case, then I can see a couple of further rate hikes this year, including perhaps one in June.  I can also see a fourth-quarter announcement that we will gradually end reinvestments along the lines of the current proposal, which we’ll return to shortly. I also see a strong case for continued gradualism in raising rates, and I’ll mention a couple of factors.  First, core inflation remains below our 2 percent target and seems to have paused there, where it’s been for eight years. I actually don’t place a lot of weight on real-time readings of inflation expectations, particularly market-based, which are noisy and unreliable and, in the case of market-based expectations, seem to be driven by movements in nominal securities. I place more weight on the idea that eight years of underperformance could well hold inflation expectations down, and it’s also notable to me that the staff’s forecast incorporating a trend inflation rate that’s below our target has fit core inflation all too well over the past several years. Second, we will have a recession at some point, and although the risks to economic growth are roughly symmetric today, the effectiveness of our toolkit is not. Third, there is much remaining uncertainty regarding the neutral rate of interest.  The scale of downward revisions to the Committee’s individual estimates of r* over the past few years has been remarkable.  The March SEP shows that all of us think that the longer-run r* is above the current federal funds rate, but the location of the endpoint is highly uncertain, and to me that suggests a gradual path of increases. Finally, I’ll point out that it is notable that the previous two recoveries did not end with inflation getting out of hand, but, instead, because of financial-sector imbalances.  Today risk premiums in the prices of equities, corporate debt, and other financial assets are compressed, and this warrants a continuing close attention and actually argues for tighter monetary policy, but, in my view, still a gradual tightening along the lines of the path reflected in the SEP.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Acting President Mullinix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Powell supports alternative B and provides reasons for his viewpoint. There is no contradictory viewpoint expressed in the passage.


Passage number 100.
 MR. MULLINIX.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  We have now raised rates three times in the march that began in December 2015.  With inflation expectations stable, the short-term real interest rate has increased, and our rate hikes have reduced the degree of policy accommodation.   Furthermore, inflation has essentially converged to our target, and labor markets have continued to improve. Alternative B therefore looks like a reasonable continuation of the policy of very gradual rate adjustments—we pause at this meeting and consider a rate increase at the next. I also support commencing the phaseout of reinvestments in Treasury and mortgage-backed securities later this year. That being said, the gradual pace at which the Tealbook and the median SEP forecast nominal and real rates to increase stands out relative to the Tealbook’s simple rule projections on Tealbook A, page 88.  For the period ahead, the first-difference rule essentially defines a lower bound for these projections at 1¾ for the end of 2017 and 2.8 percent for the end of 2018.  Both of these projections exceed the median SEP, marginally for the end of 2017 and more so for the end of 2018.  While raising the policy rate very gradually has been appropriate so far, tightening in labor markets should alert us to consider some continued policy rate discussion of pacing at future meetings.  Additionally, I am in agreement with President Kashkari’s proposed wording change to paragraph 1.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Mullinix expressing his support for continuing with the current policy of gradual rate adjustments and commencing the phaseout of reinvestments. He also mentions his agreement with President Kashkari's proposed wording change.


Passage number 101.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B.  My baseline forecast has not changed much since March and so, for me, I still see one or two additional rate increases this year as being appropriate.  I agree that June may be an appropriate time to hike again.  As I mentioned yesterday, the weak first-quarter consumption number, low March inflation data, and unsettled fiscal situation have heightened my degree of uncertainty about the outlook.  The data between now and June may confirm that the consumption and inflation data were just aberrations. If so, June is likely appropriate.  I can also imagine pausing in September while beginning our reinvestment adjustments and then assessing a final 2017 rate hike in December. But, in light of the lack of obvious broad-based inflation pressures from labor or commodity markets, the continued low readings of inflation expectations, and the dearth of inflation commentary from my business contacts, I still believe policy has some work to do in order to achieve our inflation mandate. On the question of omitting “wealth” in paragraph 1, I would be okay with that.  I seem to recall Chairman Bernanke mentioning several times that the stock market is part of the monetary policy transmission mechanism, and this is just pointing to additional lift for the economy.  If some wording other than “wealth,” along the lines of “household balance sheets,” were incorporated—I don’t think that works by itself, but something that gets at net debt situations improving—that might be one way to include that.  Or it could be omitted. Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kaplan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, expresses support for alternative B and shares his baseline forecast, rationale for rate increases, and thoughts on inflation and consumption data. He also offers a suggestion for alternative wording but ultimately agrees that "wealth" can be omitted.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 102.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I am comfortable omitting the reference to “wealth” from the statement. Otherwise, I support alternative B as written.  In light of recent relatively sluggish economic growth as well as broader secular headwinds, I agree with taking no action today. My base case for this year continues to be for a total of three rate hikes, including the one we did in March.  I also believe we should sometime later this year begin the process of allowing the balance sheet to run off.  I do think, though, it is appropriate to emphasize that we should remove accommodation in a gradual and patient manner.  “Gradual and patient” means to me that if and when we see, as we have, weak economic data, we have the ability to take time to review more data before we take further action. And I certainly intend to do that. Lastly, I’m cognizant that structural and fiscal policies may cause me to revise my outlook for economic growth and amend my views regarding monetary policy, but I don’t take as a given that the net effect of policies being discussed will be positive for economic growth.  In  particular, potential health-care reform policies, immigration policies, and trade policies, as well as the rhetoric associated with them, are examples of policies that I believe may be negative for real GDP growth. Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains some disagreement and contention. For example, Mr. Kaplan disagrees with including the reference to "wealth" in the statement and expresses concern about potential negative effects of certain policies on economic growth.


Passage number 103.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 104.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B, and I agree with President Kashkari on his suggestion about removing “wealth” for the reasons he articulated and others have said.  I don’t think it’s necessary.  I think the whole point of that clause is just to be slightly more positive about the underlying fundamentals for the household sector, and I think the real income and sentiment cover that. I will very briefly tilt against the windmill here. I’ve argued for a long time that this effort in paragraph 1—to go into all of the gory details of the data and to try to capture every bit of the news since the previous meeting—is problematic.  I think monetary policy works with pretty long lags, and we need to be very forward looking.  And I think sometimes we get ourselves into these situations in which we put in new language one time and then take it out, and put in the new language again.  I don’t think that’s always as constructive as it could be.  But my point here was that I would delete “wealth.” But, overall, the language appropriately looks through the first-quarter transitory noise.  The sentence in paragraph 2 does a good job on that and positions us well, as many have said, either to raise the federal funds rate in June, barring a meaningful deterioration in the outlook, or to reassess the data.  So I think it hits the right tone there. We have reached or exceeded full employment with underlying inflation only modestly below our 2 percent goal.  Furthermore, with the momentum in the economy that we discussed yesterday, we could be well beyond full employment in the next year or two.  That’s why, like  the Tealbook, I expect economic conditions, particularly the outlook, to support three more rate increases this year and the start of normalization of the balance sheet also by late this year. I think this is a sensible policy approach on the basis of my modal forecast.  But risk-management considerations also support a continued gradual path of rate increases.  As President Rosengren and others have mentioned, there’s a very real risk of overheating the economy significantly.  Pushing the unemployment rate well below its natural rate means that we will need to eventually correct that, and that will generate very slow growth for a number of years as we try to get the economy back in a sustainable place. Also, the possibility of sizable fiscal stimulus does argue on net—although I agree completely with President Kaplan’s remarks that the fiscal and other policies could actually cut either way—for positioning ourselves to adjust the path of policy by taking a rate increase sooner rather than later.  Then we can adjust later as we learn more about what the policies are. Lastly, I’ll note that I think that we can separate the reinvestment policy decisions we’re going to be making from the near-term funds rate path.  Obviously, they’re connected.  They are both highly relevant to thinking about the stance of monetary policy.  I do think it’s important to remind ourselves that the market’s expectations today about the trajectory of our balance sheet look about right, and markets have taken our hints of impending normalization in stride.  So our future announcements on balance sheet normalization will essentially confirm our past communications and market expectations, and, therefore, I don’t expect an overly adverse market reaction as we move forward with the balance sheet normalization. I would like to comment very briefly on Governor Powell’s remarks about losing an inflation anchor or the nominal anchor after many years of inflation running below target, or the risks of that.  I am also very concerned about that aspect of having inflation—a number of people  talked about this—continuously or consistently run below target and then eroding people’s expectations of inflation. We heard some evidence on that about whether our target really is symmetric.  I think that what we need to do is get inflation convincingly back to 2 percent.  That means at least a 50 percent probability of being above 2 percent, and I think that’s something we need to do to make sure that we don’t lose this anchor. I would like to mention that if we thought, in the future, about perhaps a better framework for thinking about this issue, if we had some type of price-level target rather than inflation target, this would need to be completely built in.  If we undershot our target for many years, you would eventually have to overshoot it later. I’m not arguing for that for today. Obviously, we’re not doing that, but I think this experience for the past eight years reminds at least me of the challenges in a world in which the effective lower bound is binding a lot, and we could again find ourselves with inflation running significantly under target for a number of years. I think we need to think about that future.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. One example is when Williams argues against going into all the details of the data and capturing every bit of news since the previous meeting. He believes this approach is problematic and not constructive. However, it is not the only example of disagreement in the passage. There are also differing opinions on the appropriate path for interest rate increases and concerns about overheating the economy and losing an inflation anchor.


Passage number 105.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B for today.  Although it is appropriate, in my view, to continue removing accommodation, with the economy at full employment and inflation running at a rate consistent with the 2 percent longer-run goal, holding rates steady at this meeting, following our action in March, is consistent with the Committee’s communications about a gradual path of interest rate moves. In my view, as we look ahead, further gradual adjustments to the funds rate will be appropriate.  Moving too slowly also carries its own cost.  According to the Tealbook, current economic output is above its potential and expected to exceed it by greater margins over the next few years. The unemployment rate is also below estimates of its longer-run level, and assetprices such as those of equities, CRE, and corporate debt are elevated and, by some measures, near all-time highs.  Of course, allowing the economy to run above its potential could come at a cost, as Tealbook projections show the economy eventually cooling to a 1.3 percent growth rate. It may be the case that we have the luxury of going slowly, because of the absence of broad-based inflationary pressures, stable longer-term inflation expectations, and moderate output growth.  But should any of these begin to move unexpectedly higher, I would anticipate we would see a need to adjust policy more rapidly, which would raise risks connected with the sustainability of the expansion and asset prices as well as our credibility. Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is a statement of support for alternative B and a discussion of the factors that support the view that further gradual adjustments to the funds rate will be appropriate. There is mention of potential costs and risks, but no explicit disagreement or contention with the overall argument.


Passage number 106.
 MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  While data on the U.S. economy since our previous meeting have mostly surprised to the downside, we’re seeing a period of synchronized global economic growth for the first time in several years.  The balance of risks from abroad has further improved, financial conditions have eased, and I anticipate the economy here in the United States will strengthen in coming months. While first-quarter GDP growth led by consumer spending showed exceptional weakness—even allowing for residual seasonality, warm weather, and a strong fourth quarter for consumers—residential construction was strong, business investment is picking up, inventory investment should rebound, and underlying fundamentals are likely to remain highly favorable for consumers.  The unemployment rate has moved down.  On average, over the past few months payroll gains have been strong, and we’re seeing some wage gains, although the momentum is somewhat muted, as well as improvements on other margins. There are good reasons to believe that improvement will continue.  Financial conditions have eased significantly, on net.  Indicators of sentiment are positive. Adverse risks arising from developments abroad are lower   than they’ve been in several years, and we’re seeing synchronous growth.  Recent announcements also suggest an upside risk to aggregate demand from possible deficit-financed tax cuts that could be larger than had been factored into the baseline forecast. Taken together, it seems likely that further removal of accommodation will be appropriate later this year. Nevertheless, one development that bears careful watching is the softening in realized and expected measures of inflation against a backdrop of an eight-year run of stubbornly below-target inflation. The March decline in core consumer prices reflected factors that are unlikely to be repeated and some that may be unwound later this year, but only in part. Nonetheless, the trailing 12-month change in the case of core PCE prices is now 1.56 percent, substantially below our objective, and the staff projects core prices to rise just 1.7 percent this year. While overall inflation is currently running a bit higher, if inflation evolves as the staff expects, we will not see any discernable progress toward our objective this year.  I share Acting President Gooding’s concern that the public may not actually believe that our inflation target is symmetric but is rather a ceiling, and Governor Powell’s concern that we do risk a decline in inflation expectations unless we are very clear in this regard. For today I support alternative B, and I can also support the change that President Kashkari has recommended. Regardless, I think, looking forward to the statement in June, I would favor modifying the language in paragraph 5 of the statement to specify the target range for the federal funds rate at which the Committee judges normalization to be well under way.  This approach is clean and continuous in relation to the policy that we’ve adopted since 2015.  A strong case can be made that the logical range would be midway to our current estimate of the longer-run federal funds rate, which would place it at a range of 1.25 to 1.5.  I’ll return to this issue shortly.  Regardless of how we dispose of that question, I think it might be helpful to clarify how Committee members are taking into account balance sheet considerations in their June SEP forecasts.  The public appears to be somewhat uncertain as to whether our dots already incorporate our expected path of balance sheet normalization or whether they should expect a revision to our interest rate projections once normalization begins.  For instance, it may not be clear to the public that in my March SEP submission, my economic outlook and my federal funds rate path were both consistent with my expectations about balance sheet normalization.  In my view, it could be useful to include a special question in the June SEP submission that will enable members to provide clarity on this issue. Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  That’s helpful.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 107.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B.  I think “wealth” is going to be taken out, in light of the sentiment around the table, but I want to defend “wealth” for a minute. I think it’s actually appropriate in the statement because I think it is a factor that should lend support to consumer spending.  That’s why we’re including it, because we think it’s actually significant. Including it in the statement doesn’t imply that there’s a stock market put, just that this is a part of the consumption function.  It’s also particularly relevant now because wealth actually has been increasing quite rapidly both through the rise in the stock market post the election and the fact that home prices are going up a lot. It’s not important to me that this be kept in the statement, but I really do think it doesn’t suggest a stock market put.  It’s just that household wealth is an important part of the consumption function, and it’s changed a lot over the past six months.  That’s one of the reasons why we’re relatively optimistic that the slowdown in first-quarter consumption is going to turn out to be transitory rather than more permanent.  I think that’s why it was in there.  I’m perfectly happy to accept thewill of the Committee to take it out, but, to me, it doesn’t create a lot of problems in terms of creating the idea of a stock market put. In general, I think the statement does a good job of communicating what we want to communicate.  Paragraph 1, I think, communicates the salient economic developments that we had since the previous FOMC meeting in a way that makes it clear we’re not putting much weight on either the softness of real GDP in the first quarter or the fall in consumer prices in March. I think paragraph 2 reinforces this by being explicit about the Committee’s view that the slowdown in the first-quarter real GDP growth rate is viewed as transitory.  When you put it all together, I would anticipate that market participants will read the statement as indicating that a June move is more likely than not, but that it’s not a done deal, and that we do remain data dependent.  That seems to be the appropriate message to send at this meeting. At the next meeting, I hope we will be able to get final agreement on our balance sheet normalization plans, and I hope we will publish the bullets that explain our approach.  Then we can see how the economy evolves and whether we want to start the process later this year, presumably with the decision made at either the September or December meeting. But regardless of when we actually decide to start that process, I think getting the framework in place and broadly understood by market participants would be worthwhile. Finally, assuming that the economy does evolve close to our expectations and we continue to raise the target range of the federal funds rate and begin to normalize the balance sheet, I wouldn’t want to do both at the same FOMC meeting. There were two reasons for what I put out there, the little pause.  First, pulling both levers of raising our federal funds rate target and announcing the beginning of balance sheet normalization simultaneously would make it more difficult for us to interpret any financial market reactions.  Second, I think that when we do  announce the decision to begin to normalize the balance sheet, it will represent a tightening of monetary policy even if it’s widely anticipated. That’s because I think there are important threshold effects inherent in such decisions.  Once you get over the bar, there’s a relatively high threshold to reversing course compared with before you had made that decision.  Consider, for example, how we’d likely react to a period of weak data that occurred before versus after the decision to begin the balance sheet normalization process. If the weak data were to occur before the potential decision, you’d probably be inclined to wait.  In contrast, if it were to occur immediately afterward, you probably would be more likely to look through the weak data for a time before you reversed your earlier decisions.  This threshold effect means that even well-anticipated decisions can have market consequences when the threshold is crossed and the anticipated policy action is initiated. If I’m right that the decision to begin to normalize our balance sheet will be a tightening of uncertain magnitude, I guess the question I would ask is:  Why would we want to compound the risk of a big outsized reaction by also announcing a rate hike at the same meeting. It seems much more prudent to me that we not take both actions simultaneously unless we want to tighten monetary policy aggressively, and, in the low-inflation world in which we currently operate, I don’t think we are close to needing to demonstrate that type of urgency.  I think it would be good for the Committee just to take this off the table—so that market participants aren’t concerned that we could be very aggressive and pull both levers simultaneously—and that’s why I want to raise that issue today.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  I think we have general agreement on alternative B and need to settle the issue of “wealth.” I have heard considerable support for President Kashkari’s suggestion to remove “wealth.”  The Vice Chairman expressed a reason to keep it in, and I  would say that I agree with the reasons that the Vice Chairman expressed.  You probably can now understand why it’s there.  But, on the other hand, like the Vice Chairman, I don’t feel this is a life or death matter, and even without “wealth,” we have given two reasons.  I think it is very important to explain why we have confidence, as we express in paragraph 2, that consumption growth will pick up, and this helps do it.  I don’t think it’s absolutely necessary.  But before we decide this issue, let me offer anybody else who wants to weigh in a chance to do so.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 108.
 MR. FISCHER.  Madam Chair, if I thought that putting the word “wealth” in implied that there’s a put on the FOMC every time the stock market goes down, I might agree, but “wealth” is such a common word.  We’re going to take it out and never use it again because it gives this connotation.  It seems to me ridiculous, and I don’t see why we should go down this route of political correctness, when it’s not even logical. CHAIR YELLEN.  Well, we do the same thing with the exchange rate—we’re very loath to mention the exchange rate.  I think, similarly, it certainly matters for both net exports and national income, as well as inflation.  However, we go to great lengths not to mention the exchange rate for a similar reason—to avoid any possible misinterpretation that we have a target for the exchange rate. So I think that’s also an example of “political correctness.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Fischer disagrees with the decision to remove the word "wealth" because he sees it as unnecessary political correctness. Chair Yellen agrees with the decision and provides an example of a similar approach taken with mentioning the exchange rate.


Passage number 109.
” MR. FISCHER.  That’s not political correctness.  That is related to a particular policy we follow, which is, we do not want to take that into account.  First of all, it’s not our policy tool, and, second, we don’t intervene in foreign exchange markets.  But I don’t understand this one, and I just don’t see that there’s a put. And I think if we start inventing things, somebody might think we’re not going to speak the truth to anybody.  It took me a long time to understand a variety of the conventions that exist with regard to the statement in which things that I think areidentical turn out to have totally different meanings if you were here in 2003 and remembered what it had meant then—that’s very disconcerting.  I don’t think we should want to get rid of “wealth” in any way.  I don’t see anything wrong with everybody’s wealth going up. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kashkari.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Fischer, is expressing his own understanding and perspective on a particular issue. There is no conflict between his views and those of another individual.


Passage number 110.
 MR. KASHKARI.  I’ve never been accused of being politically correct before.  This is a first.  [Laughter] But I’ll just say this in response to Vice Chairman Dudley’s comments:  Why now.  This was true in December. This was true in February.  This was true in March.  Whenever we make a change, market participants are begging, “Okay.  Why did they add this this month as opposed to the month before.”  So everything you said was true.  As a general statement, I agree with it.  I just can’t understand why we’re adding it now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing confusion and seeking clarification about the timing of a decision.


Passage number 111.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I would say because consumption was quite weak in the first quarter, and we’re trying to explain why we’re not taking much signal from that weakness.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a fact and providing an explanation for that fact. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 112.
 MR. ROSENGREN. It provides an explanation for the second sentence in the second paragraph. CHAIR YELLEN.  Exactly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Rosengren agrees with Chair Yellen's statement and adds that it provides an explanation for the second sentence in the second paragraph.


Passage number 113.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  So it’s explaining why we think that the weakness in consumption is transitory.  There are a number of reasons.  But this explanation is clearly supporting why we think household spending will be stronger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states that there are reasons supporting the belief that household spending will be stronger, without presenting any conflicting perspectives or arguments.


Passage number 114.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without having the actual text.


Passage number 115.
 MR. ROSENGREN. It gives three elements.  If I was to run a consumption function, the element that I drop off would be consumer sentiment, not wealth.  So I think that, because the addition to the second sentence in paragraph 2 is so key, this is setting up the explanation for why we’re fairly convinced that it’s going to be transitory.  Without that, I think it’s a less compelling case. I agree that it wouldn’t be the end of the world if we dropped it, but I think it’s actually a bad precedent to drop something that we think is an important modifier regarding how we estimate consumption because if it were in the opposite direction, if we’d had a 10 percent decline in the stock market, it would affect us, and it has in the past. In 1987, the crash did affect monetary policy.  It didn’t affect monetary policy because of any Federal Reserve targeting of stock prices.  It affected monetary policy because the Committee was worried about what the consumption function was going to look like after the crash and how it might affect business spending as well as household spending. So I think it actually does belong in the first paragraph at times when it’s modifying something like household spending.  I don’t think it’s the end of the world if we include it or not include it.  But I do think there’s a pretty solid rationale for doing so. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Evans.  Did you want to weigh in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Mr. Rosengren and Chair Yellen express similar views and agree that consumer sentiment should not be dropped off when estimating consumption.


Passage number 116.
 MR. EVANS.  No, I was just listening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, states that he was just listening, indicating a lack of disagreement or argument.


Passage number 117.
  [Laughter] MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The presence of laughter in the passage suggests a light and positive tone, indicating that there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 118.
 WILLIAMS.  He was sighing. CHAIR YELLEN.  Sorry. President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 119.
 MR. BULLARD.  I think, historically, the Committee has not wanted to refer to equity valuations because they are pretty volatile, and sometimes the valuation might go down, and you might feel like that was a welcome decline because the market seemed like it was out of line. Other times, such as 1987, it might go down, and you might feel like it is a significant move and we need to react.  My interpretation of past behavior of the Committee is that you didn’t want to put it in because there are different reasons why the market might move around, and you don’t   want to be in the position of having to react or have the perception that you might react to every movement. I guess that’s my feeling on it.  So I’d take it out. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of one person's interpretation and recommendation based on past behavior of the Committee.


Passage number 120.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay, I guess I will. Listening to this, I think if you’re a macroeconomist, you’re not bothered by this, thinking about the consumption function and all of that, right. I mean, you wouldn’t mind putting “permanent income” in there either, but that’s jargon, and so “wealth” is sort of another type of comment. I’ll be honest with you.  President Kashkari, you mentioned “put.” I looked at the statement.  I wrote down “50 percent, 1 percent, 0.1 percent, and .001 percent.”  This is more about income distribution and who has the wealth.  I think that this is not about macroeconomics but perceptions of the public, and “wealth” has a loaded connotation at the moment.  That’s why I suggested “balance sheet” or something that gets at the financial conditions if you thought that that was important, but if you can reduce it to two, I think that that’s acceptable. CHAIR YELLEN. Do you have suggested language on “balance sheet”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing his thoughts and suggestions on the use of terminology in the discussion.


Passage number 121.
 MR. EVANS.  No, I just said “balance sheet conditions,” but I don’t know that that would really pass muster with the folks who really write the statement. I think “real income and balance sheet conditions have improved.” CHAIR YELLEN.  Or “household balance sheets are strong,” something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as both Mr. Evans and Chair Yellen are discussing alternative ways to phrase a statement about balance sheet conditions. They are offering different suggestions and options for how to express the same idea, but there is no disagreement or argument present.


Passage number 122.
 MR. EVANS.  Could be, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Could be, yes" is a neutral response indicating a possibility without expressing disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 123.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  The problem with that is that it seems insensitive to all those households that don’t have strong balance sheets. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The statement implies disagreement or contention between the speaker and Chair Yellen. The speaker is expressing concern about the insensitivity of an action or decision, while Chair Yellen responds affirmatively, suggesting that she recognizes the problem as well.


Passage number 124.
MR. EVANS.  Or all those households that don’t have wealth.  That’s my whole point about 50 percent and 1 percent. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes.  David, did you want to comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. Mr. Evans is making a point about households without wealth, and Chair Yellen agrees with him.


Passage number 125.
 MR. WILCOX.  I enter the conversation with some trepidation.  I wanted to mention that if wealth is removed as an explicit factor, that might put a little more of the spotlight on income.  And it’s worth noting that in the BEA release, real DPI increased at an annual rate of 1 percent in the first quarter, a little less than we had projected in the Tealbook.  We’re not particularly concerned about that, because we think about half of that shortfall is in transfer income, and that’s going to be made up in the second quarter. That said, I wondered whether language that is a little more general might be helpful, something along the lines of “But the fundamentals underpinning continued growth of household spending remain solid.”  What that would do is generalize it away from resting quite so much on an income number that’s a little softer than many analysts had expected. CHAIR YELLEN.  Will you say that again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wilcox is simply suggesting a change in language to make the statement more generalized and less focused on a specific income number. Chair Yellen appears to be receptive to the idea and asks Mr. Wilcox to repeat his suggestion.


Passage number 126.
 MR. WILCOX.  “But the fundamentals underpinning the continued growth of household spending remain solid.”  For background, you can see the projected trajectories of some of the relevant variables on page 4 of Tealbook A.  What this does is, it gives you a little bit broader time perspective, and I would add that the house price reading that we got yesterday was a little stronger than what we had projected.  So house prices certainly factor into our assessment of balance sheet conditions. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  I think that’s a good suggestion.  Let me ask for some reaction to David’s suggestion that we would say “Household spending rose only modestly, but the fundamentals underpinning the continued growth of household spending remain solid.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It is a conversation where Mr. Wilcox suggests considering the projected trajectories and mentions that the house price reading was stronger than expected, while Chair Yellen agrees with the suggestion. There is no evident disagreement or contention.


Passage number 127.
”MR. HARKER.  And “consumer sentiment remained high.” Leave that. CHAIR YELLEN.  No.  We get rid of it.  That’s part of the fundamentals.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply shows two different opinions or preferences regarding whether to include the phrase "consumer sentiment remained high" as part of the fundamentals. One person, Mr. Harker, wants to leave it in, while Chair Yellen disagrees and wants to remove it.


Passage number 128.
 MR. HARKER.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 129.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Seems fine with me. CHAIR YELLEN.  It’s fine with me, too. Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both individuals express agreement and there is no conflicting opinion or argument presented.


Passage number 130.
 MR. POWELL.  I like it, only we’re saying “household spending” twice.  Maybe say “such spending” the second time.  But I like this approach.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Powell is simply providing feedback and suggesting a small change to improve the wording.


Passage number 131.
 MR. WILCOX.  Hearing the Chair read it, it sounded inelegant, but I was worried that I was engaging in Tealbook editing. CHAIR YELLEN.  “Growth of consumer spending” instead of “household”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wilcox expresses his concern over potentially making a mistake while editing, but there is no direct disagreement or argument between him and Chair Yellen.


Passage number 132.
 MR. WILCOX.  Or “such spending.” CHAIR YELLEN.  How many people are favorably inclined toward David’s substitute— would you just raise your hand.  Okay, I actually see a lot of support for that, David.  That’s a really good suggestion. So I would suggest we substitute that.  Let’s make sure we have this right:  “Household spending rose only modestly, but the fundamentals underpinning the continued growth of such spending remained solid.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Chair Yellen shows support for David's suggestion.


Passage number 133.
” VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes.  We could say “consumption”—“of consumption remains solid.” CHAIR YELLEN. “Remains”—how about “remained”.  Of what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "remains solid" is being slightly modified by suggesting the use of "remained" instead. However, this does not indicate disagreement but rather a possible alternative wording.


Passage number 134.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  “If consumption remains solid.” I don’t know that you have to say “such spending.”  Just say “of consumption.” CHAIR YELLEN.  How about “of consumption” and “remained solid.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting a minor adjustment in the wording, but there is no opposition or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 135.
” MS. MESTER.  “Growth,” right.  “Consumption growth,” as opposed to just “consumption”. CHAIR YELLEN.  “Of consumption growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both speakers are referring to "consumption growth," with Ms. Mester just clarifying that it is specifically growth in consumption.


Passage number 136.
” MR. WILCOX.  Well, in what I had suggested earlier, there was a “growth.” CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: Both individuals are agreeing with each other and acknowledging the "growth" that one of them had suggested earlier.


Passage number 137.
  You had, “But the fundamentals underlying the continued growth of consumption—” MS. MESTER.  Oh, I didn’t hear that.  I’m sorry. CHAIR YELLEN. —“remained solid.”  Okay.  Everybody okay with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "Oh, I didn't hear that" from Ms. Mester seems to indicate that she simply missed something that was said, rather than expressing disagreement or contention with the statement. The response from Chair Yellen, "Okay. Everybody okay with that," also suggests that there is no disagreement among those present.


Passage number 138.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: 

Without the passage being provided, it is impossible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement present. Can you please provide the passage?


Passage number 139.
 MR. FISCHER.  Yes. CHAIR YELLEN.  All right.  I think we’re ready to vote.  Brian, could you just make clear what we’re voting on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The participants are simply discussing the process and clarifying the voting topic.


Passage number 140.
  [Laughter] MR. MADIGAN.  Maybe before I actually call for the vote, I should make sure that I do understand exactly what the Committee wound up with.  What I think I have is, “But the fundamentals underpinning the continued growth of consumption spending remain solid.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification and making sure they understand the decision made by the committee.


Passage number 141.
” MR. SKIDMORE.  The other sentences are in the past tense. CHAIR YELLEN.  So it should be “remained.” “Of consumption spending” or “consumption”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Skidmore is simply providing a correction to the tense of a sentence, and Chair Yellen acknowledges the correction.


Passage number 142.
 MR. FISCHER.  Just “consumption” is fine. CHAIR YELLEN. Just “consumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers seem to be in agreement about using the term "consumption."


Passage number 143.
” MR. HARKER.  Just “consumption.” CHAIR YELLEN.  No “spending” after “consumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Harker and Chair Yellen are simply discussing the topic of consumption.


Passage number 144.
”   MR. MADIGAN.  “But the fundamentals underpinning the continued growth of consumption remained solid.” CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Madigan is stating that the fundamentals supporting the growth of consumption are solid, and Chair Yellen responds by acknowledging that statement.


Passage number 145.
 MR. MADIGAN.  Thank you.  This vote will be on the statement for alternative B shown on pages 5 and 6 of Thomas Laubach’s briefing package from yesterday, except that the second clause of the third sentence would be amended as was just discussed.  The vote will also be on the directive to the Desk as included in the implementation note for alternative B on pages 9 and 10 of Thomas’ handout.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating what will be voted on and what the directive for the Desk will be.


Passage number 146.
 Chair Yellen Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes Governor Brainard Yes President Evans Yes Governor Fischer Yes President Harker Yes President Kaplan Yes President Kashkari Yes Governor Powell Yes MR. MADIGAN.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Thanks to everybody for a very good policy round. We have two sets of related matters under the Board’s jurisdiction:  corresponding interest rates on reserves and discount rates. I first need a motion from a Board member to leave the interest rates on required and excess reserve balances unchanged at 1 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Everyone mentioned has agreed to leave the interest rates on required and excess reserve balances unchanged at 1%.


Passage number 147.
 MR. FISCHER.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Fischer makes a motion and Chair Yellen seconds it. There is no contention or disagreement evident in this exchange.


Passage number 148.
 MR. POWELL.  Second. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Without objection.  And, finally, I need a motion from a Board member to approve establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing rate of  ½ percent and establishment of the rates for secondary and seasonal credit under the existing formula specified in the staff’s April 28 memo to the Board.  Do I have a motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It is simply stating the need for a motion from a Board member to approve certain rates.


Passage number 149.
 MR. FISCHER.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage shows agreement between Mr. Fischer and Chair Yellen. Mr. Fischer states "So moved," indicating his agreement with something, and Chair Yellen responds with "Second," confirming her agreement.


Passage number 150.
 MR. POWELL.  Second. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Without objection.  Let me just wrap up our discussion with a few words concerning likely changes that we’re going to need to make in the statement at coming meetings.  This is something that Thomas also mentioned in his presentation.  Obviously, one area in which modifications will be needed concerns our reinvestment policy, which now appears likely to change in the not-too-distant future.  Aside from its technical aspects, the phasing out or ceasing of reinvestment raises important communications issues. Here we’re making good progress. The staff has distributed illustrative statement language that could help ensure that this policy change goes smoothly, and in the next round we’ll have a chance to discuss this topic. Further language changes may also be needed later this year or early next year if we tighten sufficiently to bring the actual funds rate in line with our assessment of the neutral rate. At that point, we will no longer want to say that monetary policy is accommodative or that we anticipate a further tightening in labor market conditions.  Instead, the statement should convey that monetary policy is focused on sustaining the economy at full employment with inflation running around 2 percent. It may also be appropriate to note that this maintenance strategy will likely require further increases in the funds rate over the medium term.  But I think in that context it will be appropriate for us to stress that our forecast of a rising neutral rate is uncertain.  These  considerations and the potential for improving the statement in other ways suggests that we should probably discuss the advisability of making significant changes to the structure of statement language at future meetings, and that’s something I hope we will be able to bring to you. So that concludes our discussion of policy, and I think we’re now ready to move along to our next topic.  Why don’t we start on this, and then later on we’ll be able to take a coffee break. We’ll move along to reinvestment policy.  We have two goals for this session.  The first is to get closer to nailing down the specifics of the approach we will eventually take in phasing out or ceasing reinvestments. In a few moments, Lorie will present the revised staff proposal, which was detailed in a memo circulated last Friday. The second goal is to firm up the key elements of communications about our plan that will need to be released well in advance of an actual change in our reinvestment policy.  We don’t have a staff presentation on this topic, but your handout includes a draft of some potential bullets that were discussed in another staff memo. As many of us judge that a change to our reinvestment policy will likely be appropriate later this year, releasing a high-level summary of our plan in connection with our June meeting would position us well for making such a change, provided, of course, that the economy continues to perform about as expected.  In particular, I would like to release bullets that augment our 2014 Policy Normalization Principles and Plans at the time of our June FOMC statement. That would enable me to discuss them in my press conference.  Delaying release of this information beyond that time would seem to needlessly prolong uncertainty about our general approach and, as we will have been discussing this topic for several meetings, could convey a misleading impression that we’re having a hard time coming up with a plan.In our go-round, I’ll look forward to hearing your views on both the general bullets and the plans for phasing out reinvestments.  Of course, these two items are closely linked, and one issue that needs to be settled sooner rather than later is whether to phase out reinvestments, which I believe many of us support and is a feature of the staff proposal, or, alternatively, cease them all at once. In addition, I’ll be interested to hear your views on the specific staff proposal that involves gradually rising caps on redemptions for Treasury securities and agency MBS.  As noted in the staff memo, such gradually rising caps would help smooth the monthly variability in the runoff of our portfolio.  Smoothing that variability might help reinforce our earlier communications indicating that balance sheet normalization will be conducted in a gradual and predictable manner.  These caps may provide a relatively inexpensive form of insurance against tail risks in which large monthly redemptions in our securities holdings prompt a deterioration in market functioning or outsized movements in yields.  These gradually increasing caps also seem straightforward to communicate. My hope is that, following today’s discussion, we will be able to circulate a revised set of general bullets, with the intention of finalizing and releasing them at our next meeting. Regarding the specific proposal, here, too, it would be good to get as much agreement as possible, although a deadline for releasing this detailed information to the public may not be quite so pressing. I would also like to hear any thoughts you may have about how we should communicate the timing of a change to our reinvestment policy.  As noted in the staff’s memo, signals about the timing of a change seem best suited for paragraph 5 of our policy statement as well as in the minutes and other communications.  Indeed, as Simon noted yesterday, the minutes of our March   meeting were helpful in aligning market expectations for a change to reinvestment policy with our own views.  Well, let me stop there and turn the floor over to Lorie for a briefing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a discussion about potential changes to the statement and reinvestment policy, with Chair Yellen expressing her views and goals for future meetings.


Passage number 151.
 MR. KASHKARI.  Lorie, you mentioned, in discussions with Treasury staff, that they could prefund any expected spikes in Treasury security roll-offs, so that’s what my expectation was.  I’m trying to get a sense of what the actual risk is.  If the Treasury knows when a spike is coming, it can prefund it.  What’s the actual risk of refinancing or auctions, et cetera, that we’re worried about that would push us to adopt a cap.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement and clarification of expectations regarding the Treasury's ability to prefund expected spikes.


Passage number 152.
 MS. LOGAN.  I think it’s just the total size, particularly if there are new additional fiscal net financing needs.  If you look at the financing needs that they have that are estimated by the primary dealers for 2018 and 2019, those are around $800 billion plus the SOMA piece.  That would put you well over $1 trillion in 2018 and in 2019.  And those are numbers that look similar to what they needed to finance during the financial crisis, when the environment was quite different.  The Federal Reserve was buying, but also there was a flight to safety.  So I think just the total amount of financing, even if they know in advance and can make it gradual, might have some risks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing a concern about the total size of financing needs and potential risks associated with it.


Passage number 153.
 MR. KASHKARI. Okay.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude for the information or response provided.


Passage number 154.
 MS. LOGAN.  The cap just takes off a little bit of that volatility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. LOGAN is simply stating that the cap reduces some of the volatility.


Passage number 155.
 MR. KASHKARI.  I understand.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Are there other questions.  [No response] Okay.  Let’s begin our go-round, and then we’ll take a break.  We’ll have a few presentations and then take a break for coffee.  Let’s start with the Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a discussion about the agenda and schedule of a meeting.


Passage number 156.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support the staff’s revised proposal for normalizing the balance sheet.  Doing this in a carefully controlled way, with caps on the redemption amounts stepping up over an 18-month period to $35 billion for Treasury securities and $21 billion for agency MBS per month, should help minimize the risks of market disruption.  Staging the ramp-out in caps over time reduces the risk of an outsized market reaction to the beginning of balance sheet normalization.  It gives market participants and the U.S. Treasury time to adjust to the increase in the supply of Treasury securities and agency MBS that will need to be absorbed by investors. In terms of length, I favor an adjustment period somewhat longer than expected by market participants both as a risk mitigant and because it will give the U.S. Treasury more time to adjust its debt issuance schedule should it choose to do so. With the dealer and buy-side surveys suggesting a central expectation of about a 12-month-long phaseout of reinvestment, I think this 18-month ramp-out in redemption amounts that’s being proposed here accomplishes this. The revised proposal, as Lorie mentioned, differs from the original staff proposal in that it starts with a focus on the amount redeemed each month—in other words, the amount of additional supply the market will have to absorb—rather than on the percentage of maturities and repayments that will be reinvested each month.  Focusing on the amount redeemed each month seems like the right metric if one of our primary goals is to minimize the risks of market disruption.  In the original proposal, the amount redeemed would be quite volatile from month to month, due to differences in monthly Treasury security maturities.  And that could have been contained by a cap, but that would have increased complexity as you added another component  to the proposal.  In contrast, I find that the revised proposal does this a lot more elegantly by focusing directly on the volume of securities that will have to be absorbed by the market. There are a number of other advantages compared with the original proposal.  One advantage is that when you’re below the cap, you redeem the full amount, not a percentage of what is maturing as in the original proposal.  This means that during the initial stages of normalization, you can actually run off the balance sheet a bit faster in those low-volume Treasury redemption months. A second advantage is that the revised proposal addresses more directly those months when the Treasury security maturities are very high, the quarterly refunding months. The caps limit the amount of redemptions in those months.  A third advantage is that the new proposal, as Lorie mentioned, is better able to accommodate unanticipated swings in agency MBS repayments.  I also think the new proposal is relatively easy to understand and to communicate. Now, the revised proposal does change the concept a bit from the phaseout of reinvestments to the ramping up of redemptions to fixed caps, so we’re going to have to work on how to clearly communicate this shift in orientation.  But, obviously, the minutes of this meeting will be a good place to start on this. In terms of language proposed for updated normalization principles, I favor language that indicates that we are moving toward a regime with sufficient excess reserves so that the fluctuations in reserve supply and demand do not require frequent interventions by the Desk to keep the federal funds rate stable. I think there is a strong consensus among the Committee to go to a floor system, and if that’s where we think we’re headed, then I think we should just say so explicitly in the guidance.  This is important because it defines more clearly for people how much we’re ultimately likely to shrink our balance sheet.  I also very much favor the final bullet point provided in the communications memo, which makes it clear that while we intend to reduce securities holdings in a gradual and predictable way, the autopilot notion is not so strong that we couldn’t change course should the economic outlook dictate it.  I think it’s important to have this in our communications so market participants understand that under certain conditions, conditions that presumably lie pretty far away from our baseline forecast, we might want to bring the redemption process to a halt for a time or even resume reinvesting. I think it’s important that we retain some flexibility in case the economy evolves in a way that differs considerably from our current set of expectations, and I think we want to make that clear to market participants so they understand that as well. I would not, however, want to be any more explicit than this.  For example, I wouldn’t want to say that the balance sheet runoff would stop if we were to cut the federal funds rate.  I think we want to be sort of general and a little bit vague rather than specific on this.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 157.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support the revised staff proposal as well.  I’m going to go through the questions as they were posed to us. Regarding question 1(a), I strongly believe that we should taper rather than stop reinvestments.  Tapering only slowly alters the path of the overall balance sheet, which should minimize the risk of a taper tantrum response to our announcement that we are shrinking the balance sheet. We are starting by reducing the balance sheet by less than $10 billion for each of the first three months on a $4½ trillion balance sheet.  So I think that certainly is gradual. On question 1(b), an 18-month schedule seems an appropriate phaseout period.  So I agree for the reasons the Vice Chairman highlighted. With respect to question 1(c), the original proposal had a taper percentage of maturing and prepaying securities rolling off the balance sheet.  However, the ability to communicate this plan to the public could be problematic.  Announcing redemptions on the basis of percentage reductions in reinvestments is likely to be more difficult to communicate than just announcing dollar amounts. Because we used dollar amount increments as the balance sheet expanded, the consistency of using them as we begin to contract the portfolio may be more clearly understood by the public. In addition, there will likely be variations in the amount that our portfolio shrinks in any given month, and the reasons for these variations may be difficult to communicate and could potentially pose problems for the Treasury during times of fiscal stress. Hence, the revised proposal—which communicates in dollars redeemed, under which we redeem up to a maximum amount—is certainly an improvement.  Maximum dollars redeemed on a regular schedule is predictable and is somewhat smoother.  The communication is closer to how the purchase program was conducted and avoids particularly large spikes.  On net, I think the cap proposal is easier to communicate and is predictable.  Thus, I would prefer it over the alternative plan for percentage reductions and redemptions. Regarding question 2(a), which is getting more at the communication, perhaps the most important decision is how high to raise the funds rate before we begin the program.  And, correspondingly, how much policy buffer do we build before we begin decreasing the balance sheet. What magnitude of buffer should we target.  Our current inflation target, labor force growth, and productivity growth suggest an equilibrium funds rate of about 3 percent or a bit less today.  Because recessions usually require much more than a 300 basis point reduction in the federal funds rate, this in turn implies that even mild recessions are likely to result in the federal funds rate hitting its effective lower bound. That means the size of the policy buffer we are aiming for must be something less than what is required to respond to a full-blown recession with reductions in the federal funds rate alone.  Instead, we might consider delaying reductions in our balance sheet until we are confident we have sufficient room to lower the federal funds rate to offset a medium-sized negative shock.  I have in mind the stock market crash of 1987, in response to which we reduced the federal funds rate 75 basis points, as an example of a medium shock. A more general way to calibrate the buffer is one sufficient to offset a negative shock that would otherwise result in an increase in the unemployment rate of 40 to 50 basis points.  In the Boston model, that is roughly the effect on the economy of a 100 basis point decrease in the federal funds rate. Once we have raised the federal funds rate target range one more time to between 100 and 125 basis points, I believe the funds rate will have attained a level sufficient to begin shrinking the balance sheet. On question 2(b), in terms of timing and communications, at the June FOMC meeting, I would raise the federal funds target to between 100 and 125 basis points and announce our intention that soon thereafter we will begin a gradual reduction in our balance sheet—while possibly providing details on the tapering strategy that could be discussed at the press conference. I would then announce in the July statement—and this is all assuming that the economy continues to evolve as we expect—that we were starting with a very gradual redemption program beginning in August.  This timing is consistent with having built a sufficient buffer in the funds rate to offset a medium-sized shock.  It is also consistent with a concern that most of our projections entail the significant risk of an overshoot in labor markets, which would justify a slightly earlier start to shrinking the balance sheet. Of course, if the Committee prefers   a larger buffer, it could instead choose to follow the same process in September, at the time of our next funds rate increase, assuming the economy develops as forecast. In terms of the comments the Vice Chairman made about the timing and the meetings, I view the March meeting and this meeting as already highlighting that it’s quite likely that we’re going to start this program.  So, what I’m suggesting here is actually that in June, we’re not announcing the start of the program but announcing that the conditions have been set and that we have a program in place.  And then—again, assuming that the economy evolves as expected— we’re making the actual announcement in July, with a start in August.  So it wouldn’t be timed as an announcement at the June meeting but would actually be off cycle at the July meeting.  Again, you could obviously do that same sequencing in the fall if that was your preferred choice.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It is a speech by Mr. Rosengren expressing his support for the revised staff proposal on tapering the balance sheet. He provides his views on various questions and suggests a timeline for implementing the program, but there is no direct opposition to any other participant's viewpoint.


Passage number 158.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I, too, support the revised staff proposal.  In the statement of policy normalization principles and plans, the Committee noted that we would normalize the size of the balance sheet in a gradual and predictable manner, and that we would do so primarily by ceasing reinvestments of principal payments on our existing holdings. I thought that the original staff proposal, presented in the memo distributed a couple of weeks ago, was reasonable.  In particular, the taper feature under that plan would have helped market participants become accustomed to a declining level of the Federal Reserve operations in Treasury securities and MBS.  However, under that proposal, after the phaseout period, which was 18 months, redemptions of Treasury securities in some months would have been very sizable, and, depending on the path of interest rates, redemptions of MBS as well could have been sizable and variable. So, for me, there were shortcomings and challenges with the   percentage approach, both on the complexity of it and on the “gradual and predictable” dimension.  And I think that the revised proposal in the staff memo that we got on Friday addresses those concerns very well. This approach seems to me to ensure that the runoff of our securities will be relatively smooth over time and eliminates the possibility of especially large runoffs. So it accords well with our message that we’ll be normalizing the balance sheet in a gradual and predictable manner.  It really hammers home that message very well. In addition, by eliminating the possibility of large runoffs in any given month, it should help reduce the chances that the process of normalizing the balance sheet will have adverse effects on market liquidity or cause outsized reactions in interest rates. As discussed in the memo, the revised proposal has about the same profile for the expected date of normalization and remittances as the original proposal.  So the smoother path in this approach seems to provide insurance against tail risks at very little, if any, cost.  The approach is straightforward and, in my view, should be easy to communicate to the public, so that’s why I support it. I think that, in terms of communication, releasing the augmented principles along these lines in June would allow the Chair to provide more detail during her press conference and would allow sufficient time for the market to absorb the information before the phaseout might begin. A couple of thoughts:  First, I guess I was thinking more of doing this in the fall for effect in the first quarter of next year. I think that’s preferable. Second, I think that when the market gets a look at just how gradual and predictable this is, it’s not likely to be any kind of a shock that would provoke some sort of another taper tantrum.  So it isn’t clear to me that we should  take off the table the idea of a contemporaneous interest rate move.  I would leave that possibility open.  I was very pleased by the market’s reception of the earlier discussion, and I think there’s a decent chance that in this case there just isn’t going to be a reaction, because of how gradual and predictable we’re being. Finally, we’ve had a large number of discussions about the long-run framework, which have shown a pretty strong consensus regarding some sort of a floor system, something that I favor.  I like the language in the top half of exhibit 2, which, without using the term “floor system,” refers very clearly to a floor system.  So I like that language as written.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of support for a revised staff proposal.


Passage number 159.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 160.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I think we’ve been well served by date-based guidance in so many cases, and often it’s taken once we hit a particular juncture. All right.  As I noted last time, as long as we accomplish our macroeconomic goals and reduce the balance sheet over three or four years, I do not have strong feelings on the precise details.  I’m fine with the latest proposal.  It reduces the balance sheet within an appropriate time frame.  This proposal has an autopilot approach that puts the normalization process in the policy background.  That’s the most important part.  And the caps should avoid potential disruptions to Treasury and agency security markets. Furthermore, by preannouncing such a mechanical rule, we keep appropriate distance between our balance sheet policy and future Treasury financing decisions.  I agree with the suggestion that the Committee issue a refresher to our Policy Normalization Principles and Plansthat describes this phaseout schedule.  I expect that we can afford to wait until the June or July FOMC meeting.  That still gives plenty of forewarning for a change in reinvestment policy at either the September or the December meeting. I like table 1 in the memo.  It answered several questions for me.  I think the Fed-watching public would benefit from seeing some version of column 1 of table 2.  Other useful FAQ-type information could be included in the note as well. Also, there’s the question of what the update to the normalization principles should communicate about our long-run framework for monetary policy implementation.  I guess we’re coalescing around a floor system.  I had written here, “Well, this is a momentous decision, and we ought to do this in our typical deliberate way, and maybe we need another agenda item to do this.” Or maybe, I guess, we have a strong consensus here.  But I would note that even if we’re close to agreement on a floor, I think we are much further away from deciding the level of reserves needed to best operate a system. So when you say “floor system,” it has so many different varieties that that’s what I think we need to really talk about. There’s a lot more we need to know before making that decision.  Indeed, as we reduce our balance sheet, I expect that the staff and the Committee will learn a good deal more about reserve market functioning that would help us make this determination. In any event, our policy of gradual balance sheet reduction means we’re going to be operating with a large quantity of excess reserves for at least several more years.  When we do update the principles, we can simply say that the Committee is still in the process of determining the appropriate longer-run level of reserves. I guess that means I prefer the bullet after the “or,” as opposed to the bullet that’s got “autonomous factors” in there.  On the question of when we should begin the reinvestment phaseout, if the economic outlook and federal funds rate path evolve in line with the current median SEP expectations, then I could see beginning the phaseout at the September or December FOMC meeting. With regard to communications, I favor the generality in the first offering for paragraph 5 given in the communications plan memo. Finally, I’m fine with releasing this guidance at the time we put out the update to the normalization principles. As I said earlier, if economic developments transpire in line with our current expectations, I could see doing so after the June or July FOMC meeting.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of the speaker expressing their agreement with various proposals and offering additional suggestions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 161.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’ve long argued that we should normalize monetary policy through balance sheet normalization first and interest rate normalization later.  I thought that we should have normalized the yield curve effects—the “twist” effects on the yield curve that we got through balance sheet policy, at least according to our rhetoric.  We didn’t go  that way, and now I think we have some contradictions in how we’re approaching policy.  I think that, to an outsider, it looks like the balance sheet part of the policy is pretty easy or as easy as it was even at the height of the crisis, whereas we’re proceeding with interest rate normalization and telling everyone that the economy is getting better.  And I think this is, in my mind, not ideal.  This is why I’ve been an advocate of getting going on normalizing the balance sheet.  In my view, we’re way behind schedule on this, so I do think we should get going.  I do think the revised proposal is reasonable, and I appreciate the staff efforts to put this together.  I am struck by how cautious this is.  This is quite cautious—maybe excessively cautious.  Because it’s a very cautious proposal and almost nothing happens during the early months of ending the reinvestment policy, I think we could actually move ahead with this quite quickly, perhaps during the summer.  Frankly, I think it could be implemented right now without much effect because almost nothing happens initially. There’s been talk here about the taper and the worry that we might induce a taper tantrum.  So let me give you “Jim’s view of the taper tantrum,” which is that I would like to remind the Committee that we actually did nothing in terms of tangible action in June 2013, nor did we take any tangible action in September 2013.  The actual taper began only in December 2013, and, at that point, there was no ripple in global financial markets.  In fact, the entire taper went on without incident, in my view. What was happening at the time of June 2013 was all about communication and all about the unexpected effect on markets because they didn’t realize what the Committee was thinking. And I’d just remind the Committee that the decision that day was to do nothing with the statement but to send the Chairman out to give a press conference that would explain how we were going to approach the taper.  I think that didn’t work out very well in retrospect, because   the Committee actually did not have a plan.  But here we’re talking about something that’s well communicated and will be easily understood, and I would expect the whole thing to come off without much effect. On a broader point, I think the Committee has to be realistic that we’re probably going to have to consider quantitative easing at some point in the future.  The policy rate probably will be driven back to the zero bound at the point of another recession.  Recessions, I’m sure, have not gone away.  So there will be one at some point in the future.  And, in my opinion, we should be doing more to create the policy space that we’re going to need to at least be able to entertain a possible quantitative easing program at that juncture.  So, in my opinion, we should be doing more to create the policy space now by shrinking the size of the balance sheet during relatively good times. This proposal is okay, but it’s generally extremely slow from the perspective of creating a better optionality for the Committee in future recession states.  So I would be open to considering ways to speed this up in the future.  I wouldn’t do that now—we’re trying to get the program under way—but it may be something that we want to consider further down the road.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Thank you very much.  I suggest we take a 10- or 15-minute coffee break.  We’re making good progress, and we’ll come back and finish up. [Coffee break] CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay, folks, let us resume.  Our next speaker is Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement and contention throughout the passage. The speaker argues that the approach to monetary policy is contradictory and not ideal, advocates for normalizing the balance sheet first, and criticizes the cautiousness of the current proposal. The speaker also disagrees with the notion that tapering may induce a taper tantrum, citing previous instances where the taper plan was well communicated and did not have negative effects. Lastly, the speaker disagrees with the slow pace of the current proposal and suggests considering ways to speed up the process.


Passage number 162.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support the revised staff proposal for reinvestment policy and suspect that the market participants are sufficiently flexible to have been able to deal with the pre-revised proposal as well.  But this one at least enables me to understand what’s going on, so it’s preferable. I think that the key issue is going to be the communications, and that we should give them as much as we can once we affirm that we know it and not have some document hanging around here that is a full plan that we reveal no details of until a key moment.  I think if we can feed it out, we’ll probably do it better.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Oh, and thank you to the team or teams that came up with these proposals. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Thank you.  Acting President Gooding.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is mainly expressing support for the revised staff proposal and discussing the importance of effective communication.


Passage number 163.
 MS. GOODING. Thank you.  I support the staff’s proposal to use increasing caps over an 18-month period to begin normalization of the balance sheet.  Phasing out reinvestment seems a prudent approach to managing potential risk related to market function.  The proposed plan will allow for maximum control over the pace of balance sheet shrinkage while also being gradual and predictable.  In addition, it’s similar to the plan used to taper purchases at the end of the most recent LSAP.  For all of these reasons, the plan should allow for clear communication to, and understanding among, market participants. I also support what seems to be the rough consensus of the Committee that beginning a phaseout of reinvestment later this year will be appropriate if the economy evolves as expected.  In other words, the default right now, in my mind, is to begin, absent a change in the economic outlook.  I do not support formally tying the beginning of the program to a particular level for the federal funds rate. As an overarching principle, I would like to see the Committee communicate its intentions as soon as it is reasonably certain that beginning the phaseout is likely to occur within the next 12 months.  Furthermore, I’m in favor of the Committee laying out its specific plans for how the phaseout will be implemented, including the planned pace and any plans to assess and potentially change implementation once under way.   Given these principles, I support the bullet points proposed by the staff for addition to the plans and principles document and would like to see this document released after the June FOMC meeting.  If the consensus of the Committee in June is that phaseout will likely be appropriate later this year, inclusion of such language in the June FOMC statement would, in my mind, be worthy of consideration.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kaplan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing support for the staff's proposal and provides reasons for their support.


Passage number 164.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support the staff’s revised plan, and I want to thank the staff for doing a good job and being flexible enough to revise their plan.  I think this is a good improvement. On account of the gradual nature of the plan over 18 months and the nature of the caps, I think I would be comfortable announcing this plan once we get to a meeting at which we raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 1 to 1¼ percent. So I guess I agree with President Rosengren.  For me, under this plan, I’d be comfortable with that trigger, which I would assume would be either in June or September, although we’ll see.  Then, when we announce it, I would give probably a two- to three-month timetable telling the market we will start two to three months hence, and I’ll come back to that in a moment. Regarding the language on the quantity of reserve balances, I agree with the comments made by Governor Powell, Vice Chairman Dudley, and, with some amendments, President Williams.  I’m comfortable with that language.  And regarding the language in the second bullet point that suggests if there is a change in economic conditions, we might reverse course, I agree that it should be added, but I would insert the concept that it has to be a material future deterioration, not just a deterioration.   Stepping back, alluding to something that Governor Brainard talked about earlier, I would also say that my SEP submission has been based on the assumption that we begin the process of letting the balance sheet run off sometime this year.  So my base case of three funds rate increases has that balance sheet runoff subsumed in it, and I assumed that it would be done gradually.  That’s what I’ve always assumed for my path of rates, so I agree with comments that have been made that we may want to have the option to separate the timing of our start of the process of letting the balance sheet run off from a federal funds increase. While I’d like that option, I want to make sure we don’t promise or commit to a so-called pause, because, especially with this plan, I believe it overstates in the mind of the market the effect of ceasing reinvestments and the effect on the level of accommodation.  I think if this plan is done as has been expressed, I would actually hope that we could do it in a way that materially limits the effect on those two markets.  And those are my comments.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you very much.  President Harker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 165.
 MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  As I mentioned in our previous go-round on this topic, the basic factors I see influencing the timing of normalization involve the level of the funds rate, the state of the economy relative to our goals, and the balance of risks facing the economy.  While I would anticipate beginning the normalization process after one or, preferably, two more rate hikes, I also do not want to explicitly tie the timing of normalization to the level of the funds rate.  I can also envision conditions evolving in a way that would make it desirable to start normalization later this year.  This would imply the need for some form of communication in June, as others have discussed previously. Although my modal forecast is that normalization will have only small effects on yields and market functioning, I do have concerns about the uncertainty surrounding that view.  For that  reason, I do prefer the use of caps at the onset of normalization and for normalization to be tapered.  That tapering can be more cleanly done by adjusting the caps as in the revised memo.  I also appreciate the work by the staff and the willingness of the staff to listen to some of the feedback and revise the original proposal. Regarding the caps on Treasury securities, they do seem to me to be a little bit conservative.  We could start at $10 billion or $15 billion and work our way up to $40 billion or $50 billion unless the Desk indicates there would likely be operational problems with this larger cap.  The Treasury securities market is well functioning, and $40 billion to $50 billion does not seem like a large amount relative to overall Treasury security issuance. Communication of the simpler plan seems rather straightforward, especially in view of the sophistication of the target audience.  I will, however, defer to the Desk on this issue, as they have the pulse of the market participants and understand the possible risks of a larger cap, although the larger cap would, I hope, accelerate the process a little bit, which I think is a helpful thing, as some others have mentioned. To reiterate, the conditions for starting normalization are roughly those I expect to prevail close to the end of this year, when I anticipate the funds rate could be in the target range of 125 to 150 basis points.  As I indicated, I do not favor explicitly linking the level of the funds rate with the start of normalization. First, communication would need to be carefully crafted to avoid confusion over whether the level of the federal funds rate that starts normalization is a threshold or a trigger.  Second, a tie-in between the level of the funds rate and the start of normalization would raise the stakes on what should be mundane 25 basis point increases.  It seems preferable to me to rely on data-contingent language in a manner analogous to that deployed for the federal funds rate.  In that regard, I am in favor of communicating through therelease of additional bullets that summarize operational plans, with information being fleshed out in the Chair’s June press briefing.  As indicated, a more detailed explanation could be subsequently issued by the Desk, guaranteeing minimal market confusion. I’m also in favor of releasing the likely timing of normalization in the bullets as well as in the FOMC statement.  Doing so would place all of the basic information in one place.  But because this is an important change in policy, it deserves to be included in the statement as well. I found the draft language on page 3 of the memo to be quite well done and strongly prefer the second paragraph after the “or”—that is, the simpler language.  The first alternative, in my mind, goes into too much detail and commits the Committee to using a floor, and I want to come back to that in a minute. The second alternative is clear and concise.  The last paragraph does the job of making normalization policy state contingent, which, due to the uncertainty I alluded to earlier in my remarks, makes, in my mind, perfect policy sense.  I believe that communication along these lines will help avoid occurrences similar to what happened during the taper tantrum.  My only disagreement is with the overly conservative approach taken with respect to the caps on Treasury securities and the question of whether they could be higher. Finally, the proposed change to paragraph 5 of the statement seems well thought out and may very well be appropriate for the June policy statement.  But I also agree with some others that the announcement of the phaseout should not be at a meeting at which we’re also raising the federal funds rate.  I think separating those two, as Vice Chairman Dudley said, makes some sense. But I’d like to raise one additional issue that the Committee needs to come to grips with, and it’s whether we end up operating in a floor system or a corridor system.  Now, preliminary work at the Philadelphia Federal Reserve—and I really do want to emphasize “preliminary”—drawing on a recent model of Afonso, Armenter, and Lester finds that in the current institutional environment, we could see ourselves operating firmly in a corridor with somewhere in the neighborhood of $400 billion in reserves and could possibly enter a corridor with as much as $1 trillion in excess reserves. If further work bears out these initial estimates, a corridor system would not suffer the operational costs associated with a very small quantity of reserves, and, in that case, political economy considerations might favor a corridor system. Again, this is very preliminary work.  But the reason I raise it—and they’re going to continue research in this area—is that it implies to me that we should be careful about saying, in any statement we make, that we’re going to be using a floor system, because we may not.  We may say we want to use a floor system, but it may be that we’d actually be in a corridor system, if some of this work is even close to correct, under the level of reserves we’re talking about.  And that’s another reason I would prefer the simpler language rather than trying to explain whether we’re going to be using a corridor or a floor system.  We will know that as we reduce the reserves over time. I’m not sure we necessarily need to state it publicly.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Acting President Mullinix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 166.
 MR. MULLINIX.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Let me preface my comments on the staff’s questions by saying that what seems most important to me is that our actions with regard to the balance sheet be well communicated, predictable, and, to the extent possible, divorced from the path of interest rates—or in the background, as Presidents Mester and Williams put it. Assuming that interest rates continue along the upward path we currently expect, it appears that the economic differences between different approaches to winding down reinvestment are small. Accordingly, with regard to the first question, I would be comfortable   with the phaseout described in the April 28 staff memo.  I would also be comfortable with the proposed caps. With regard to the second question, on communications, I can see the case for an abundance of caution, which would warrant communicating the phaseout in a statement of principles and plans in the June press conference before we actually begin.  In this spirit, I also believe, Madam Chair, announcing that the phaseout will commence in October at the September press conference seems to be a reasonable approach, assuming, of course, economic conditions continue to warrant it.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Mullinix is expressing his agreement with the staff's recommendations and his support for clear communication and predictability in the actions of the balance sheet.


Passage number 167.
 MS. BRAINARD.  I support communicating the conditions under which the balance sheet would start to be reduced in paragraph 5 of our June statement and issuing a statement of principles and plans for balance sheet normalization at the June FOMC meeting.  Let me take each in turn. First, I prefer an approach that clearly and directly implements the statement language that was introduced in December 2015 and has remained in the statement since then.  Under this approach, the Committee would simply need to clarify the level of the federal funds rate that it views as being consistent with normalization being well under way. This approach clearly ties the commencement of phasing out reinvestment to the federal funds rate, and thereby to economic conditions, rather than reintroducing time-contingent language, which has created challenges for us in the past and I view as unnecessary today. The original intention of the “well under way” threshold was to ensure that our most proven tool, the federal funds rate, will have reached a level at which it can be cut, if needed, to buffer adverse shocks and thus help guard against the asymmetric risks associated with the   effective lower bound. At the time the language was discussed, the staff analysis suggested a threshold of 2 percent, which was midway to the SEP median of the longer-run value of the federal funds rate at that time.  Since we originally introduced that language, the SEP median of the longer-run value of the federal funds rate has fallen to around 3 percent currently.  With 3 percent as the longer-run value, it would seem simple, elegant, and economically compelling for the Committee simply to clarify that it views the “well under way” threshold as being midway to its longer-run equilibrium value. Thus, I would prefer a simple amendment to the statement language along the following lines:  “The Committee intends to commence phasing out reinvestments once normalization of the level of the federal funds rate is well under way, after the target range for the federal funds rate reaches 1¼ to 1½ percent, midway to the expected longer-run federal funds rate.” The Chair could further clarify in the June press conference that, under the SEP median estimate, this would mean commencing the phaseout of reinvestment at the meeting or press conference meeting after the target for the federal funds rate has reached that range, which could be as soon as September if economic conditions evolve in line with the median SEP number.  At the meeting when the federal funds rate is raised to that threshold, the statement could simply acknowledge that the Committee now judges that normalization is well under way—thus paving the way for the well-communicated change in reinvestment policy to commence at the subsequent meeting or press conference meeting. On this matter, there has been some confusion as to whether the Committee would put adjustments in the federal funds rate on pause for some time during which the phasing out of balance sheet reinvestment gets under way.  It would be prudent to clarify the Committee’s expectation that it will not adjust the federal funds rate at the meeting at which it commences the   phaseout of reinvestment, out of an abundance of caution, but that this would apply only to the initial change in balance sheet policy and not any subsequent meetings. With regard to the statement of principles and plans, it’s important to make clear that the balance sheet will, in general, be subordinate to the federal funds rate.  So I support our clearly stating that the Committee will use changes in the target range for the federal funds rate as its primary means for adjusting the stance of monetary policy.  Predictability, precision, and clarity of communications all argue in favor of this approach when the two tools are largely substitutes for one another. Second, I like the approach that would cap monthly redemptions at a gradually increasing level over an 18-month period.  In my view, this approach is the least likely to trigger an adverse market reaction or encounter market liquidity challenges, because it would gradually and predictably increase the amount of securities the market will be required to absorb each month while avoiding spikes.  It also has an appealing symmetry in relation to the predictable dollar approach taken during the purchase process, as noted by President Rosengren.  I appreciate the staff’s effort to respond to our request for a predictable and gradual approach that avoids spikes and is easier to communicate.  In addition, I’d be inclined to apply the change in our reinvestment policy symmetrically across Treasury securities and MBS as proposed. Next, it’s important for the principles to set expectations about the framework that will govern the size of the balance sheet once it reaches its “new normal.” The Committee’s deliberations suggest there is substantial support for maintaining the current floor framework for establishing the System’s short-term interest rate target, especially because of its greater relative simplicity, and I favor stating this clearly in the normalization plans and principles.  Of course, it’s difficult to know with precision in advance the minimum level of reserves that will efficiently and effectively implement monetary policy in a floor system. Ultimately, the Committee is likely to have to gauge the appropriate supply of excess reserves in the “new normal” by relying on monitoring money markets for indications that any further reduction in the supply of reserves would put upward pressure on money market rates as the balance sheet gradually declines. Finally, while subordination of the balance sheet to the federal funds rate will be our baseline policy, it’s also important to indicate that there will be circumstances when we may need to rely on the balance sheet more actively.  During the period when the balance sheet is running down, for instance, if the economy encounters material adverse shocks, it may be appropriate to commence the reinvestment of principal payments again in order to preserve conventional policy space.  I support stating clearly that the Committee is prepared to use its full range of tools if future conditions warrant a more accommodative stance of policy than can be achieved through the use of the federal funds rate alone.  Informing markets of our intentions in this regard could promote stability and resilience in the economy.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you very much.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Ms. Brainard is expressing her support for various approaches and proposals, without mentioning any objections or disagreements.


Passage number 168.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I, too, support phasing out reinvestments along the lines of the revised staff proposal, with the sequence of increasing caps and redemptions throughout the normalization process.  I do think there’s scope to consider a shorter phaseout horizon than 18 months—again, on the basis of the Desk survey of dealers and market participants, in which those expectations seem to be more in the one-year time frame. In terms of the timing of this, I favor starting the phaseout process this year and support releasing the detailed information as outlined in the draft refresh of the Committee’s communications.  Market expectations seem to be coalescing around some announcement in the fourth quarter of this year regarding the reinvestment policy, and communicating relatively soon about the approach seems appropriate.  So I support the idea of releasing the normalization principles with new bullets along with the statement and having the Chair speak to this at the press conference and, of course, using the minutes for additional context regarding these discussions today. I think it’s also important to communicate about this issue of the interaction between the funds rate and balance sheet normalization, and I liked Governor Brainard’s proposal about using the SEP, perhaps, to think about how to explain that more in June.  In terms of the proposed communications about reinvestment, I agree that at some point we’ll need to address the longer-run size and composition of the balance sheet as well as how to determine the appropriate timing of phaseout of the ON RRP facility. Understanding that many participants did see advantages for a floor system when we talked about a long-run framework, I still think it’s premature to foreshadow that direction, though, in our communications until we have an explicit decision about the long-run framework and thinking about the implications for its future use.  For that reason, as we release new bullets augmenting the normalization principles, I prefer the third bullet over that second one, which reiterated that reductions of our securities holdings and reserves would be to levels “no larger than necessary to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively.” Also, I would favor stating in the last bullet that reinvestments will resume only if the target for the federal funds rate is again constrained by the effective lower bound.  This approach adheres to the principle of using the tools we understand best to their fullest extent before implementing other tools and conforms to the message we sent in the minutes of the November  meeting that signaled the balance sheet would not be used as an active tool away from the lower bound. Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kashkari.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. George, expresses support for the phased phaseout of reinvestments, a shorter phaseout horizon than 18 months, and starting the phaseout process this year. She also supports releasing detailed information and communicating about the approach relatively soon. Additionally, she agrees with using the minutes for additional context and communicating about the interaction between the funds rate and balance sheet normalization. She prefers the third bullet over the second one in terms of proposed communications about reinvestment, and she favors stating that reinvestments will resume only if the target for the federal funds rate is again constrained by the effective lower bound. Overall, there is agreement and support for various proposals and approaches mentioned.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 169.
 MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I struggle with these caps.  At first, I liked them.  The more I thought about them, the less excited I got about them, and here’s why.  First, substantively, I can’t figure out why we need them.  I think about Lorie’s explanation about the Treasury market.  The Treasury will know when these refundings are due. It can prefund.  I don’t see a market-functioning issue arising unless the U.S. government is running huge budget deficits—which is the Treasury’s problem, not our problem, to deal with.  Second, it’s not like we’re selling off our portfolio.  This is literally the bond just coming due on schedule, so I don’t really see how the caps are necessary for the Treasury securities market. And, by the way, there are lots of professors saying the world is short of safe assets, so I further don’t see this as being a problem.  If you take the MBS side of the market, the only way this is a problem is if rates drop and then people refinance quickly.  But we’ve already said that if rates drop, we may suspend this program anyway.  So I don’t feel like this is a real problem that we’re going to have in either the MBS market or the Treasury securities market.  The best argument I have for caps or a phaseout is just a psychological one—that maybe, on the margin, it’s less likely to trigger some form of a taper tantrum.  And that may well be a good enough reason to do it, but, just hearing the arguments, I don’t see a technical reason why we need to have these caps. In terms of the specific questions, I would prefer a slightly shorter phaseout—12 months rather than 18—though I don’t feel strongly about this. I do support putting out something in June because the most important thing we can do is to give markets as much advance warning as possible so there are no surprises.  And I would saythat if the Desk is going to put out some form of an operational memo, I would encourage that sooner, maybe even in June if it’s ready, rather than delaying it. I like the idea of making this date based.  I agree with President Williams and others.  Around year-end feels right to me.  It gives markets plenty of advance warning.  I don’t like the idea of tying it to a federal funds rate hike, because that, then, becomes a momentous move, as opposed to just putting this in the background and letting it take its own course. Lastly, I also agree with President Williams that if we’re going to call it a floor system, let’s just call it a floor system. When I saw “autonomous factors,” it raised all sorts of questions in my mind:  “What does this mean.  Oh, it means a floor system.” Why don’t we just call it a floor system.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker presents a different perspective from others and raises several points of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 170.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I went at the beginning, and I’ve been listening to all of this discussion.  I had just one comment. I said in my remarks that I was more in favor of an 18-month phaseout than 12 months because I want to minimize the risk of market disruption.  But I heard that a lot of people around the table thought the 12-month was sufficiently good.  I think there are a couple of points to make in favor of 12 months, so I’m going to make them, having listened to what everyone else said.  The first reason is that you’re not really fully phased out even after 12 months, because there are caps in place beyond that.  So in some ways, it’s really 12 months plus.  The second advantage of 12 months is that you could end up with rounder numbers.  I just did this back-of-the-envelope: If you did MBS starting with 4, you go 4, 8, 12, 16, and 20, and, for Treasury securities, you go 18, 16, 24, 32, and 40.  To me, 40 and 20 feel sort of like more round numbers than the 21 and 35 that seem to be very arbitrary.  It would be hard to explain to people that we had whole numbers, and we had seven increments, so that’swhy we ended up with the 21 and 35.  So I think I’d be open minded about going to 12 months with that kind of program.  It also addresses President Harker’s point that the market probably could absorb more than $35 billion in Treasury securities a month, provided that there is enough time for the U.S. Treasury to adjust its debt management program.  So I think that’s a potential alternative. CHAIR YELLEN.  Agreed. Thank you for a very good discussion.  I heard, I believe, unanimous support around the table for the idea that we should try to issue a set of bullets on our approach that we would discuss.  Clearly, there are a couple of things that are important that we need to work out between now and the June meeting to make sure we can agree on the bullets.  I think the issue of how long the phaseout period is, which many of you mentioned, is something we need to talk to the staff about and come back with a proposal.  Also, the bullet that essentially says we’ll use a floor system—although I heard considerable support for going to a floor system, I also heard some reservations about announcing that now.  So I think we’ll need to sit down and think about what the best approach is and come back to you in a timely fashion.  Maybe we’ll need some back-and-forth in order to make sure we can converge on what these bullets look like in the June meeting.  We’ll try to sort that out, but I did hear quite a bit of support for the general sort of approach that the staff has recommended and for issuing these bullets. CHAIR YELLEN. I think that concludes our discussion of reinvestment policy.  We have just a couple of administrative items to cover. First, I want to confirm that our next meeting will be Tuesday and Wednesday, June 13 and 14. Second, I think you know that the staff has circulated a tentative schedule of meetings for 2018. If you haven’t already done so, I would ask you to review that schedule and let the  Secretariat know by Friday whether that schedule is acceptable.  We’re hoping to release the schedule to the public next week. Finally, I want to turn to Governor Fischer, who is going to brief you on a proposal by the communications subcommittee that would more closely align the securities trading blackout period—which is not a policy of the FOMC but is rather something that’s approved by the Board of Governors and the Conference of Presidents—with the blackout period in the FOMC’s external communications policies. So let me invite Governor Fischer to brief you on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a summary of comments made by different individuals during a discussion, and the passage ends with Chair Yellen expressing gratitude for the discussion and consensus around certain ideas.


